-----

-----

**FOREWARNING**
This document is provided for the reader’s convenience
only. The translation from the official Spanish version was
made by Banco de México’s staff. Discrepancies may
arise between the original document in Spanish and its
English translation. For this reason, the original Spanish
version is the only official document.


**1. PLACE, DATE AND PARTICIPANTS**

**1.1. Place: Meeting held by virtual means.**

**1.2. Date of Governing Board meeting: August 7,**
2024.

**1.3. Participants:**

- Victoria Rodríguez, Governor.

- Galia Borja, Deputy Governor.

- Irene Espinosa, Deputy Governor.

- Jonathan Heath, Deputy Governor.

- Omar Mejía, Deputy Governor.

- Gabriel Yorio, Undersecretary of Finance and

Public Credit.

- María Elena Méndez, Secretary of the Governing

Board.

Prior to this meeting, preliminary work by Banco de
México’s staff analyzing the economic and financial
environment as well as the developments in inflation
and the determinants and outlook for inflation, was
conducted and presented to the Governing Board
(see Annex).

**2. ANALYSIS AND RATIONALE BEHIND THE**
**GOVERNING BOARD’S VOTING**

**_International environment_**

**Some members noted that global economic activity**
is expected to have moderated during the second
quarter of 2024 compared to the previous one. Some
members argued that, nevertheless, the dynamism
of economic activity is expected to have remained
heterogeneous across countries. They highlighted
the prospects of lower growth in emerging
economies and higher growth in advanced

economies compared to the previous quarter. In this
regard, **one member noted that the United States**
registered higher-than-anticipated growth in the
second quarter. **Another member specified that**
economic activity in China exhibited low dynamism.
**One member indicated that world economic growth**
is expected to be slightly lower in 2024 than in 2023.
**Another member pointed out that in the remainder**
of 2024, world economic growth faces the risk of a


more pronounced slowdown due to the lagged
effects of interest rates remaining high for a longer
period than expected. He/she added that geopolitical
risks also prevail, associated with the potential
escalation of conflicts in the Middle East and with
increased trade tensions.

Delving into the US economy, **some members**
agreed that, although growth was greater than
expected, industrial activity in that country remains
weak, mainly in its manufacturing sector. With
respect to consumption, **one member highlighted**
that the dynamism of services moderated, while that
of goods was mainly driven by the consumption of
vehicles, which had registered negative variations
since the second quarter of 2023. He/she specified
that, nevertheless, in their annual comparison, these
continued registering a contraction. Most members
**noted that recent indicators suggest a reduction**
**in the US labor market dynamism.** **Some members**
pointed out that the unemployment rate increased.
**One member mentioned that wage growth slowed**
down. **Another member pointed out that the non-**
farm payroll exhibited lower-than-expected growth,
and that the number of job vacancies continued to
decline. **Some members considered that the**
publication of lower job creation figures generated
concerns about the possibility of a “hard landing” in
that economy. **One member noted that a cooling**
labor market, coupled with slower growth in
disposable income and signs of a less sound
financial position of households, could affect
consumption dynamics.

**Most members stated that in a large number of**
**advanced** **economies** **headline** **inflation**

**continued decreasing.** **Some members attributed**
this, mainly, to lower pressures on food prices and to
a decline in core inflation. However, **one member**
considered that this component continues showing
persistence at the global level. **Another member**
stated that the disinflation process continues
showing heterogeneity, with a marked decrease in
the goods subindex and resistance to decline in the
services subindex. In the particular case of the
United States, one member pointed out that annual
headline inflation, measured by the personal
consumption expenditure deflator, declined in June.
He/she stated that since May, the monthly variations
of the core component have been lower than those
recorded in the first quarter. He/she argued that the
rise in the unemployment rate and the slowdown in
wage growth can be expected to contribute to a
further decline in inflation in that country. **Another**
member indicated that, looking ahead, disinflation is
anticipated to continue in advanced economies.

1


-----

Regarding inflation in emerging countries, **some**
members highlighted the rebound in headline
inflation in some of them in recent readings. **One**
member pointed out that this was due to increases in
energy prices and in certain food prices. However,
**some members noted that core inflation in these**
economies continues decreasing steadily. **One**
member added that in several emerging economies
inflation is already within the variability range of their
monetary authorities.

**Most members mentioned that the US Federal**
**Reserve left the target range for the federal funds**
**rate unchanged. They pointed out that said**
**institution recognized a more favorable outlook**
**for inflation. Some members indicated that its**
statement highlighted that the labor market is less
tight. One member added that the Federal Reserve
emphasized that the risks to achieving its

employment and price stability goals continue to
move towards a better balance and that the
committee remains vigilant to the risks on both sides
of its mandate. **The majority underlined that its**
**chairman mentioned that in view of the evolution**
**of inflation and the labor market, a reduction in**
**the reference rate could be on the table at the**
**September meeting. One member mentioned that**
analysts expect three 25-basis-point cuts in 2024,
although a high degree of uncertainty prevails in this
regard.

**Regarding monetary policy decisions of other**
**central banks, most members underlined that the**
**Bank of Japan raised its reference** **rate**

**unexpectedly. One member noted that, with this**
adjustment, its reference rate reached its highest
level since 2008. Another member added that this is
the second increase so far this year. **One member**
mentioned that said central bank plans to halve its
monthly purchases of Japanese government bonds
starting in 2026. Meanwhile, **some members**
commented that the European Central Bank kept its
interest rate unchanged after having reduced it in the
previous policy decision. Some members mentioned
that both the Bank of Canada and the Bank of
England lowered their reference rates. One member
pointed out that in the case of the Bank of Canada,
this is the second consecutive reference rate cut.
He/she explained that said institute underlined that,
although inflation continues above its target and the
services component remains high, some

measurements of core inflation have exhibited a
positive performance recently. He/she added that in
the case of the Bank of England, its monetary policy
statement pointed out that risks persist, that inflation
could rebound above its target and that the monetary


policy stance will remain restrictive for as long as
necessary. **Another member anticipated that the**
rate-cutting cycle by central banks in advanced
economies will continue during the rest of the year,
although this could happen intermittently. **One**
member commented that, despite some

heterogeneity in monetary policy cycles, going
forward, central banks will acknowledge the need to
avoid excessively restrictive monetary policy stances
in view of progress in disinflation.

**Most members pointed out that international**
**financial markets have recently been volatile.**
**They considered that certain employment data**
**suggesting a lesser dynamism of the labor**
**market in the United States as well as the**
**surprise increase in the reference rate in Japan,**
**contributed to the above. Some members stated**
that the latter led to a significant appreciation of the
yen and to a notorious depreciation in currencies
typically used in carry trade positions with said
currency, which tended to unwind. Regarding the
recent US labor market data, **some members**
expressed that these contributed to widespread
reductions in government bond yields globally. Some
members highlighted the decline in the main stock
market indices, particularly in the technology sector,
given prospects of a greater-than-expected

slowdown in the US economy. One member added
that capital flows to emerging economies had a
divergent behavior by asset class, with outflows in
fixed-income assets and historically high inflows in
equity assets. He/she mentioned the flows to China
by local state-owned funds.

**_Economic activity in Mexico_**

**The majority underlined that, according to the**
**GDP flash estimate for the second quarter of**
**2024, productive activity registered low growth**
**and continued showing the weakness it has**
**exhibited since the end of last year. Some**
members pointed out that the deceleration in
economic activity was greater than anticipated. One
member stated that during the last three quarters
growth has been below expectations. **Another**
member specified that GDP registered an annual
growth of 1.1%. **One member indicated that it was**
0.2% at a seasonally adjusted quarterly rate.
**Another member commented that such weak**
performance occurred in a context in which growth of
the US economy surprised to the upside. **Some**
members noted that the second quarter of 2024
marks three consecutive quarters of economic
weakness. **Some members detailed that in the last**
three readings the economy exhibited quarterly

2


-----

variations below 0.5%, specifically 0.3 and 0.2% in
the two most recent ones. One member added that
these results have been observed after the economy
grew at a quarterly rate close to 1% for eight
consecutive quarters.

**Regarding the behavior of Mexico’s economic**
**activity by sector, most members highlighted**
**that secondary activities continue showing**
**sluggishness.** **One member commented that in the**
second quarter of 2024 these expanded at an annual
rate of 0.5%. Another member added that, although
these activities reactivated somewhat during that
quarter, they are still below the levels of October
2023. The majority mentioned that the low
**performance of this sector is largely due to the**
**weakness in manufacturing. One member pointed**
out that manufacturing fell at a monthly rate of 1.8%
in May. **Another** member detailed that

manufacturing associated with transportation

equipment has not been able to reverse the
contraction it registered at the end of 2023.
**Meanwhile, the majority stressed that timely data**
**indicate a loss of dynamism in the tertiary sector.**
**One member mentioned that in the second quarter**
of the year this sector expanded at an annual rate of
1.7%. **Another member pointed out that moderate**
growth in this sector mainly derives from lower
commercial activity, which accounts for around one
third of this component. He/she added that a high
degree of heterogeneity prevails in the behavior of
the subsectors that constitute this sector. Finally,
**some members noted the contraction of the primary**
sector during the second quarter of the year.

**Regarding domestic demand, most members**
**underlined** **that** **investment** **continued**

**reactivating somewhat. One member stated that**
gross fixed investment increased at an annual rate of
5.6% in May. Some members pointed out that it has
been mainly driven by the construction sector.
However, **one member emphasized the weakening**
of investment in machinery and equipment. In
addition, some members pointed out that, excluding
the behavior of imports of capital goods, investment
has been contracting for two quarters.

**Some members pointed out that consumption**
maintains its dynamism. **One member added that**
total consumption grew at an annual rate of 2.8% and
remains at high levels. **Another member noted that**
the latest information indicates that aggregate
demand grew at an annualized quarterly rate close
to 6% in the first quarter, mainly driven by household
consumption. **Some members highlighted that**
consumption has exhibited signs of moderation. One


member noted that, while the indicator of private
consumption in the domestic market had still
expanded in a dynamic manner in the first quarter of
the year at an annualized quarterly rate of 7.5%, in
the second quarter it contracted around 1.9% with
April and May data. **Another member pointed out**
that private consumption shows a lower dynamism in
both domestic goods and services. He/she added
that consumption of imported goods registers high
levels, although they are already declining. **One**
member commented that estimates of consumption
directed to the domestic market exhibit a slowdown.

Regarding the external sector, one member pointed
out that as of the second quarter of the year, the
value of automotive manufacturing exports

reactivated moderately and remained at high levels.
He/she added that the value of non-automotive
exports showed some sluggishness and a lateral
trend. Another member estimated that the behavior
of imports, in terms of both private consumption and
investment, is related to the appreciation of the real
exchange rate, which demonstrates the transmission
of the monetary restriction to the economy through
the exchange rate channel.

**Some members noted that, looking ahead, although**
forecasts suggest that economic activity will continue
expanding, said growth would be modest. **One**
member added that he/she expects a pace of growth
below its historical average throughout the forecast
horizon. He/she also mentioned that, in this regard,
the economy seems to be transitioning towards a low
growth path. **Another member considered that the**
balance of risks to economic activity is biased to the
downside. He/she deemed that the main risk to the
downside is the materialization of lower-thanexpected growth in the US economy. He/she
emphasized that the risks associated with

geopolitical conflicts and commercial tensions stand
out, as well as those related to various electoral
processes and their possible results, mainly in the
United States. He/she mentioned that all these
factors contribute to the increased risk of lower-thanexpected growth in private investment in Mexico.
**One member added the greater uncertainty**
regarding the performance of the global economy
and volatility in financial markets derived from
idiosyncratic and global factors.

Regarding the cyclical position of the economy, most
members mentioned that the point estimate of the
output gap has been narrowing. **One member**
indicated that it is essentially at zero. **Some**
members highlighted that it would be persistently
negative throughout 2025. **One member expressed**

3


-----

that the output gap estimates are generally not
statistically different from zero. He/she pointed out
that, additionally, when the sector that includes
outsourcing services is excluded from the gap
estimate, the gap increases by a couple of
percentage points. Another member stated that the
slack indicator based on principal components
remained in positive territory. One member specified
that this indicator decreased slightly. He/she added
that, although the indicator more closely related to
the labor market is positive, the indicator related to
consumption is close to zero. Another member said
that the seemingly looser slack conditions should not
be expected to promptly contribute to the reduction
of inflation. He/she mentioned that, despite the
downward revisions to growth forecasts, these do not
yet point to a contraction that would lead to a fullfledged easing of slack conditions. Meanwhile, **one**
member warned that, although slack measures entail
a high degree of uncertainty, one cannot fail to
recognize that hard data indicate that the economy
has already exhibited three consecutive quarters of
weakness. He/she considered that in the face of a
notable downward bias in the balance of risks to
growth, the cyclical conditions of the economy will be
a relevant element in the price formation process.

**Most members underlined that some labor**
**market indicators show signs of moderation.**
**Some members mentioned that despite the above**
the labor market continues showing strength. Most
**members highlighted the slowdown in formal**
**employment creation. One member pointed out**
that this slowdown has been taking place since mid2023. Another member noted that the annual growth
of the employed population is trending downwards.
**Some members mentioned the decline in the labor**
force participation rate and a slight increase in the
unemployment rate in their latest readings. One
member detailed that for the first time in 12 months
the labor participation declined below 60% in June.
He/she added that unemployment and

underemployment increased with respect to the
previous month. **Another member indicated that**
unemployment rates, nonetheless, remain near their
historic lows. Some members noted some reduction
in wage growth rates. However, **one member**
mentioned that said rates remain high. He/she
specified that, based on figures as of June, the
nominal annual variation of the daily wage of IMSSinsured workers registered 9.5%, while the moving
average of contractual wage revisions for public and
private firms recorded 4.1% and 9.3%, respectively.
**Another member considered that, looking ahead,**
the strength of the labor market is expected to further


diminish, considering a growth of economic activity
lower than expected some months ago.

**_Inflation in Mexico_**

**Most members agreed that the fading shocks**
**associated** **with** **the** **pandemic** **and** **the**

**geopolitical conflict in Ukraine, as well as the**
**monetary policy stance adopted, have allowed**
**for a significant progress in disinflation in Mexico**
**since the most critical moments of the current**
**inflationary** **episode.** **Nevertheless,** **they**

**acknowledged that the inflationary environment**
**remains complex. One member expressed that an**
unfavorable inflationary dynamic has developed in
recent months. Another member recalled that it was
already anticipated that the disinflation process
would not be linear.

**All members pointed out that since the last**
**monetary policy decision, annual headline**
**inflation continued increasing, registering 5.57%**
**in July. Most members noted the increase it has**
**exhibited since October 2023, when it stood at**
**4.26%. Some members considered that the upward**
trajectory of headline inflation has been more evident
since March 2024. **All members acknowledged**
**that its increases were exclusively due to the**
**upward trend of the non-core component, given**
**that core inflation has remained on a downward**
**trend.** **One member stated that on few occasions**
was it possible to identify the concentration of
inflationary shocks in a single inflation component
with such clarity. Another member pointed out that
of the 131 basis points by which headline inflation
has increased since October 2023, non-core inflation
has contributed with 235 basis points, while core
inflation has contributed downward with 104 basis
points. In this context, most members argued that
**relative** **price** **adjustments** **rather** **than**

**generalized increases are being observed. Some**
members specified that indicators that better
represent the medium-term trend of headline inflation
do not suggest that generalized price increases are
taking place. **One member pointed out that the**
trimmed mean indicator of headline inflation, which
excludes extreme upward and downward figures,
registered 4.3% in July.

**Most members highlighted that core inflation**
**continued decreasing and registered 4.05% in**
**July.** **Some members pointed out that this level is the**
lowest since March 2021, before Banco de México
began its hiking cycle. One member emphasized that
its seasonally adjusted and annualized monthly rate
was 3.53% in July 2024. Some members observed
that, based on figures from July, this component

4


-----

accumulated eighteen consecutive months of
reductions. However, one member warned that since
then it has declined at a slower rate. **Another**
member stated that it has shown a very significant
decline compared to other disinflation periods. One
member mentioned that the fall in core inflation is
particularly relevant, since this component better
reflects the medium-term trend of headline inflation.

**The majority pointed out that the downward trend**
**in core inflation is due to the behavior of**
**merchandise inflation.** **One member argued that**
the factors that have contributed to the disinflation
process have been reflected faster and more notably
on merchandise prices than on services prices.
**Another member pointed out that in July annual**
merchandise inflation was 3.09%, accumulating
twenty consecutive months of reductions. **Some**
members noted that annual inflation figures for both
food and non-food merchandise are at historical
lows. Some members deemed that these segments
are unlikely to decline much further, and therefore,
looking ahead, the reduction in core inflation will
depend, to a greater extent, on the performance of
services inflation.

**Most members mentioned that services inflation**
**continues showing persistence. One member**
noted that in July it stood at 5.22% and has exhibited
a lateral trend for over thirteen months. **Another**
member stated that it remains above its historical
average. One member argued that services
companies continue making price adjustments
stemming from the pandemic shocks, which they had
not been able to implement because demand for
services recovered slowly. **Some** members

forewarned that housing inflation is trending
upwards. **One member added that inflation of**
education services has not yet reached an inflection
point. However, **some members agreed that, in**
recent months, some indicators have performed
more favorably. They highlighted that, after having
attained a maximum inflation of 7.72% in March
2023, the subcomponent of services other than
housing and education registered an inflation of
6.01% in July 2024. **One member emphasized that**
this figure is the lowest in over two and a half years,
except for June 2024 when it was 5.96%. **Another**
member noted that, while the seasonally adjusted
annualized monthly rates of this subcomponent were
above 6% in the first months of the year, the average
of the last three months was 4.05%. He/she
expressed that, while during 2021 the percentage of
the basket of services with price variations greater
than 10% accounted for more than 25%, based on
more recent data said percentage was 1.8%.


**All members mentioned the upward trend in non-**
**core inflation. One member recalled that after**
having reached a historically low level of -0.67% in
July 2023, non-core inflation has been subject to
upward pressures by an unfortunate sequence of
adverse shocks. Most members pointed out that in
**its last reading of July 2024, non-core inflation**
**registered 10.36%. Some members noted that in**
this month it again recorded double-digit annual
variations comparable to those observed in August
2022. They noted that the sharp monthly variation
observed in July is located at the 99[th ]percentile of the
empirical distribution of such variations of this
component, thus suggesting that its rebound in that
month was highly atypical. **Some** members

emphasized that this component is characterized by
its high volatility. **One member considered that it is**
subject to shocks that can cause significant
adjustments between each reading, which can be
both upward and downward. In this context, he/she
stated that inflation of agricultural and livestock
products went from 3.16 to 13.72% between July
2023 and July 2024, while inflation of energy
products increased from -7.82 to 9.17% in the same
period.

**Most members underlined that non-core inflation**
**dynamics respond to supply shocks. Some**
members mentioned the increases in international
reference prices for energy goods. Most members
**highlighted the incidence of climatic events. One**
member noted that adverse weather conditions like
those observed recently had not occurred in over a
decade. **Some members highlighted the significant**
increases in the prices of some fruits and vegetables.
**One member pointed out that more than 50 basis**
points of annual headline inflation are attributed to
just ten CPI items within the fruits and vegetables
subcomponent. **Another member underlined that,**
when analyzing the deviation of headline inflation
from its historical behavior, it is observed that it
stands at 157 basis points above its average, 102
points of which are explained by the behavior of
agricultural and livestock products.

**Regarding inflation expectations drawn from**
**surveys, most members highlighted that longer-**
**term inflation expectations remained relatively**
**stable, although at levels above target. One**
member indicated that their distribution continues
improving. **Regarding short-term expectations,**
**the majority mentioned that those corresponding**
**to headline inflation for the end of 2024**
**increased. They attributed this to a deterioration**
**in** **implied** **expectations** **for** **the** **non-core**

**component. One member considered that this**

5


-----

adjustment reflected the increase in observed
inflation. **Most members added that, in contrast,**
**expectations for the core component for the end**
**of 2024 decreased. Regarding expectations for**
**the next twelve months, they noted that those for**
**headline inflation declined.** However, some
members pointed out that those for the end of 2025
adjusted slightly upwards. As for expectations drawn
from market instruments, **one member noted that**
they remained relatively stable. **Another member**
stated that breakeven inflation deteriorated due to a
reversion of risk premia to their historical average.
**Some members argued that headline inflation**
expectations drawn from surveys remain above
Banco de México's forecasts. **One** member

mentioned that this is also reflected in market
expectations. **Another member commented that**
none of the analysts anticipate that inflation will reach
a rate close to 3% by the end of 2025. He/she noted
that core inflation expectations are also above the
central bank forecasts. He/she added that surveys
point to stagnation in the latter component around its
current levels.

**Most members stated that in view of the supply**
**shocks that have affected non-core inflation, the**
**central bank’s forecasts for headline inflation**
**were revised upwards for the short term. They**
**underlined that considering the nature of these**
**shocks, their effects on inflation are anticipated**
**to begin dissipating relatively quickly, and thus**
**headline inflation would resume a downward**
**trajectory. They added that the forecasts for core**
**inflation remain unchanged, and therefore it is**
**expected to continue decreasing. One member**
pointed out that core inflation is foreseen to be at
3.9% in the last quarter of 2024. All members noted
**that headline and core inflation are still expected**
**to converge to 3% in the fourth quarter of 2025.**
**Thus, most members highlighted that, looking**
**ahead, disinflation is expected to continue. Some**
members commented that forecasts consider the
fading effects of the global shocks, the weakness of
domestic economic activity, and the effects of the
monetary policy stance.

**Most members considered that the balance of**
**risks for the trajectory of inflation within the**
**forecast horizon remains biased to the upside.**
**Some members warned of the risk of prolonged high**
levels of non-core inflation contaminating core
inflation. **One member stated that this risk is not**
minor, as adverse weather conditions are becoming
more frequent with deeper and longer-lasting effects.
**Some members argued that previous inflationary**
episodes show that increases in the non-core


component are usually followed by increases in the
core component. One member pointed out that this
occurred in 2021 and 2022 as well as in 2017.
However, he/she noted that, in those cases,
alongside the pressures on the non-core component,
the economy was also facing other types of shocks
that led to increases in the core component, and for
that reason it was necessary to implement significant
adjustments to the reference rate. In contrast, he/she
underlined that the current situation is different, as
core inflation has consolidated a clear downward
trend for a year and a half and the reference rate is
at a much higher level. He/she added that the
analysis carried out does not point to any effects on
core inflation, despite the pressures on the non-core
component being felt since the end of last year. Thus,
**some members argued that the effect on core**
inflation of the shocks that non-core inflation is
currently experiencing would be limited. **Most**
**members noted that the behavior of analysts'**
**expectations** **suggests** **that** **the** **market**

**consensus does not anticipate any negative**
**effects either. Some members mentioned that non-**
core inflation items which have registered the highest
price increases, such as various fruits and
vegetables, generally are not essential inputs in
production processes. They also noted that, given
the availability of close substitutes, they have a high
price elasticity of demand, and thus economic agents
that use them as inputs can, to a certain extent,
substitute them for other alternatives.

**Some members mentioned the upside risk of**
persistence in core inflation, particularly in its
services component. Some members highlighted the
risk of further exchange rate depreciation. **One**
member indicated that it will be necessary to assess
the possible implications of exchange rate

adjustments on inflation dynamics. He/she added the
possibility of greater cost-related pressures. Another
member pointed out the risks related to the labor
market and to fiscal policy. **Regarding downward**
**risks, most members highlighted the lower-than-**
**anticipated economic activity. However,** **one**
member argued that this could be offset by the
resilience of aggregate demand supported by a
robust labor market and high disposable personal
income. **Another member noted that the economic**
weakness could help improve services inflation and
limit the pass-through on costs.

**_Macrofinancial environment_**

**Most members commented that after the**
**volatility observed at the beginning of June in**
**light of idiosyncratic factors, in subsequent**

6


-----

**weeks financial markets in Mexico performed**
**better. They indicated that the adjustments in**
**financial variables that took place at the**
**beginning of June, associated with idiosyncratic**
**factors,** **partially** **reversed.** **Some** members

emphasized that trading conditions in both foreign
exchange and fixed-income markets improved in July
with respect to the previous month. Most members
**noted that the yield curve for government bonds**
**decreased, especially in the medium term, in a**
**context of improved trading conditions with**
**respect** **to** **June.** **One** member specifically

highlighted the increase in trading volume.

**The majority indicated that domestic markets**
**were** **affected** **by** **the** **volatility** **recently**

**experienced by international markets at the**
**beginning of August. They highlighted that such**
**volatility was associated with the release of**
**employment data in the United States and with**
**Japan’s monetary policy decision. One member**
added that these events led to the unwinding of carry
trade positions of the Mexican peso against the yen.
**Some members pointed out that the evolution of the**
electoral process in the United States also influenced
markets. In this context, all members highlighted
**the recent depreciation of the Mexican peso.**
**Some members mentioned that it traded in a wide**
range. **One member noted that in early August the**
exchange rate reached intraday levels above 20
pesos per dollar. He/she added that trading
conditions have not returned to levels prior to the
episode of turbulence in June and its metrics have
exhibited a bias towards depreciation. Another
member stated that from June onwards, sovereign
credit risk indicators registered increases, albeit
smaller than in other stress episodes. He/she pointed
out that the foreign exchange market is becoming
increasingly deeper, and thus, despite the volatility,
interventions in the foreign exchange market have
not been necessary. **Some members commented**
that additional bouts of volatility cannot be ruled out.
**One member considered that, in an uncertain**
environment, markets have tended to overreact to
economic news. Some members argued that, in the
case of Mexico, robust macroeconomic

fundamentals and a risk-adjusted interest rate
spread that continues being among the most
attractive, imply that the economy is in a solid
position to handle potential challenges.

**One member stated that expectations implied by TIIE**
swaps for the trajectory of the reference rate
decreased, with a rate of 10.80% anticipated for this
decision. He/she added that a rate of 10.20% is
expected for the end of 2024. He/she mentioned that


the analysts' consensus is divided as to the date of
the next adjustment and expects a reference rate of
10.50% by the end of 2024. He/she pointed out that,
although differences persist between markets and
surveys, both incorporate graduality and caution in
their trajectories. **Another member stated that**
despite the sharp monetary restriction, financing to
the non-financial private sector continued expanding.
He/she specified that it grew at a real annual rate of
2.0% in June, supported by domestic financing. In
this regard, he/she emphasized that commercial
bank credit to firms, consumer credit and mortgage
lending continued trending upwards, with the former
two registering especially high expansion rates.
Regarding credit risk, he/she indicated that

delinquency rates are at low and stable levels.

**_Monetary policy_**

**The Governing Board assessed the behavior of**
**inflation and its determinants, as well as of**
**inflation expectations. It considered the nature of**
**the shocks that have affected the non-core**
**component and the projection that their effects**
**on headline inflation will dissipate over the next**
**quarters. It took into account core inflation’s**
**trajectory and the fact that it is anticipated to**
**continue decreasing. It estimated that, although**
**the outlook for inflation still calls for a restrictive**
**monetary policy stance, its evolution implies that**
**it is adequate to reduce the level of monetary**
**restriction. Thus, with the presence of all its**
**members, the Board decided by majority to lower**
**the target for the overnight interbank interest rate**
**by 25 basis points to 10.75%.**

**Looking ahead, the Board foresees that the**
**inflationary** **environment** **may** **allow** **for**

**discussing reference rate adjustments. It will**
**consider that global shocks will continue fading**
**and the effects of the weakness in economic**
**activity. It will take into account the incidence of**
**the monetary policy stance that has been**
**maintained and that prevailing in the future on**
**the evolution of inflation throughout the horizon**
**in which monetary policy operates. Actions will**
**be implemented in such a way that the reference**
**rate remains consistent at all times with the**
**trajectory needed to enable an orderly and**
**sustained convergence of headline inflation to**
**the 3% target during the forecast period. The**
**central bank reaffirms its commitment with its**
**primary mandate and the need to continue its**
**efforts to consolidate an environment of low and**
**stable inflation.**

7


-----

**One member argued that the analysis of the**
evolution of the inflationary outlook suggests that
conditions are appropriate to lower the level of
monetary restriction. He/she emphasized the notable
progress in the reduction of core inflation, which
better reflects the medium-term trend in inflation, as
well as the prospect that this component will continue
declining. He/she pointed out that the nature of the
shocks that have exerted upward pressure on the
non-core component and headline inflation should be
considered. He/she reiterated that the effects of said
supply shocks tend to dissipate relatively quickly,
which would lead headline inflation to resume a
downward trajectory in the following months. He/she
also stated that, although it is necessary to
acknowledge that non-core inflation at double-digit
levels has exerted significant pressures on headline
inflation, it is also important to consider that this
represents a change in relative prices rather than
generalized pressures. He/she argued that both
domestic and external environments are conducive
to a continuous moderation of inflationary pressures.
He/she highlighted the disinflation progress at the
global level. In this regard, he/she indicated that
since Mexico is an economy open to international
trade, the country’s disinflation benefits from the
lower levels of external inflation. He/she added that,
domestically, the expected weakness of national
economic activity would contribute to mitigate
inflation pressures over the planning horizon. Finally,
he/she stated that the level of monetary restriction
should be consistent with the fading of pressures
stemming from the global shocks, which at the time
led to a rise in the reference rate for 15 consecutive
meetings, accumulating 725 basis points of

increases. Considering all of the above, he/she noted
that this decision should be communicated in the
context of progress in global shocks’ fading, and
taking into account that the effect of the rebound in
non-core inflation on headline inflation is only in the
short term, as well as the current level of monetary
restriction and that prevailing in the event of an
interest rate cut. He/she highlighted that it will be
essential to emphasize that, in line with the central
bank's commitment to its primary mandate, the
monetary policy stance will continue being clearly
restrictive and, therefore, will continue acting to
ensure that inflation converges to the 3% target.
He/she estimated that, looking ahead, the inflationary
environment will allow to continue discussing
reference rate adjustments. However, he/she

acknowledged that a gradual approach will need to
be maintained.

**Another member commented that both the reversal**
of shocks associated with the pandemic and


geopolitical conflicts as well as a restrictive and
timely monetary policy stance by the central bank
have allowed for significant progress in the
disinflationary process. However, he/she considered
that the outlook for the conduct of monetary policy
continues to be very complex in light of the
unfavorable inflationary dynamics in recent months.
He/she highlighted that headline inflation has
continued increasing due to a greater and longerlasting rebound in the non-core component than
expected. He/she argued that the supply shocks that
have led to this rebound will not necessarily dissipate
rapidly, potentially contaminating core inflation.
He/she stated that the latter depends, in part, on their
effects on inflation expectations, as well as on the
monetary policy response. For this reason, he/she
warned that it would be risky to begin a downward
cycle when non-core inflation is trending significantly
upwards. He/she pointed out that the recent slower
decline in core inflation has occurred despite the
monetary restriction. He/she stated that the forecast
of lower inflationary pressures in light of the
weakening of economic activity could be offset by the
ongoing resilience of aggregate demand. He/she
noted that tensions in financial markets due to
idiosyncratic and global factors have added to this
complex inflationary dynamic. He/she indicated that
exchange rate pressures could continue and
escalate, which could hinder the disinflationary
process even in light of the expected slowdown in
economic activity. He/she highlighted that both
inflation expectations and the exchange rate have
been the two main channels through which monetary
restriction has been operating. He/she noted that
since the adoption of a floating exchange rate
regime, the pass-through effect has diminished,
although this does not mean that exchange rate
dynamics are not relevant for the trajectory of
inflation. He/she argued that the pass-through effect
can only remain bounded if markets’ confidence in
the central bank's commitment to its primary
mandate is maintained. He/she considered that this
is an additional reason to conduct monetary policy
with caution in episodes of high exchange rate
volatility such as the current one. He/she argued that
in this environment an adjustment in the monetary
policy stance should not be rushed and, instead, a
risk management approach should be favored.

**One member considered that the conduct of**
monetary policy requires analyzing both the
observed data and the expected determinants of
inflationary dynamics. With respect to inflation data,
he/she pointed out that the recent readings show a
differentiated behavior in its components. He/she
highlighted the decline in the core component over

8


-----

18 consecutive months, which is something unseen
since the implementation of the inflation-targeting
regime and clearly responds to the monetary
restriction. He/she mentioned that, in contrast, noncore inflation has continued rising due to different
supply shocks. He/she stated that these shocks
appear as short-term determinants of inflation;
however, since they concentrate in agricultural and
livestock product prices, they only have limited
indirect effects, provided that expectations remain
anchored. He/she also mentioned, among mediumterm determinants, the weak economic activity data,
which could contribute to better behavior of the
services subcomponent. He/she added that two
inflation determinants, expectations and the

exchange rate, are also the two transmission
channels that have performed better in the current
cycle and are unlikely to cease contributing to
disinflation, provided that an absolute restrictive
stance and an adequate relative stance are
maintained. He/she emphasized that a long-term
determinant is the central bank's unwavering
commitment to reducing inflation towards its target,
as shown by the level of monetary restriction
attained. In this regard, he/she recalled that the real
ex-ante rate is more than twice the upper limit of the
neutral range and that the nominal rate is almost
twice the observed inflation. He/she stated that the
difference between the interest rate gap and the
inflation gap is one of the highest among the main
emerging economies and is the largest if core
inflation is considered. He/she argued that the
monetary restriction should also be evaluated in
terms of its duration, which is nearing two years and
which, he/she considered, will extend throughout the
planning horizon. He/she indicated that, even after
taking into account the reference rate adjustment,
there will be a stance adequate and consistent with
the expected pressures on inflation. He/she
considered that the pauses in May and June allowed
to assess both the disinflationary process and the
functioning of the transmission channels. He/she
indicated that the monetary policy stance should be
as efficient as possible in order to consolidate
disinflation and ensure an orderly adjustment of the
economy and markets. In this regard, he/she stated
that it should be emphasized that the task is yet to be
concluded and that a vigilant approach should be
maintained. He/she commented that it is appropriate
to continue with a data-dependent approach in which
gradualism prevails. He/she highlighted that, looking
ahead, adjustments may even continue to be spaced
out and not proportional to the expected decline in
inflation for the remainder of the year.


**Another member recalled that in the previous**
monetary policy decision the target rate remained at
11%, in a context of increasing headline inflation,
persistence in services inflation, inflation

expectations above the central bank's forecasts, and
a balance of risks for inflation biased to the upside.
He/she mentioned that in the last six weeks, in
his/her opinion, data have not improved and suggest
an even more complex environment, in which
increased uncertainty has not dissipated. He/she
warned that, in an environment in which the
expectations channel is the most important, there is
a lack of credibility in Banco de México's inflation
forecast, given that none of the expectations surveys
anticipate reaching the 3% target by the end of 2025
and, on the contrary, they foresee higher inflation
levels. He/she argued that chronic optimism
stemming from an inflation forecast targeting
framework that considers a target rate determined
under the assumption that the 3% inflation target is
attained in a horizon of eight quarters should be
avoided. However, he/she pointed out that if this
assumption is not imposed, forecast inflation would
not be very different from analysts’ expectations,
which could be reflecting the perception of a
monetary policy that has a low incidence. Therefore,
he/she stated the need to maintain a firm restrictive
policy stance, given an inflation that is off the target
range. He/she emphasized that credibility is a central
issue, and therefore it is crucial to convey to the
public that all possible measures will be taken to
meet the inflation target in order for monetary policy
to be more effective. He/she estimated that, with
inflation risks to the upside, an increasing inflation
trajectory, and unfavorable inflation expectations, the
monetary policy stance cannot be eased yet. He/she
considered that the mixed signals from the Federal
Reserve regarding further easing, exchange rate
depreciation, and the recent volatility in financial
markets, should play a secondary role in the
monetary policy decision given their limited progress
in curbing inflation. He/she stated that the effects of
the external environment on the relative monetary
policy stance are yet to be defined. He/she argued
that a premature monetary easing could hinder the
attainment of the primary objective and that for this
reason the monetary policy stance cannot be
adjusted at this time. He/she pointed out that both
international institutions and multiple academic
studies warn about the relevance of avoiding a
premature easing. He/she stated that the signal sent
by this adjustment would be more relevant than the
level of the reference rate itself and that, under the
current conditions, lowering the target rate would
send the wrong message of being content with rising
headline inflation. He/she added that if services

9


-----

inflation does not show any progress, headline
inflation is not declining, and inflation expectations
are not more aligned with the central bank's targets,
it will be difficult to send signals in another direction.

**One member** stated that the economy continues
facing two shocks that have become more intense
and have opposite effects on inflation. He/she
mentioned that, on the one hand, the exchange rate
continued registering volatility and depreciated,
while, on the other hand, he/she expects a slightly
greater easing of slack conditions than previously
anticipated in June. He/she recalled that the passthrough from the exchange rate to prices is low, and
that the greater economic slack will help mitigate the
risk of a greater pass-through. He/she added that
signs of deceleration would indicate that the shock to
economic activity will last longer, affecting the entire
monetary policy horizon. He/she delved into the
information suggested by the central bank’s forecast,
by reiterating, on the one hand, that the revision to
headline inflation is attributed to supply shocks, with
the convergence timeline remaining unchanged,
and, on the other hand, that core inflation is
anticipated to continue decreasing. He/she

highlighted that expectations for core inflation for
2024 and for the next twelve months have
decreased, which indicates that markets do not
perceive that shocks are contaminating core inflation.
Regarding the level of monetary restriction, he/she
mentioned that, given the behavior of inflation
expectations, the 25-basis point reduction in the
reference rate in March has resulted in a decrease of
only 9 basis points in the real ex-ante interest rate.
He/she underlined that its level is almost twice the
upper limit of the neutral range, making it highly
restrictive under any metric. In view of the shift in the
monetary policy outlook in other economies, he/she
stated that even with rate cuts, the relative monetary
policy stance will continue to be robust. Considering
this solid absolute and relative policy stance, he/she
rejected the notion that reductions reflect

complacency. In this regard, he/she commented that
a restrictive stance will continue to be essential and,
in this regard, he/she considered that the monetary
policy stance has margins. He/she stated that,
although at the time it was necessary to take the
reference rate to maximum levels, in response to the
unprecedented shocks, now the current inflation
challenges are of a different nature, given that the
higher readings of headline inflation are explained by
its non-core component. In this context, he/she
emphasized that convergence to the inflation target
and an adjustment to the level of monetary restriction
are compatible. He/she added that reference rate
cuts aligned with the central scenario must not be


postponed, as there is the risk of managing monetary
policy with a lag, incurring unnecessary costs for the
economy. He/she pointed out that monetary policy
should be conducted prospectively, considering both
the observed and the expected determinants, without
overweighting any specific data point. He/she
considered that a gradual approach allows for
acknowledging progress in the disinflationary

process, while continuing to address the prevailing
challenges in a responsible manner.

**3. MONETARY POLICY DECISION**

The Governing Board assessed the behavior of
inflation and its determinants, as well as of inflation
expectations. It considered the nature of the shocks
that have affected the non-core component and the
projection that their effects on headline inflation will
dissipate over the next quarters. It took into account
core inflation’s trajectory and the fact that it is
anticipated to continue decreasing. It estimated that,
although the outlook for inflation still calls for a
restrictive monetary policy stance, its evolution
implies that it is adequate to reduce the level of
monetary restriction. Thus, with the presence of all
its members, the Board decided by majority to lower
the target for the overnight interbank interest rate by
25 basis points to 10.75%.

Looking ahead, the Board foresees that the
inflationary environment may allow for discussing
reference rate adjustments. It will consider that global
shocks will continue fading and the effects of the
weakness in economic activity. It will take into
account the incidence of the monetary policy stance
that has been maintained and that prevailing in the
future on the evolution of inflation throughout the
horizon in which monetary policy operates. Actions
will be implemented in such a way that the reference
rate remains consistent at all times with the trajectory
needed to enable an orderly and sustained
convergence of headline inflation to the 3% target
during the forecast period. The central bank reaffirms
its commitment with its primary mandate and the
need to continue its efforts to consolidate an
environment of low and stable inflation.

**4. VOTING**

Voting in favor of the decision were Victoria
Rodríguez, Galia Borja, and Omar Mejía. Irene
Espinosa and Jonathan Heath voted in favor of
maintaining the target for the overnight interbank
interest rate at 11.00%.

10


-----

**5. DISSIDENT OPINIONS / VOTES**

**Vote. Irene Espinosa**

Given the complex inflationary environment, we
should avoid rushing into adjusting the monetary
policy stance. It is imperative to remain cautious and
prioritize a risk management approach, for the
benefit of the central bank’s credibility. Headline
inflation has continued to increase consecutively for
five months, reaching levels unseen in more than
twelve months and deviating further from the 3%
target. Our forecasts have once again been adjusted
upwards; core inflation decreases ever more slowly;
non-core inflation continues at high levels and will
likely remain above our forecasts, while the risk of the
core component becoming contaminated is not
negligible; inflation expectations remain above our
forecasts and do not show any signs of inflexion; and
the balance of risks continues biased to the upside.
Looking ahead, foreign exchange volatility could
intensify due to domestic and external factors. This
would jeopardize the disinflationary process, even
considering the anticipated slowdown in economic
activity. Under the circumstances and risks outlined
above, a reference rate cut would undermine the
central bank’s credibility regarding its commitment
with the constitutional mandate of ensuring price
stability.


**Vote. Jonathan Heath**

The decision to ease the monetary policy stance
undermines our credibility given that headline
inflation has increased in the last five months and is
now at 5%. Core inflation is currently at 4.0%, and
surveys indicate that it will remain at that level at the
end of 2024 and barely reach 3.8% at the end of
2025; that is, they do not anticipate a decline in
inflation. Nine institutions even anticipate that in
December 2024 core inflation will be higher than its
current levels. Our trajectory for core inflation for the
next eight quarters is overly optimistic and lacks
credibility. Current inflation figures and its mediumterm expectations simply do not support this
decision. The monetary policy regime that Banco de
México adopted many years ago aimed at eliminating
fiscal dominance and focusing the Governing
Board’s efforts on price stability above all. Voting in
favor of easing the monetary policy stance at this
time, given a high fiscal deficit and a yet-to-beconfirmed weakness of economic activity, while
inflation is still far from target, may be interpreted as
premature as long as there is no certainty that
inflation is on track, as supported by more solid data.

11


-----

**ANNEX[]**

The information in this Annex was prepared for this
meeting by the staff of Banco de México’s
Directorate General of Economic Research and
Directorate General of Central Bank Operations. It
does not necessarily reflect the considerations of the
members of the Governing Board as to the monetary
policy decision.

**A.1. External conditions**

**A.1.1. World economic activity**

World economic activity is estimated to have grown
at a more moderate rate during the second quarter
of 2024 as compared to the previous one, albeit with
heterogeneous behavior among countries. This
reflected, in general, the slower growth of emerging
economies, after their robust performance during the
first quarter. Advanced economies, on the other
hand, are estimated to have expanded at a faster
pace than in the previous quarter. Purchasing
Managers’ Indices for July point to progress in the
services sector at the global level (Chart 1). These
indices also suggest a deceleration in manufacturing
activity in emerging economies and a stagnation of
this sector in advanced economies. Recent world
trade indicators grew at moderate rates compared to
the first quarter. Among global risks the following
stand out: the intensification of geopolitical turmoil;
the protraction of inflationary pressures; greater
volatility in financial markets, and, to a lesser extent,
the challenges to financial stability.

During the second quarter of 2024, the US economy
grew at a faster pace than in the previous quarter,
supported by a solid domestic demand. GDP grew at
a seasonally adjusted quarterly rate of 0.7%, after
having increased 0.4% in the first quarter (Chart 2).[1]
This performance mainly reflected positive

contributions from private consumption, changes in
inventories, and non-residential investment.

 Note: In the electronic version of this document the data to
generate all the charts and the table can be obtained by clicking
on them, except for those that are not produced or elaborated by
Banco de México.


s. a. / Seasonally adjusted figures.
1/ The index varies between 0 and 100 points. A reading above 50 points
indicates an expansion and below 50 indicates a contraction. A reading
equal to 50 points indicates no change.
Source: IHS Markit.

**Chart 2**

**US: real GDP and components**

Quarterly percentage rate and contribution

in percentage points, s. a.

3.0

Private consumption expenditures
Residential investment

2.5 Nonresidential investment

Change in private inventories

2.0 Net exports

Government consumption expenditures

1.5 Total

1.0

0.5

0.0

-0.5

-1.0

I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV I II

2021 2022 2023 2024

s. a. / Seasonally adjusted figures.
Source: Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA).

US industrial production increased at a seasonally
adjusted monthly rate of 0.6% in June, after having
grown 0.9% in May. The performance of industrial
activity in June resulted from a 2.8% increase in the
electricity and gas generation sector and to the
respective growth of 0.4 and 0.3% in manufacturing

1 Expressed as a seasonally adjusted annualized quarterly rate,
the change in the US GDP was 1.4% in the first quarter of 2024
and 2.8% in the second one.

### 12


**Chart 1**

**Purchasing Managers' Index:**

**production component for advanced,**

**emerging and global economies**

Diffusion index, s. a.[1/]


62

60

58

56

54

52

50

48

46

44

42

40

J

2021


A J O J

2022


A J O J

2023


A J O J

2024


A J


-----

production and the mining sector. Purchasing
Managers’ Indices point to a stagnation of
manufacturing activity in July.

The US labor market has shown more evident signs
of easing, moving towards a better balance between
labor supply and demand. The non-farm payroll
continued to exhibit a moderation in its rate of
expansion, registering 114 thousand new positions
in July, below the monthly average of the first quarter
of 276 thousand new jobs and 179 thousand new
jobs registered in June. July's figure is one of the
lowest readings in the period of post-pandemic
recovery. Initial claims for unemployment insurance
have been trending upwards since the end of April,
standing at 249 thousand new claims in the week
ending July 27. The unemployment rate grew from
4.1% in June to 4.3% in July, its fourth consecutive
increase. These increases placed it at its highest
level since November 2021. After trending

downward since May 2022, the number of job
vacancies remained stable at around 8.2 million in
May and June, still above pre-pandemic levels. On
the other hand, the variation of the employment cost
index decreased at a quarterly rate from 1.2% in the
first quarter to 0.9% in the second quarter. Lastly,
average hourly wages continued decelerating, from
an annual variation of 4.0% in June to 3.8% in July.

In the second quarter of the year, economic activity
in the euro area grew at a similar pace to that
observed in the first one.[2] This was mainly supported
by the expansion in the services sector. The labor
market in the euro area remained strong. The
unemployment rate increased from 6.4% in May to
6.5% in June. Despite the increase at the margin, it
remains at historic lows. This took place in a context
in which the labor force participation rate has been
increasing.

Regarding the rest of the major advanced
economies, they are expected to expand in the
second quarter of 2024, although with differences in
terms of growth rate. Specifically, Japan’s economic
activity is expected to recover, following the sharp
contraction observed in the previous quarter. Labor
markets in said group of economies generally
exhibited signs of easing. Nevertheless, they
remained tight.

Most of the major emerging economies are expected
to have shown lower dynamism in the second

2 Expressed as a seasonally adjusted quarterly rate, the change
in euro area GDP was 0.3% in the first quarter of 2024 and 0.3%
in the second quarter. Expressed as a seasonally adjusted


quarter of the year compared to the previous one,
mainly in Emerging Asia and Latin America. This was
the case of the Chinese economy. Its economic
activity slowed down compared to the first quarter of
the year. This was despite the various stimuli
implemented by its authorities to boost growth. Its
GDP grew at a seasonally adjusted quarterly rate of
0.7%, after having expanded at a rate of 1.5% in the
previous quarter.[3] This performance reflected a
weaker dynamism of consumption and a still
depressed real estate activity, which was partially
offset by the strength of exports and manufacturing
activity.

Since Mexico’s last monetary policy decision,
international commodity prices have generally
declined. Oil prices decreased throughout most of
the period. Although towards the end of June and the
beginning of July crude oil prices registered an
increase in light of the expectation of a higher
demand in the northern hemisphere during summer,
they began trending downwards as of the second
week of July. The latter was partly due to prospects
of lower demand from China. In early August, crude
oil prices were subject to additional downward
pressures as stock markets fell sharply, reflecting a
relatively more negative outlook for the US economy
as compared to expectations up to July. Likewise,
the geopolitical conflict in the Middle East caused
episodes of volatility in crude oil prices. Natural gas
prices, in general, were subject to downward
pressures due to the expectation of lower demand in
the United States, as well as relatively higher
inventory levels in that country and in Europe.
Nonetheless, prices in Europe were under upward
pressures in the last week of July, partly due to the
lower gas production in Norway and Australia, as a
result of the maintenance of their processing
infrastructure as well as of supply concerns related
to the conflict in the Middle East. Grain prices
decreased mainly as a result of higher harvests in
the United States and favorable weather that has
generated expectations of increased agricultural
production in that country. Industrial metal prices
declined as a result of expectations of a lower
demand from China and relatively high inventory
levels in several countries. Meanwhile, precious
metal prices rose in response to expectations that
financial conditions would ease sooner than
anticipated at the end of the first quarter of the year.

annualized quarterly rate, the change in euro area GDP was 1.1%
in the first quarter of 2024 and 1.0% in the second quarter of 2024.
3 Expressed as an annual rate, the GDP growth rate of China was
5.3% in the first quarter of 2024 and 4.7% in the second one.

### 13


-----

Thus, the price of gold reached record highs during
the third week of July.

**A.1.2. Monetary policy and international financial**
**markets**

In most advanced economies, annual headline
inflation decreased in its most recent reading,
following slight increases in some countries over the
previous months (Chart 3). The reduction was
generally attributed to lower pressures on food prices
and to the core subindex, mostly its goods and, in
some cases, energy components. In most advanced
economies, headline inflation remained above the
central banks’ targets. However, in some cases,
including the United Kingdom and Canada, it was at
its point target or within the variability interval of each
central bank.

In the United States, annual headline inflation
measured by the personal consumption expenditure
deflator decreased from 2.6% in May to 2.5% in
June. This reduction reflected the fall in annual
inflation of energy products. Core inflation remained
practically unchanged at 2.6% during the same
period. Nevertheless, since May, the monthly
variation of the core component has been below the
levels observed in the first quarter, mainly due to
lower pressures on services prices. The CPI inflation
decreased from 3.3% in May to 3.0% in June, while
its core component went from 3.4 to 3.3% between
the same months.

Analysts' inflation forecasts foresee a moderation in
headline inflation at the end of 2024 compared to the
current levels in some of the main advanced
economies. Meanwhile, longer-term inflation

expectations drawn from financial instruments for
some of these economies were revised downwards,
especially in recent weeks, with respect to
expectations registered in the last week of June.
Both short- and long-term inflation expectations
remained at levels above the inflation targets in most
advanced economies.


**Chart 3**

**Selected advanced economies:**

**headline inflation**

Annual percentage change

12

United States PCE 1/

10 United States CPI

Japan
Euro area 2/

8

United Kingdom
Canada

6

4

2

June

July

0

-2

J J J J J J J J J J J

2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 2024

1/ The personal consumption expenditures price index is used.
2/ Preliminary figures for July.
Source: Bureau of Economic Analysis, Bureau of Labor Statistics, Eurostat,
Bank of Japan, the UK Office for National Statistics, and Statistics Canada.

In a large number of emerging economies, annual
headline inflation increased in its most recent
reading. This occurred, partly, due to higher
pressures on energy and food prices. Despite the
above, in several cases headline inflation was within
the variability range considered by each central
bank. Meanwhile, core inflation declined in most of
these economies.

In this context, since Mexico’s last monetary policy
decision, the central banks of the major advanced
and emerging economies adjusted their reference
rates in a heterogeneous manner, considering the
specific circumstances of each country.

In the main advanced economies, most central
banks continued to gradually reduce their securities’
holdings and some central banks lowered their
reference rates. The Bank of Canada cut its interest
rate in July for the second consecutive time and the
Bank of England announced its first rate cut since
2020. Other central banks kept them unchanged,
including the US Federal Reserve. In contrast, the
Bank of Japan raised its rate. The latter, together
with the lesser dynamism of the US labor market,
contributed to the recent volatility in international
financial markets.

Specifically, at its July meeting, the US Federal
Reserve left the target range for the federal funds
rate unchanged for the eighth consecutive decision.
Thus, it remained between 5.25 and 5.50%. The
Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) noted that
the risks associated with meeting its employment
and inflation goals continue moving towards a better

### 14


-----

balance and that it is attentive to the risks to both
parts of its dual mandate. Although it mentioned that
there has been some additional progress toward the
inflation target, the Committee reiterated that it does
not expect it would be appropriate to reduce the
target range for the federal funds rate until it has
greater confidence that inflation is converging
sustainably toward the 2% target. Additionally, the
Federal Reserve continued reducing the size of its
balance sheet.

During the press conference, the chairman of the
Federal Reserve stated that inflation data of the
second quarter have generated greater confidence
that inflation is converging sustainably toward 2%.
He added that the Committee has not made any
decisions regarding future meetings and that,
although the Committee's general sentiment is that
the economy is approaching the point at which it will
be appropriate to reduce the reference rate, this will
depend on economic indicators. He indicated that, if
the data, the evolution of the economic outlook and
the balance of risks are consistent with increasing
confidence in the sustained downward trajectory of
inflation and with a solid labor market, the rate cut
could take place at the September policy meeting.

The European Central Bank decided to keep its
reference rates unchanged at its July meeting, after
having cut them by 25 basis points (bps) in its June
decision. Thus, its refinancing, key lending, and key
deposit rates stand at 4.25, 4.5, and 3.75%,
respectively. Its Governing Council noted that
headline inflation will likely remain above target until
next year. It reiterated that it will keep the reference
rates at sufficiently restrictive levels for as long as
necessary in order to ensure that inflation returns to
its target promptly. The Council reiterated that it will
maintain an approach dependent on economic and
financial data to determine the appropriate duration
and degree of such tightening. It reaffirmed that it
was not committing to a specific monetary policy
path. Regarding the Pandemic Emergency Program
(PEPP), as of July the Governing Council

discontinued reinvesting all payments on securities’
holdings acquired under the program, reducing the
portfolio by an average of EUR 7.5 billion per month,
and it plans to discontinue reinvestments at the end
of 2024.

4 At its March meeting, the Bank of Japan raised its reference rate
from -0.1% to a range of 0.0 to 0.1%, after having maintained it at
negative levels for over eight years. This was the first rate-hike
since 2007. At that meeting, it removed the yield curve control that
kept the target level of the Japanese ten-year government bond
(JGB) interest rate at around 0%. At its April and June meetings,
it left the reference rate unchanged. At its July meeting, it


At the press conference, the president of the
European Central Bank pointed out that, despite
being on a disinflationary path, domestic pressures
on prices continue to be high, and the

interconnection between wages, profits and

productivity can generate uncertainty regarding said
path. She indicated that the decision to be made at
the September meeting is up for debate and will be
determined based on all available data.

In contrast, at its July meeting, the Bank of Japan
raised its reference rate from a range of 0.0 to 0.1%
to around 0.25%, a move that had not been
anticipated by analysts. This occurred after the
central bank had previously increased it in March
and had maintained it at negative levels for over
eight years.[4] The Bank of Japan also announced a
plan to reduce the amount of Japanese government
bond purchases. The Board of that central bank
noted that the country's economic activity and prices
have evolved in line with its April forecasts. It
mentioned the increase in investment, the resilience
of private consumption, and wage increases. In this
regard, the Board deemed it appropriate to adjust the
accommodative level of monetary policy to attain the
inflation target in a sustainable and stable manner. It
indicated that it expects real interest rates to remain
significantly negative and that accommodative
financial conditions will continue supporting

economic activity. The Board indicated that, going
forward, if most recent forecasts for economic
activity and prices materialize, the bank will continue
raising the reference rate and adjusting the level of
monetary policy accommodation. During the press
conference following the monetary policy decision,
said central bank governor noted that future
increases will be data-dependent and indicated that
there is still some road ahead to reach the neutral
rate.

In the main emerging economies, some central
banks, mainly those in Latin America and Eastern
Europe, continued lowering their reference rates.
However, some of these central banks moderated
the magnitude of their rate cuts or even left their
rates unchanged in their most recent decisions. The
central bank of China announced cuts in several of
its reference rates in July. These included the 7-day
reverse repo rate, the 1-year loan prime rate (LPR)

announced a plan to reduce the amount of its monthly Japanese
government bond (JGB) purchases to around 3 trillion yen in
January-March 2026. In principle, the amount will be reduced by
around 400 billion yen each quarter. It also announced changes
in the interest rates it applies to various facilities, including the
supplementary deposit facility and the provisioning measure to
stimulate bank lending.

### 15


-----

and the medium-term lending facility rate (MLF),
which had not been adjusted since August 2023. In
addition, the Central Bank of Russia has recently
increased its reference rate by 200 bps, raising it to
its highest level since April 2022.

Regarding future actions, the central banks generally
indicated that further rate adjustments will remain
dependent on incoming economic data and their
implications for the inflation outlook. Some of these
institutions anticipate that reference rates will remain
at restrictive levels for some time and communicated
that they are prepared to make additional

adjustments, if necessary, to bring inflation back to
target.

In the first half of July, international financial
conditions eased somewhat after the release of
lower-than-expected inflation data in the United
States and employment data indicating a better
balance between supply and demand in the labor
market. This led to a downward adjustment in the
expected path for the federal funds rate. Starting on
the second half of July, the easing of global financial
conditions reversed, partly due to the high volatility
in stock markets in some advanced economies,
largely as a result of corrections in the high
technology sector in the United States In addition, at
the beginning of August, the publication of labor
market data suggesting a lower employment
dynamism in the United States generated concerns
about the economic outlook in that country and a
further deterioration in global financial conditions
(Chart 4). The Bank of Japan's unexpected increase
in reference rates also contributed to said

deterioration. This episode of volatility accentuated
the differences in the expected trajectories of
reference rates implicit in swap curves (OIS) (Chart
5). Thus, particularly for the United States and the
euro area, the implied trajectories foresee reference
rate cuts at the end of the third quarter of 2024, with
cumulative rate cuts between 70 and 120 bps during
2024.


1/ The financial conditions index is constructed considering the effect of five
variables on economic activity: the reference interest rate, the 10-year
government bond, the spread of investment grade bonds over the
government debt bond with equivalent maturity, the ratio of a stock index
with 10-year average earnings per share, and the trade-weighted exchange
rate.
2/ In the case of the euro area, the spread between the sovereign bonds of
France, Italy, Spain, the Netherlands, Belgium, Austria, Portugal and
Finland over the German 10-year bond is also considered. The vertical
black line indicates the last calendarized monetary policy meeting of Banco
de México.
Source: Bloomberg and Goldman Sachs.

**Chart 5**

**Reference rates and trajectories**

**implied in OIS curves[1/]**

Percent

7 **― US Federal Reserve 2/** End of End of End of

**― Bank of England** 2022 2023 2024

6 **― Bank of Japan**

**― European Central Bank deposit rate**
**― OIS implicit trajectory Aug 7, 2024**

5 **--- OIS implicit trajectory Jun 27, 2024**

4

3

2

1 Forecasts

0

-1

2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 2024 2025

1/ OIS: Fixed floating interest rate swap where the fixed interest rate is
associated with the effective overnight reference rate
2/ For the observed reference rate of the U.S., the average interest rate of
the target range of the federal funds rate (5.00%- 5.25%) is used.
Source: Bloomberg.

### 16


103

102

101

100


**Chart 4**

**Financial Conditions Index[1/]**

Units

Tightening

Easing

J        J         J         J

2022              2023                 2024

Financial Conditions Index - global
Financial Conditions Index - United States
Financial Conditions Index - euro area 2/


-----

As a result of the aforementioned factors, mediumand long-term rates in most of the major advanced
and emerging economies decreased significantly.
Stock markets in advanced economies fell,

exhibiting significant volatility, especially in Japan
and the United States (Chart 6). In foreign exchange
markets, the US dollar depreciated against most
advanced economies’ currencies. Likewise, at the
beginning of August, the yen appreciated

considerably, which contributed to a greater volatility
in foreign exchange markets as elevated short
positions against the Japanese yen were liquidated
to finance carry trade positions in the currencies of
countries with higher interest rates (Chart 7). This
derived from the expectation that the Bank of Japan
will continue raising the country's reference rates in
the future. Lastly, since the last monetary policy
decision, there have been net capital inflows to
emerging economies both in equity and fixed income
assets.

**Chart 6**

**Change in selected financial indicators from**

**June 27 to August 7, 2024**


15%

10%


5%


80

60

40

20

0


0%

-5%


-10%

-15%


Kingdom -20

Spain

Spain France

GermanyFrance United StatesCanadaItaly -40

Italy

United Kingdom -60

Canada

United States -80


1/ DXY: a weighted average estimated by the Intercontinental Exchange
(ICE) of the nominal exchange rate of the main six currencies operated
globally with the following weights: EUR: 57.6%, JPY: 13.6%, GBP: 11.9%,
CAD: 9.1%, SEK: 4.2%, and CHF: 3.6%.
Source: Bloomberg.


**Chart 7**

**Selected emerging economies: financial assets**

**performance as of June 21, 2024**

Percent, basis points Percent, basis points

**2-year** **10-year**

**Equity**
**Region** **Country** **Currencies** **interest** **interest** **CDS**

**markets**

**rates** **rates**

**Mexico** **-8.10%** **-1.03%** **-56** **-30** **13**

**Brazil** **-6.48%** **3.72%** **13** **-19** **5**

**Latin**

**Chile** **-2.23%** **-2.67%** **29** **-18** **9**

**America**

**Colombia** **0.34%** **-3.55%** **-106** **-45** **-4**

**Peru** **1.67%** **-4.24%** **-9** **-28** **8**

**Russia** **4.61%** **-5.24%** **319** **167** **N.A.**

**Poland** **2.89%** **-5.52%** **-50** **-61** **0**

**Emerging**

**Turkey** **-1.68%** **-2.77%** **-124** **-50** **17**

**Europe**

**Czechia** **1.34%** **2.44%** **-60** **-49** **2**

**Hungary** **2.16%** **2.61%** **-95** **-58** **-2**

**China** **1.96%** **-3.10%** **-21** **-14** **-1**

**Malaysia** **6.06%** **1.30%** **-16** **-17** **-1**

**India** **-0.36%** **4.89%** **-17** **-8** **-3**

**Asia**

**Philippines** **1.56%** **7.26%** **-30** **-59** **0**

**Thailand** **3.91%** **0.51%** **-16** **-15** **-1**

**Indonesia** **1.61%** **6.22%** **-20** **-30** **1**

**Africa** **South Africa** **-3.57%** **0.97%** **-32** **-40** **-2**

Note: An upward adjustment indicates currency appreciation. Interest rates
correspond to swap rates at the specified terms, except for Hungary, where
government securities with 3-year maturities were used as a reference. For
the Philippines, a 2-year swap rate was used, and for Russia, 2-year and
3-year swap rates were used. The latest CDS data for Russia is as of June
1, 2022.
Source: Bloomberg.

**A.2. Current situation of the Mexican economy**

**A.2.1. Mexican markets**

Since Mexico's last monetary policy decision,
domestic financial markets were affected by the
volatility in international financial markets, with a
differentiated performance by asset class. The
Mexican peso depreciated significantly against the
US dollar, interest rates fell overall, and stock
markets were affected by expectations of lower
economic growth (Chart 8).

Since Mexico's last monetary policy decision, the
Mexican peso traded in a range of 2.64 pesos,
between 17.60 and 20.24 pesos per US dollar.
During the period, it depreciated 8.10% (Chart 9),
due to factors such as the unwinding of carry trade
positions against the yen, the evolution of the
electoral outlook and economic moderation in the
United States, and the persistence of idiosyncratic
risk factors. This behavior occurred in an

environment characterized by increased volatility
and a deterioration in trading conditions.


### 17


-----

Range in 2024 Range since previous monetary policy decision Jun 21, 2024 Aug 2, 2024


Source: Bloomberg and Proveedor Integral de Precios (PIP).

Interest rates on government securities decreased
along the yield curve, reaching decreases of up to 71
bps in the middle part of the curve (Chart 10). Yields
on real-rate instruments also performed positively,
with decreases of up to 59 bps in short- and mediumterm bonds. In this context, breakeven inflation
implicit in spreads between nominal and real rates of
market instruments exhibited high volatility and
differentiated variations by term (Chart 11).

Meanwhile, risk premia, including yield spreads
between US and Mexican government bond rates,
as well as term premia, registered moderate
increases. The fixed-income market exhibited an
improvement in trading conditions.

Regarding expectations for the path of the monetary
policy reference rate, information implicit in the
interest rate swaps curve incorporates with a high
probability a decrease in interest rates in the August
2024 decision, with an expectation of 10.10% and
8.59% for the target rate for the end of 2024 and
2025, respectively (Chart 12). In turn, the median of
the survey by Citibanamex published on August 6
anticipates a 25-basis-point cut for the September
meeting. The median for the end of the year places
the reference rate at 10.50%.


### 18


-----

**Chart 11**

**Breakeven inflation and inflation risk implied in**

**government securities’ yields**

Basis points

600

550

500

450

400

350

3-year

300 10-year

20-year
30-year

250

J F A M J A O N J F A M J A O N J F A J J A O N J M A J J

2021 2022 2023 2024

1/ Horizontal lines refer to the respective averages observed from
September 2008 to date.
Source: Proveedor Integral de Precios (PIP).

**Chart 12**

**Interbank funding rate implied in TIIE swaps**

Percent

12.50

11.50

10.50

9.50

8.50

7.50

6.50

5.50 Banxico overnight rate (reference rate)

Implied interest rate in TIIE swaps for 08/02/24

4.50

Implied interest rate in TIIE swaps for 21/06/24

3.50

J  A  J  O  J  A  J  O  J  A  J  O  J  A  J  O  J  A  J  O

2021       2022       2023        2024       2025

Note: Gray lines represent the range since the last monetary policy
decision.
Source: Proveedor Integral de Precios (PIP).


**A.2.2. Economic activity in Mexico**

According to Mexico's GDP flash estimate published
by INEGI, in the second quarter of 2024, productive
activity registered low growth, thus extending the
weakness it has exhibited since the end of 2023
(Chart 13).

**Chart 13**

**Gross Domestic Product**

Quarterly percentage change, s. a.

2.5

2.0

1.5

1.0

0.5

0.0

-0.5

-1.0

Q-II 1/

-1.5

I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV I II

2021 2022 2023 2024

s. a. / Seasonally adjusted figures. The chart’s range was adjusted to
facilitate its reading.
1/ The figure for the second quarter of 2024 refers to the timely estimate of
quarterly GDP published by INEGI.
Source: Mexico’s System of National Accounts (SCNM, for its Spanish
acronym), INEGI.

Regarding domestic demand, during the period of
April-May 2024, consumption contracted with
respect to the previous quarter. Within this indicator, 24/06/2024
both goods and services consumption exhibited 21/06/202420/06/2024
weakness. Gross fixed investment 19/06/2024 continued

showing a moderate recovery, although the pace of 18/06/202417/06/2024
growth so far in 2024 has been slower than that 14/06/2024
observed between the last quarter of 2022 and the 13/06/2024
third quarter of 2023. In this regard, investment in
construction continued reactivating, while

investment in machinery and equipment continued
decelerating. As for external demand, manufacturing
exports remained weak during the second quarter of
2024, reflecting some stagnation in both automotive
and non-automotive exports (Chart 14).

### 19

|Col1|1.47 1.21 0.94 0.96 1.01 0.83 0.83 0.80 0.71 0.67 0.28 0.22 0.01 -0.74 Q-II 1/|
|---|---|


-----

**Chart 14**

**Manufacturing exports**

Indices 2021 = 100, s. a.


**Chart 15**

**Global Indicator of Economic Activity**

Indices 2021 = 100, s. a.


160

150

140

130

120

110

100

90

80

J

2021


A J O J

2022


A J O J

2023


A J O J

2024


A J


115

110

105

100

95

90


M


M S J

2022


M S J

2023


M S J

2024


s. a. / Seasonally adjusted series and trend series based on data in nominal
US dollars. The former is represented by a solid line and the latter by a
dotted line. The chart’s range was adjusted to facilitate its reading.
Source: Prepared by Banco de México with data from the Tax
Administration Service (SAT, for its Spanish acronym), the Ministry of the
Economy (SE, for its Spanish acronym), Banco de México, the National
Institute of Statistics and Geography (INEGI, for its Spanish acronym).
Mexico’s Merchandise Trade Balance. The National System of Statistical
and Geographical Information (SNIEG, for its Spanish acronym).
Information of national interest.

On the production side, during the period of AprilMay, services lost dynamism (Chart 15). Despite
having increased during the quarter, industrial
activity continued performing weakly. This reflected,
to a good extent, the sluggishness of the
manufacturing sector. In contrast, construction
performed better and reached high growth levels.
(Chart 16).

Regarding the cyclical position of the economy, the
output gap, which had been becoming progressively
less positive, practically closed due to the weakness
of economic activity (Chart 17). The labor market
continued showing strength in June 2024, albeit with
some moderation at the margin. Both national and
urban unemployment rates increased in their
monthly comparison. However, both remained at low
levels (Chart 18). In July, with seasonally adjusted
data the number of newly created formal IMSSinsured jobs continued decelerating. Lastly, in May
2024, unit labor costs in the manufacturing sector
rebounded to high levels (Chart 19).


s. a. / Seasonally adjusted series and trend series. The former is
represented by a solid line and the latter by a dotted line. The chart’s range
was adjusted to facilitate its reading.
Source: Mexico’s System of National Accounts (SCNM, for its Spanish
acronym), INEGI.

**Chart 16**

**Industrial activity [1/]**

Indices 2021 = 100, s. a.

135

Total

130 Mining (12%)

125 Manufacturing (63%)

Construction (19%)

120

Utilities (6%)

115

110

105

100

May

95

J M S J M S J M S J M

2021 2022 2023 2024

s. a. / Seasonally adjusted series and trend series. The former is
represented by a solid line and the latter by a dotted line
1/ Figures in parenthesis correspond to their share in the total in 2018.
Source: Mexico’s System of National Accounts (SCNM, for its Spanish
acronym), INEGI.

### 20


J

2021


-----

**Chart 17**

**Output gap estimates[1/]**

Percent of potential output, s. a


12

8

4

0

-4

-8 Global Economic Activity Index

(IGAE) 2/

-12

Gross Domestic Product 2/

-16

95% confidence interval 3/

-20

Q-II
June

-24

J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J  A J

2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 2024

s. a. / Calculations based on seasonally adjusted figures.
1/ Output gap estimated with a tail-corrected Hodrick-Prescott filter; see
Banco de México (2009), “Inflation Report, April-June 2009”, p.69.
2/ GDP flash estimate up to Q2-2024 and IGAE up to June 2024.
3/ Output gap confidence interval calculated with a method of unobserved
components.
Source: Prepared by Banco de México with INEGI data.

**Chart 18**

**National and urban unemployment rates**

Percent, s. a.

6.5

Urban unemployment rate

6.0

National unemployment rate

5.5

5.0

4.5

4.0

3.5

3.0

2.5

June

2.0

J M S J M S J M S J M J

2021 2022 2023 2024

s. a. / Seasonally adjusted series and trend series. The former is
represented by a solid line and the latter by a dotted line.
Source: Prepared by Banco de México with data from ENOE, INEGI.


s. a. / Seasonally adjusted series and trend series. The former is
represented by a solid line and the latter by a dotted line. The chart’s range
was adjusted to facilitate its reading
1/ Productivity based on hours worked.
Source: Prepared by Banco de México with seasonally adjusted data of the
Monthly Manufacturing Industry Survey and industrial activity indicators of
Mexico’s System of National Accounts (Sistema de Cuentas Nacionales de
México, SCNM), INEGI.

Domestic financing to the private sector continued
growing in June 2024, albeit at a slower pace
compared to the dynamism observed throughout
2023. Regarding its components, commercial bank
lending to firms registered a lower growth rate than
the one observed at the end of the previous year.
(Chart 20). Likewise, household loan portfolios
continued showing a moderation in their rate of
expansion.

As for the cost of financing, interest rates on bank
credit to firms remained at high levels in June 2024.
Meanwhile, credit intermediation margins did not
register significant changes during the period. Bank
interest rates on mortgages remained at levels
similar to those observed prior to the pandemic.
Lastly, regarding commercial bank consumer credit,
credit card interest rates did not show significant
changes in April 2024, and thus they continued to
remain at relatively high levels.

### 21


**Chart 19**

**Productivity and unit labor costs**

**in the manufacturing sector [1/]**

Indices 2021 = 100, s. a.


108

106

104

102

100

98

96


J

2021


M S J

2022


M S J

2023


M S J

2024


May

M


-----

As for portfolio quality, the delinquency rates of bank
credit to firms and households remained at low levels
in June 2024. In the segment of consumption, this
indicator did not register significant changes during
the month and thus stopping the upward trend
observed since the second half of 2023.

**Chart 20**

**Performing credit from commercial banks**

**to the private sector**

Annual percentage change

15

10

5

0

-5

-10 Consumption

-15 Mortgage1/

Non-financial private firms2/ June

-20

J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A

2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 2024

1/ Adjusted to account for the withdrawal from and the incorporation of nonbank financial intermediaries to the credit statistics.
2/ Adjusted for valuation effects due to movements in the exchange rate.
Source: Banco de México.

**A.2.3. Development of inflation and inflation**
**outlook**

Annual headline inflation increased from 4.98 to
5.57% between June and July 2024 (Chart 21 and
Table 1). This upward behavior was due to the
increase in non-core inflation. In contrast, core
inflation continued declining.

**Chart 21**

**Consumer Price Index**

Annual percentage change

14
13 CPI
12 Core
11 Non-core
10

9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0

-1
-2 July
-3

J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M

2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 2024

Source: INEGI.

Annual core inflation decreased from 4.13 to 4.05%
between June and July 2024. Regarding its
components, annual merchandise inflation


decreased from 3.28 to 3.09% (Chart 22), influenced
by a reduction from 4.22 to 4.03% in food inflation
and from 2.16 to 1.95% in non-food inflation (Chart
23). Annual services inflation remained at high levels
and without showing a clear downward trend. On
those dates, it registered 5.15 and 5.22%,
respectively.

**Chart 22**

**Merchandise and services**

**core price subindex**

Annual percentage change

12

Merchandise

11

Services

10

9

8

7

6

5

4

3

2

1

July

0

J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M

2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 2024

Source: INEGI.


**Chart 23**

**Merchandise and services core price subindex**

Annual percentage change

16

Food, beverages and tobacco

14 Non-food merchandise

12

10

8

6

4

2

July

0

J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M

2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 2024

Source: INEGI.

Annual non-core inflation increased from 7.67 to
10.36% between June and July 2024 (Chart 24 and
Table 1). This performance reflected pressures on
agricultural and livestock prices as well as on energy
prices. During said period, annual inflation of
agricultural and livestock products rose from 10.36
to 13.72%, mainly driven by an increase from 19.73
to 23.55% in the annual variation of fruits and
vegetables prices. This was due to supply shocks
that affected the prices of some of its components.

### 22

|Chart 21 Consumer Price Index Annual percentage change|Col2|Col3|
|---|---|---|
|CPI|||
|Core Non-core|||
||||
||||
||||
||||
||||
||||
||||
|July|||


-----

In addition, the annual inflation of livestock products
increased from 2.89 to 5.36%. For the same
comparison, annual inflation of energy products rose
from 6.32 to 9.17%. This result was mainly due to an
increase from 12.71 to 25.61% in the annual
variation of L.P. gas prices, influenced by the
behavior of their international references.

**Chart 24**

**Non-core price subindex**

Annual percentage change

25 Non-core

Agricultural and livestock products

20 Energy and government-authorized prices

15

10

5

0

-5

July

-10

J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M

2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 2024

Source: INEGI.

Regarding inflation expectations drawn from the
survey conducted by Banco de México among
private sector specialists, between May and July
2024, the median of headline inflation for the end of
2024 increased from 4.27 to 4.58%, while that
corresponding to the non-core component rose from
4.91 to 6.76%,[5] due to the increase in non-core
inflation, which became more evident since the
second fortnight of July. In contrast, the median of

5 Non-core inflation expectations are calculated implicitly for each
analyst using headline and core inflation expectations. This


core inflation decreased from 4.07 a 3.97%. Inflation
expectations for the end of 2025 increased. The
median of headline inflation rose from 3.71 to 3.83%.
The core component remained at a similar level,
shifting from 3.70 to 3.71%. At the same time, the
median of headline inflation expectations over the
next four years remained at 3.70%, while that of core
inflation was adjusted from 3.60 to 3.64%. The
median of headline and core inflation expectations
for the long term (5 to 8 years) remained stable at
3.60 and 3.50%, respectively. Lastly, breakeven
inflation tended to increase with respect to the level
observed in the last monetary policy decision.
Regarding its components, inflation expectations
implied in market instruments remained stable, while
the inflation risk premium adjusted upwards.

In view of the supply shocks that have affected noncore inflation, the forecasts for headline inflation
were revised upwards for the short term. Headline
inflation is still expected to converge to the target in
the fourth quarter of 2025. These projections are
subject to risks. On the upside: i) persistence of core
inflation; ii) greater foreign exchange depreciation;
iii) greater cost-related pressures; iv) climate-related
impacts, and v) the intensification of geopolitical
conflicts. On the downside: i) lower-than-anticipated
economic activity; ii) a lower pass-through effect
from some cost-related pressures, and iii) a lowerthan-anticipated effect of the peso’s depreciation on
inflation. The balance of risks for the trajectory of
inflation within the forecast horizon remains biased
to the upside.

calculation is only performed for those analysts who provide a
forecast for both headline and core inflation.

### 23


-----

**Table 1**

**Consumer Price Index and components**

Annual percentage change

**Item** **May 2024** **June 2024** **July 2024**

**CPI** **4.69** **4.98** **5.57**

**SubyacenteCore** **4.21** **4.13** **4.05**

**Merchandise** **3.38** **3.28** **3.09**

Food, beverages and tobacco 4.49 4.22 4.03

Non-food merchandise 2.05 2.16 1.95

**Services** **5.22** **5.15** **5.22**

Housing 3.81 3.87 3.96

Education (tuitions) 6.34 6.35 6.36

Other services 6.14 5.96 6.01

**No SubyacenteNon-core** **6.19** **7.67** **10.36**

**Agricultural and livestock products** **8.44** **10.36** **13.72**

Fruits and vegetablesFruits abd vegetables 18.55 19.73 23.55

Livestock productsLivestock 0.71 2.89 5.36

**Energy and government-authorized prices Energéticos y Tarifas Aut. por Gobierno** **4.20** **5.28** **7.31**

Energy productsEnergy 4.81 6.32 9.17

Government-authorized pricesTarifas Autorizadas por Gobierno 2.88 3.09 3.42

Source:INEGI.


-----

-----

