-----

-----

**FOREWARNING**
This document is provided for the reader’s convenience
only. The translation from the official Spanish version was
made by Banco de México’s staff. Discrepancies may arise
between the original document in Spanish and its English
translation. For this reason, the original Spanish version is
the only official document.


**1. PLACE, DATE AND PARTICIPANTS**

**1.1. Place: Meeting held by virtual means.**

**1.2. Date of Governing Board meeting:** February
7, 2024.

**1.3. Participants:**

- Victoria Rodríguez, Governor.

- Galia Borja, Deputy Governor.

- Irene Espinosa, Deputy Governor.

- Jonathan Heath, Deputy Governor.

- Omar Mejía, Deputy Governor.

- Rogelio Eduardo Ramírez, Secretary of Finance

and Public Credit.

- Gabriel Yorio, Undersecretary of Finance and

Public Credit.

- María Elena Méndez, Secretary of the Governing

Board.

Prior to this meeting, preliminary work by Banco de
México’s staff analyzing the economic and financial
environment as well as the developments in inflation
and the determinants and outlook for inflation, was
conducted and presented to the Governing Board
(see Annex).

**2. ANALYSIS AND RATIONALE BEHIND THE**
**GOVERNING BOARD’S VOTING**

**_International environment_**

**Most members highlighted the resilience of world**
**economic activity, although they noted a**
**differentiated performance among economies.**
**One member pointed out the dynamism exhibited by**
some economies in 2023, including that of the United
States. He/she also mentioned the continuous
tightening of labor markets and the boost to
consumption observed in that economy. He/she
compared the latter with the sluggishness shown by
emerging economies, especially the Asian ones.
**Another member stated that during the last quarter**
of 2023, although the pace of expansion of the US


economy moderated, it was higher than expected,
while economic activity in the euro area remained
stagnant. He/she added that emerging economies
registered a lower dynamism during the same period
compared to the previous quarter. Regarding labor
markets, he/she indicated that they remain tight in
the main economies, although in some of them they
show signs of moderation. He/she mentioned that
unemployment gaps have slightly narrowed and that
wage growth has moderated, although it remains at
high levels. He/she underlined that, despite the figure
for non-farm payrolls at the margin which is
consistent with the resilience of the US economy, this
indicator has been trending downwards since mid2022.He/she added that, likewise, a downward trend
can be observed for vacancies and for excess
demand for labor.

**Some members indicated that forecasts from**
international organizations point to global growth of
around 3% for 2024. Some members underlined that
these forecasts consider a heterogeneous behavior
among countries. **Most members mentioned that**
**US economic growth is still expected to**
**moderate, although some members stated that the**
likelihood of a soft landing in that economy has
increased. **The majority warned that the outlook**
**for world economic activity faces risks. Some**
members considered that this outlook remains
uncertain given the expected slowdown in

systemically important economies. **One** member
highlighted the uncertainty about the impact of the
tightening of credit conditions and decreased excess
savings in the United States, and the real estate
sector problems in China. **Another member**
highlighted the risk of an escalation of geopolitical
tensions, especially for world trade.

**Most members pointed out that, after decreasing**
**in recent months, headline inflation has recently**
**rebounded in several economies, especially in**
**the advanced ones, due to pressures on energy**
**prices. However, they indicated that, despite the**
**upward adjustment at the margin, a significant**
**decline in inflation has been observed at the**
**global level.** **One member attributed the latter to**
improvements in supply and to sound monetary
policy stances in different regions. However, another
member warned that, in a large number of
economies, headline inflation remains above central
banks' targets. **Most members argued that core**
**inflation continued declining globally. However,**
**one member noted that, in most cases, it still remains**
high. Another member pointed out that progress in
disinflation of the core component mainly reflects a
sustained fall in food merchandise inflation. Some

1


-----

members pointed out that, in contrast, services
inflation still does not show a clear downward trend,
although one member stated that it has moderated.

**Some members indicated that in most economies**
inflation is expected to converge to their

corresponding central banks’ targets by 2025. **One**
member pointed out that international organizations
expect inflation to fall in nearly 80% of the world's
economies during 2024. **Another** member

mentioned that, looking ahead, various price-related
pressures are expected to continue easing as the
effects of pandemic-related shocks and the military
conflict in Ukraine dissipate. He/she emphasized that
this, along with tight monetary conditions worldwide,
will continue contributing to global disinflation. **One**
member pointed out that in the United States certain
leading indicators suggest that shelter inflation,
which has contributed significantly to inflation in that
country, could moderate towards the second half of
2024.

**Some members highlighted that, since the last**
monetary policy decision, international commodity
prices have been volatile. **One member underlined**
that oil prices were affected by the uncertainty
associated with geopolitical conflicts, inventory
levels, and a changing outlook for global demand.
**Another member stated that the outlook for**
commodity prices remains uncertain.

**The majority noted that the central banks of**
**major advanced economies left their reference**
**rates unchanged. One** member specified that the
European Central Bank (ECB) kept its reference
rates unchanged for the third consecutive meeting
and that, despite the recent increase in headline
inflation, it did not change its inflation outlook for the
medium term. Most members mentioned that at its
**first meeting of the year the US Federal Reserve**
**left the target range for the federal funds rate**
**unchanged for the fourth consecutive time.** **Some**
members highlighted that said institution

acknowledged that the risks to the fulfillment of its
employment and price stability mandates are moving
towards a better balance. **Some members added**
that the Federal Reserve's chairman stated that the
federal funds rate may have already reached its
peak. One member underlined that he also pointed
out the advance in the disinflation process despite
the solid economic expansion and argued that it
would be appropriate, sometime in 2024, to start
reducing the funds rate, if the economy evolves as
expected. **However, most members highlighted**
**that said chairman indicated that they will wait**
**until they have more confidence that the decline**


**in inflation is sustainable before reducing the**
**federal funds rate. Some members stated that the**
aforementioned contributed to markets adjusting
their expectations of the first rate cut towards the
second quarter of 2024.

**Some members noted heterogeneity in the monetary**
cycles across regions, especially in emerging
economies. **One member attributed this to a**
differentiated behavior of inflation and economic
activity across economies. **Another** member

underlined that some Latin American economies
continue their monetary normalization. One member
pointed out that the central banks of Brazil and Chile
continued lowering their reference rates, reflecting
optimism about their inflation trajectories, while the
Central Bank of Colombia has been more moderate
about its reference rate cuts. **Another member**
indicated that, looking ahead, advanced economies,
except for Japan, are expected to begin reducing
their rates in the second quarter of 2024. **One**
member noted that the ECB and the Bank of England
emphasized that they will continue with a cautious
and data-dependent approach to ensure that inflation
remains on a trend towards their respective targets.
**Another member highlighted that few changes are**
anticipated in the policy stances of the monetary
authorities of emerging European and Asian
economies. One member added that adjustments in
monetary policy stances this year are expected to be
consistent with the convergence of inflation rates to
their respective targets.

**Some members noted that international financial**
markets have been sensitive to both the release of
economic figures, mainly in the United States, and to
changes in the outlook for reference rates, especially
those of the Federal Reserve. One member pointed
out that market reactions to events in the United
States reflect the systemic nature of the US economy
and the uncertainty about its evolution. **Another**
member noted that in recent weeks markets have
responded to data releases and to comments by
central bank officers, seeking to anticipate the
inflection point of monetary policy, mainly in the
United States and Europe. Some members recalled
that at the end of last year, sovereign interest rates
decreased significantly. One member attributed this
to the continued effects from the perception in
financial markets that the Fed’s message of high
interest rates lasting longer in the major advanced
economies is less likely to hold. **Another member**
pointed to lower inflation as the cause. **Most**
**members stated that, subsequently, the release**
**of data suggesting that the US economy remains**
**resilient had an impact on international financial**

2


-----

**markets.** **Some** members pointed out that

government interest rates have partially reversed the
decline observed towards the end of 2023. **Some**
members added that the US dollar has also
recovered. One member noted that there has been a
recent compression of credit spreads and a rebound
in stock markets, particularly in the technology
sector. **Some members highlighted that volatility in**
these markets has moderated in recent weeks.
Regarding emerging markets, **one** member

underlined that the beginning of 2024 has been
characterized by a slightly adverse performance of
their assets, partly reversing the positive

performance observed in the last quarter of 2023.

**Some members** stated that, looking ahead, episodes
of financial volatility cannot be ruled out in view of the
data-dependent stance of various central banks. In
that regard, one member added that the divergence
between what central banks have communicated and
what markets expect represents a risk for financial
stability, because it could generate sudden changes
in the prices of some assets in case of unfavorable
financial conditions. Among the risks to financial
stability, **some members pointed out the possibility**
of instability in light of various upcoming elections
around the world this year. One member added that
a possible escalation of geopolitical conflicts can also
generate volatility.

**_Economic activity in Mexico_**

**All members mentioned that in the fourth quarter**
**of 2023, the Mexican economy registered a**
**greater-than-expected slowdown. Most members**
**noted that the three sectors of economic activity**
**contributed to the slower pace of expansion. One**
member pointed out that the economy grew at a
quarterly rate of 0.1% in the fourth quarter, after
having registered 0.6, 0.9 and 1.1% in the previous
quarters. Thus, some members considered that, by
expanding 3.1% during the year, the economy
exhibited robust growth in 2023. One member added
that, nevertheless, the slowdown at the end of the
year implies a slightly lower expected GDP growth in
2024.

**Regarding the performance of industrial activity,**
**all members stated that manufacturing showed**
**weakness.** **One member indicated that such**
behavior mirrored the sluggishness of this sector in
the United States. **Some members noted a**
moderation in the rate of growth of the transportation
equipment component. One member pointed out that
this happened after its significant expansion since
the end of 2021. **Some members highlighted that**
during 2023 the weakness of manufacturing


contrasted with the dynamism of the construction
sector. **However, most members stated that, as**
**revealed in most recent data, the latter sector**
**grew at a slower-than-expected rate. In this**
regard, **some members argued that, nevertheless,**
the level of activity in this sector remains high.

**Regarding domestic demand, most members**
**indicated that recently investment moderated its**
**pace of expansion due to a slowdown in non-**
**residential construction and in machinery and**
**equipment. Some members mentioned that, in spite**
of the above, investment grew significantly over the
last year and remains at high levels. **One member**
pointed out that with data up to November, gross
fixed capital formation grew at annual rates of over
20%. **Some members added that consumption**
maintained its positive trend, although **some**
members noted that it showed less dynamism
towards the end of 2023. Some members indicated
that consumption growth has reflected the dynamism
of consumption of imported goods. Some members
mentioned that, in contrast, consumption of domestic
goods and services was sluggish. Regarding
external demand, **one** member stated that

manufacturing exports contracted during the fourth
quarter of 2023. **Some members noted that**
automotive exports improved slightly at the margin,
while non-automotive exports moderated compared
to the first half of 2023. In this regard, one member
considered that aggregate demand has moderated.
**Another member warned that these signs of**
moderation must continue being monitored.

**Most members argued that economic activity is**
**expected to resume a greater dynamism in the**
**first half of 2024. Some members noted that**
spending on public investment is expected to
continue supporting economic growth. One member
pointed out that in election years, domestic demand
tends to be more dynamic during the first half of the
year. **Another** member added that public

construction spending is expected to continue in light
of the fiscal expansion plans for the year. However,
**one member noted that there is uncertainty about the**
dynamism of economic activity in light of the effects
that the fiscal stance might have, the slowdown
observed at the end of 2023, and the expectation of
weaker external demand. **Some members stated**
that private spending is also foreseen to continue
expanding. Regarding risks to growth, one member
identified as a risk to the upside the possibility that
the effects of nearshoring are greater than
anticipated. As a risk to the downside, he/she
mentioned a greater-than-expected deceleration of

3


-----

the US economy. He/she considered that risks to
growth remain balanced.

**Most members mentioned that, despite the lower**
**quarterly growth rate registered at the end of**
**2023, the point estimate of the output gap**
**remained positive, although it decreased at the**
**margin and is still not statistically different from**
**zero. One member pointed out that over the forecast**
horizon the gap is now estimated to be slightly less
positive and to be closing gradually, approaching
zero.

**Most members highlighted that the labor market**
**continued showing strength. They agreed that**
**unemployment rates remain low. However, some**
members indicated that there are signs of easing in
the labor market. One member added that growth of
formal employment has slowed down. **Another**
member stated that both the employment-toworking-age population ratio and the number of
vacancies have shown signs of moderation. **Some**
members mentioned the stabilization of the labor
participation rate.

**Most members considered that wages continue**
**increasing at an elevated rate. Some members**
pointed out that they show double-digit nominal
annual growth rates. One member stated that these
rates of change are historically high. **Another**
member indicated that the annual variation of the
nominal daily wage associated with IMSS-insured
workers remained above 10% in December, while
contractual wage revisions stood at 9.7 and 4.2% in
private and public companies, respectively.

However, one member argued that wage variations
of formal workers seem to have begun to stabilize.
**Another member pointed out that these have**
moderated in the industrial and service sectors.
Regarding the recent increases in the minimum
wage, **one member stated that these have had an**
increasing incidence on the average wage.

**_Inflation in Mexico_**

**Most members acknowledged the disinflation**
**process in Mexico.** **Some members noted that**
headline inflation is at levels significantly below the
peak of 8.70% registered in August 2022. **One**
member pointed out that it is currently 382 basis
points below this peak, 248 of which are due to the
decline in the core component and 134 to the noncore one. This member pointed out that the above
reflects a better balance between the core and noncore contributions.


**All members mentioned that in the latest**
**readings annual headline inflation increased,**
**reaching 4.88% in January 2024. Most members**
**pointed out that this increase in headline inflation**
**was due to a rebound in the non-core**
**component,** **as** **the** **core** **component** **has**

**continued to decline. They highlighted that, after**
**having registered historic lows, the non-core**
**component has increased, reaching 5.24% in**
**January. They noted that, at the margin, the rise**
**in this component was due to marked increases**
**in the prices of certain products within the fruits**
**and vegetables subcomponent. Some members**
mentioned that this was due to a considerable drop
in the supply of these products caused by climaterelated factors. **One member underlined that in**
January inflation of the fruits and vegetables
subcomponent stood at 21.78%. **Some members**
emphasized that a large part of this increase was due
to upward adjustments in the prices of three
vegetables: onion, tomato, and tomatillo. **One**
member specified that these three products
accounted for more than 70% of the annual variation
in this subcomponent in January. He/she noted that
these price increases have been among the most
extreme over the last two decades. Another member
highlighted that these vegetables contributed with 84
of the 488 basis points that headline inflation
registered in January. **One member indicated that**
the annual price changes of just two CPI items jointly
contributed with over half of the annual inflation of
fruits and vegetables in its latest reading. **Another**
member noted that the current level of non-core
inflation is very close to its historical average, and
thus the risk of a reversion to its historical mean has
practically already materialized.

**All members highlighted that core inflation**
**continued** **trending** **downwards,** **registering**

**4.76% in January 2024. Some members underlined**
that since its peak in November 2022, this
component has decreased by 375 basis points. One
member highlighted that various measures of central
tendency of core inflation have trended downwards
since the second half of 2022, and that extreme
variations have been declining. He/she pointed out
that more than one third of the CPI items that make
up this component show seasonally adjusted and
annualized monthly variations of less than or equal
to 3%.

**Regarding core inflation’s components, most**
**members noted the decline in merchandise**
**inflation. They specified that in January both**
**food and non-food inflation registered 5.54 and**
**2.97%, respectively.** **One member stated that,**

4


-----

although food merchandise inflation still remains at
high levels, it has declined considerably. He/she
pointed out that, after having attained a maximum of
14.14% in December 2022, it has decreased by 860
basis points and its most recent reading is the lowest
since May 2021. **Another member underlined that**
the merchandise price index has registered

seasonally adjusted and annualized monthly

variations close to 3%.

**The majority stated that services inflation still**
**does not show a clear downward trend.** **Some**
members pointed out that it was 5.25% in January.
**One member mentioned that, since August 2022, it**
has registered annual rates above 5%. He/she
considered that such persistence is a matter of
concern given that services are non-tradable, which
makes them more sensitive to domestic pressures,
particularly to the economy’s cyclical conditions.
**Another member pointed out that services inflation**
remains high, with pressures perceived in two of its
three components. One member stated that inflation
of services other than housing and education
remains stable, but at high levels. Another member
emphasized that, at the margin, services inflation
declined slightly and is below the maximum level of
5.71% attained in March 2023. He/she highlighted
that price variations of some of its items have indeed
trended downwards.

**Most members mentioned that services inflation**
**continues reflecting the cost-related pressures**
**that have accumulated as a result of the**
**pandemic and the war in Ukraine. One member**
stated that their performance corresponds to a
necessary adjustment in the economy due to a
significant distortion in the relative prices between
merchandise and services which was generated as a
result of the pandemic. He/she recalled that, amid the
economic fallout from this health crisis, merchandise
inflation increased before services inflation. In
contrast, during the current disinflationary phase,
merchandise inflation has decreased at a faster rate.
However, he/she underlined that he/she anticipates
a decline in services inflation insofar as the effects
from the easing of the shocks are observed and
monetary tightening has an impact. He/she added
that the materialization of this outlook is a factor to
monitor.

**Some members considered that medium- and long-**
term inflation expectations drawn from surveys
remained relatively stable. One member pointed out
that they have gotten closer to their historical
averages, and that their distributions have improved
at the margin. **Some members noted that they**


remain at levels above target. **One member stated**
that expectations for the average of the next four
years were at 3.7%, still above their historical
average prior to 2020, while those for the next five to
eight years remained at 3.5%.

As for short-term inflation expectations, **some**
members indicated that those for the end of 2024
increased. One member pointed out that over half of
surveyed analysts anticipate that by the end of 2024
inflation will exceed the variability range. Another
member specified that the median of headline
inflation expectations for the end of 2025 registered
3.7%, which differs from Banco de México's forecast
of 3.1% for the same period. One member underlined
that expectations for the next 12 months have
continued decreasing and have accumulated a 104
basis-point drop since March 2023. **Another**
member pointed out that short-term expectations for
the core component decreased slightly, while those
for the non-core component adjusted upwards. As for
expectations implied by market instruments, he/she
highlighted that breakeven inflation decreased for the
short term, reaching below 4%, while for the long
term it remained at higher levels. He/she noted that
the slower evolution of expectations drawn from
market instruments contrasts with the decline in
analysts’ medium- and long-term expectations.
He/she mentioned that this suggests uncertainty
regarding inflation’s trajectory.

**Most members mentioned that the central bank’s**
**forecast for headline inflation was revised**
**slightly upwards for the short term. They pointed**
**out that supply shocks on non-core inflation**
**basically account for said adjustment.** **They**
**estimated that these impacts will not be long-**
**lasting, and that for this reason the disinflation**
**process is expected to continue in the following**
**months. Some members indicated that the**
incidence of said supply shocks is expected to
decrease during the second quarter of 2024. **Most**
**members pointed out that headline inflation is**
**still foreseen to converge to target in the second**
**quarter of 2025.** **Some members stated that**
forecasts for core inflation remained practically at the
same levels as in the previous monetary policy
meeting. One member mentioned that projections for
this component were revised slightly downwards for
the first quarter of 2024 as a result of lower-thanexpected annual variations in merchandise prices in
January. **Another member highlighted that the**
recent increase in the non-core component is not
expected to pass on to core inflation, and it is still

5


-----

expected to be around 3% in the second quarter of
2025.

**All members considered that the balance of risks**
**for the foreseen trajectory of inflation within the**
**forecast horizon remains biased to the upside.**
**One member mentioned that, in his/her opinion, this**
balance has accentuated its upward bias and level of
uncertainty. He/she pointed out that the risk of
disinflation stagnating or reversing has increased.
He/she highlighted that the core component has
been declining recently at a slower pace. Likewise,
he/she noted that non-core inflation has increased
more than expected. On the other hand, **another**
member emphasized that it had already been
anticipated that the disinflation process would be
non-linear and heterogeneous. He/she estimated
that this does not alter the medium-term outlook for
inflation. He/she asserted that, despite the recent
rebound in headline inflation, the balance of risks has
improved compared to that prevailing at the end of
2022 and at the beginning of 2023. He/she argued
that the risks that currently prevail are more akin to
those observed in previous inflationary episodes, as
opposed to the atypical shocks faced in the aftermath
of the pandemic, and thus their materialization would
have more limited effects on inflation.

**Among upward risks to inflation, the majority**
**underlined the persistence of core inflation at**
**high levels. In this regard,** **some members stated**
that services inflation will likely continue exhibiting
some downward rigidity. **One** member pointed out
that such rigidity may be the result of services prices
not having compensated the totality of the increases
observed in the production costs. Another member
mentioned that the decline in merchandise inflation
could also stagnate due to, among other factors, the
deceleration in the decline of global inflation.

**Most members warned about the possibility of**
**greater cost-related pressures of various nature.**
**Some members underlined the risk of an escalation**
of geopolitical turmoil leading to further increases in
transportation costs and to upward pressures on
energy prices by affecting the security and continuity
of global supply chains. One member mentioned the
possibility of climate-related, geopolitical and

macrofinancial factors may accelerate inflation by
disrupting the supply of agricultural and energy
products, and merchandise. Another member added
that a potential interruption of gasoline price policies
also constitutes a risk for this component. However,
**one member expressed that, although incidents in**
the Red Sea have raised sea freight costs between
Europe and Asia, their impact on inflation should be


significantly lower compared to disruptions caused
by pandemic-induced bottlenecks. On the other
hand, another member mentioned the risk related to
wage adjustments, as well as those associated with
insecurity. Some members forewarned that non-core
inflation could also continue to be affected by
climate-related factors. One member added that said
factors could also affect the core component, for
instance, through the impact of water scarcity on the
prices of some services.

**Some members argued that the behavior of**
aggregate demand could also pose a risk to
inflation’s persistence. One member considered that
capacity utilization and labor market indicators point
to tight conditions, and thus aggregate demandrelated pressures on prices cannot be ruled out.
**Another member pointed out that higher public**
spending planned for this year could reinforce
demand-related pressures more than expected and
slow down the reduction of inflation. He/she stated
that, if the cuts in public spending in 2025 turn out to
be smaller than those announced, growth would be
higher than forecasted. On the other hand, he/she
mentioned that markets expect reference rate cuts in
advanced economies to be of greater magnitude
than those implied by their central banks’

communication. He/she cautioned that these

discrepancies could result in capital outflows, foreign
exchange depreciations, and inflationary pressures
in emerging economies, including Mexico.

Among risks to the downside, **one member**
highlighted a greater-than-anticipated deceleration of
the world economy, leading to a faster-than-expected
decline in global inflation. He/she underlined that the
decline in global inflation, especially in the United
States, contributes to disinflation in Mexico through
lower variations in tradable goods’ prices.

**_Macrofinancial environment_**

**Some members indicated that domestic financial**
markets exhibited an orderly behavior. The majority
**mentioned that the Mexican peso appreciated**
**slightly and its trading conditions improved.** **One**
member underlined that such conditions have
returned to pre-pandemic levels and that, overall, the
Mexican peso remained stable despite the volatility
registered in certain trading sessions. The majority
**pointed out that the Mexican peso stood out**
**among emerging economies’ currencies, favored**
**by a relatively high volatility-adjusted interest**
**rate** **spread** **and** **stable** **macroeconomic**

**fundamentals. Some members expressed that both**
markets and analysts perceive the possibility of
facing episodes of exchange rate volatility, and of

6


-----

observing an upward correction in the exchange rate
associated, among other factors, with the electoral
processes in both Mexico and the United States.

**The majority noted that government bond yields**
**decreased moderately along the entire yield**
**curve.** **One member stated that foreign participants**
showed interest in short-term instruments. He/she
attributed such interest to investors seeking to take
advantage of interest rate levels and the expectation
that these will remain relatively elevated throughout
the year, compared to those of other emerging
countries. **Some members highlighted that in**
December there was also a significant positioning by
foreign investors in domestic government debt. One
member pointed out that the above partly reversed in
January. **Another member added that, during the**
first days of 2024, two placements of government
debt were carried out in international markets. On the
other hand, he/she indicated that stock markets have
performed favorably and have exhibited gains of over
6% since the last monetary policy decision. **One**
member added that these markets exhibited a strong
dynamism at the end of 2023, but performed more
moderately in January. Another member stated that,
since the end of 2022, sovereign risk indicators for
Mexico, as well as for other emerging economies,
have trended downwards.

Regarding total financing in the economy, **some**
members highlighted that it continued growing due to
the expansion of the domestic component, while the
external component decreased. **One member**
mentioned that the expansion of monetary sources
continued to reflect the acquisition of long-term
instruments. **Most members highlighted that**
**credit granted by commercial banks continued**
**increasing.** **Some** members underlined that

mortgage lending kept expanding moderately. They
added that the consumer loan portfolio continued
growing at a high rate, despite showing some
deceleration. **One member pointed out that such**
performance has been demand-driven since,

according to the survey of banks, overall credit
lending conditions have tightened. Another member
added that demand from businesses for bank credit
has maintained an expansion rate above its prepandemic annual average. Regarding credit risk,
he/she indicated that delinquency levels remain at
relatively low and stable levels, despite exhibiting a
marginal upward trend.

**_Monetary policy_**

**The Governing Board evaluated the effects of the**
**shocks on inflation and its determinants, along**
**with the behavior of medium- and long-term**


**inflation expectations and the price formation**
**process. It acknowledged the disinflationary**
**process in Mexico. Nevertheless, it estimated**
**that the outlook is still challenging. Based on the**
**above, and taking into consideration the**
**monetary policy stance already attained and the**
**persistence of the shocks that the Mexican**
**economy is facing, with the presence of all its**
**members, the Board decided unanimously to**
**maintain the target for the overnight interbank**
**interest rate at 11.25%. With this decision, the**
**monetary policy stance remains in the trajectory**
**required for inflation to converge to its 3% target**
**within the forecast horizon.**

**The Board will thoroughly monitor inflationary**
**pressures as well as all factors that have an**
**incidence on the foreseen path for inflation and**
**its expectations. In the next monetary policy**
**meetings, it will assess, depending on available**
**information, the possibility of adjusting the**
**reference rate. It will take into account the**
**progress in the inflation outlook and the**
**challenges that prevail. It will also consider the**
**incidence of both the restrictive policy stance**
**that has been maintained and that prevailing in**
**the future on inflation throughout the horizon in**
**which monetary policy operates. Actions will be**
**implemented in such a way that the reference**
**rate remains consistent at all times with the**
**trajectory needed to enable an orderly and**
**sustained convergence of headline inflation to**
**the 3% target during the forecast period. The**
**central bank reaffirms its commitment with its**
**primary mandate and the need to continue its**
**efforts to consolidate an environment of low and**
**stable inflation.**

**One** **member indicated that, while it should always**
be kept in mind that the inflation target refers to
headline inflation, when conducting monetary policy,
it should be considered that the non-core component
is highly volatile and that core inflation better reflects
the trend in inflation. He/she recalled that, during the
second half of 2022, although headline inflation was
already decreasing, the hiking cycle continued.
He/she stated that this was because such decline
was attributed to the decrease in non-core inflation,
while the core component continued increasing.
He/she pointed out that it was not until core inflation
began to decline markedly that it was deemed that
the disinflationary phase had started and that it was
unanimously decided to stop increasing the
reference rate. He/she highlighted that currently core
inflation continues to decline. He/she stated that for
monetary policy decisions it is important to consider

7


-----

that the increase in headline inflation reflects a
change in relative prices of specific products in the
non-core component. He/she added that shocks like
the recent ones tend to reverse relatively fast and do
not compare to those observed during the pandemic
and during the war in Ukraine, which were
widespread, deep, and long-lasting. He/she added
that it is foreseeable that headline inflation will
resume its downward trend in the following months.
He/she mentioned that, at the next monetary policy
decision meeting, depending on available

information, the appropriateness of lowering the
reference rate can be assessed, taking into account
the visible progress in disinflation and, at the same
time, the challenges that still persist. He/she argued
that headline inflation remains above target and core
inflation continues at relatively high levels despite
having declined significantly. He/she underlined that
acknowledging the progress in disinflation and
discussing the possibility of lowering the reference
rate does not imply that victory has been proclaimed
in the fight against inflation, as it is recognized that
the task is not yet completed. He/she stated that the
prevailing level of monetary restriction should be
weighed against the evolution of inflation and its
components, as well as its outlook, considering that
the restrictive policy stance that has been maintained
as well as the one prevailing in the future will impact
the inflation outlook over the horizon in which
monetary policy operates. He/she considered that,
given the challenges, whenever macroeconomic
conditions allow for cuts in the reference rate, these
would be gradual. He/she emphasized that Banco de
México must continue with the cautious approach
that has guided its decisions. He/she underlined that
actions will be implemented in such a way that the
reference rate remains consistent at all times with the
trajectory needed to enable an orderly and sustained
convergence of headline inflation to the 3% target
during the forecast period. This is for the benefit of
the country's population, primarily its lower-income
segments, which are the most affected by inflationary
episodes.

**Another** **member highlighted that, at this monetary**
policy meeting, it is important to consider that, while
core inflation has exhibited a favorable behavior, the
risks of a rebound in the non-core component, which
would take it to levels closer to its historical average,
have started to materialize to such an extent that it
more than compensates for the decline that core
inflation continues exhibiting. He/she indicated that,
although the central scenario considers that the
shocks on relative prices that have affected the noncore component will dissipate in the second quarter
of 2024, other risks persist that may jeopardize the


foreseen trajectory of inflation towards the 3% target.
In this regard, he/she highlighted the possibility that
non-core inflation stabilizes at levels above those
forecasted for this component by the central bank.
He/she pointed out that these forecasts anticipate
non-core inflation to be at around half of its historical
average throughout 2025. He/she also mentioned as
risk factors for the foreseen trajectory for inflation a
greater-than-anticipated resilience of the Mexican
economy, and possible episodes of depreciation of
the Mexican peso during 2024, given internal and
external risk factors, as anticipated by some currency
market indicators. Additionally, he/she expressed
concern about inflation expectations, both drawn
from surveys and implicit in market instruments, not
decreasing at the required pace to reach the 3%
target. He/she deemed that, in view of the
environment of high uncertainty and the risks to the
upside mentioned above, it is fundamental to
maintain the attained level of monetary restriction,
and therefore in this meeting the reference rate
should remain at its current level. He/she stated that
a tone of caution should be maintained in this
monetary policy statement, given an environment in
which the balance of risks for inflation remains biased
to the upside. He/she warned that the fact that it may
be necessary to maintain the current level of the
reference rate longer than anticipated by market
consensus cannot be ruled out. Given the prevailing
inflationary dynamics, he/she mentioned that it is
extremely risky to include forward guidance and
therefore, in his/her opinion, a data-dependent
approach should be reinforced. He/she argued that
the monetary policy statement should provide
flexibility for each of the future decisions, as the
economic situation is highly uncertain, both

externally and domestically. Therefore, the central
bank should not commit to any adjustment of the
reference rate within a specific timeframe.

**One member highlighted that, on this occasion, a**
first reduction in the reference rate should not be
considered, given that headline inflation has recently
increased, even more than expected, due to the
rebound in the non-core component and taking into
account that short- and medium-term inflation
expectations increased. He/she also argued that the
inflation forecast might be perceived as optimistic
since it assumes the increase in non-core inflation is
temporary, of which there is no certainty. He/she
considered that the recent surprising inflation and
economic activity figures have sent mixed signals for
determining the monetary policy stance. He/she
stated that, before beginning a cycle of consecutive
reference rate cuts, core inflation and, particularly, its
services subcomponent, must show less persistence

8


-----

and consolidate into a downward trajectory, as
anticipated by the central bank's forecasts. He/she
mentioned that it will be necessary to make sure that
the rebound in non-core inflation does not spill over
to core inflation, that monetary policy has its
expected impact on aggregate demand and that
shocks to non-core inflation are effectively reversed.
He/she pointed out that it is also necessary for
inflation expectations to return to the variability
interval. He/she stated that a signal must be sent that
efforts to strengthen the anchoring of inflation
expectations will not be spared. He/she underlined
that, looking ahead, the current levels of monetary
tightening must be maintained. He/she highlighted
that, compared to other countries, monetary policy in
Mexico is not as effective, and thus a longer-lasting
monetary restriction is necessary. He/she pointed out
that, since the last reference rate increase, a passive
tightening of the monetary policy stance has been
observed, and stated that the real ex-ante rate has
increased by approximately 110 basis points. In view
of the latter, he/she considered that, should the
inflation outlook improve significantly, some

adjustment to the reference rate could be made in
order to maintain a high level of monetary restriction,
but without generating excessive astringency.
He/she added that the outlook is very uncertain and
therefore caution and prudence in managing
monetary restriction should prevail in the next
monetary policy decisions. He/she underlined that
any eventual downward adjustment to the reference
rate should not be interpreted as the beginning of a
monetary easing cycle. He/she highlighted that, in
his/her opinion, it should be communicated that
subsequent monetary policy decisions will be
completely dependent on the evolution of the data
and on the upside risks to inflation not materializing.

**Another member stated that during 2023 inflation**
declined significantly and at a speed that has few
precedents. He/she pointed out that recently there
has been a reversion of the non-core inflation while
the core one, which is the most sensitive to monetary
policy, has continued to decline. He/she indicated
that the Bank’s forecasts suggest that this process
will continue, while inflation expectations remain
anchored and moving slowly towards their historical
averages. However, he/she warned that the gap
between observed inflation and its target remains
wide and there are several risks to attaining
convergence. He/she mentioned that, in order to
close the inflation gap, the ex-ante real interest rate
has remained in restrictive territory since September
2022. He/she recalled that, although the nominal
interest rate has not changed since March 2023, the
monetary restriction has increased as inflation and


inflation expectations have improved. He/she pointed
out that in order to quantify the level of restriction
attained, it’s possible to observe that the difference
between the ex-ante real rate and the central
estimate of its neutral range is more than double the
inflationary gap. He/she added that, in the past, when
inflation was above 4%, the real rate gap was on
average less than one time the inflation gap. He/she
underlined that, consistent with the extraordinary
shocks that have been faced, the ratio between both
gaps is the largest on record during an entire
monetary cycle. He/she pointed out that this measure
is also higher than the average currently maintained
by both emerging and advanced economies, and
even greater than that observed in economies that
have shown strong resilience, that have faced
episodes of exchange rate stress or that face fiscalrelated pressures. He/she stated that, looking ahead,
given the expected disinflation and the passive
increase in the real interest rate, if the reference rate
is not adjusted, the ratio between both gaps could
increase significantly and above what is necessary.
He/she added that, due to the upward bias in the
inflation risk balance, the forecast is still susceptible
to revision in that direction, which would imply that
room to calibrate the monetary policy stance is
limited and will need to be thoroughly assessed in
each decision meeting. He/she highlighted that the
approach should be prudent, cautious, flexible and
data-dependent. He/she concluded that in

subsequent decisions, if macroeconomic conditions
allow, the prevailing level of restriction could be
pondered along with the evolution of inflation and its
determinants, in compliance with the constitutional
mandate, seeking an orderly adjustment of the
economy and financial markets.

**One member** highlighted that monetary policy
should respond to the overall trend of the inflation
outlook and considered that its improvements allow
the discussion of whether it is adequate to make an
adjustment to the monetary policy stance. He/she
highlighted the decline of about 380 basis points in
headline and core inflations, as well as decreases in
the frequency of price revisions, in the fraction of line
items with extreme variations and in the central
tendency measures. Likewise, he/she pointed out
that, although the balance of risks remains biased
upwards, it is less adverse than the one prevailing at
the start of 2023. He/she stated that the degree of
monetary restriction attained resulted from the
atypical nature of the shocks and risks confronted
and reiterated that both have mitigated significantly.
He/she recalled that the rebound in headline inflation
is the result of a significant increase in the price of a
few products from the non-core component, which is

9


-----

expected to be temporary, and considered it relevant
progress that the recent disinflationary process has
been guided by the core component. For that reason,
he/she estimated that, in keeping with the tone of
caution that has characterized this cycle, in this
occasion there is space to adjust the communication
so that it captures these improvements as well as the
risks that prevail. On the other hand, he/she noted
there has been a passive tightening of around 109
basis points and added that when inflation has been
at similar levels, nominal and real interest rates have
been well below current levels. Thus, he/she
emphasized that the monetary policy stance is
clearly restrictive by any metric, and argued that it will
continue being robust even in case of changes in the
relative stance. He/she highlighted that downward
adjustments in the interest rate would not prevent the
continuation of a restrictive stance, which is
necessary given that there is still a distance to cover.
Likewise, he/she mentioned that given that monetary
policy operates with lags, it will continue fostering the
convergence of inflation and added that the speed
with which it is transmitted to the different
components is heterogeneous. In that regard, he/she
noted that the inflation of merchandise prices has
declined faster than that of services prices, and
indicated that the behavior of these last ones is the
result of a necessary adjustment in the economy
given the distortion of their relative prices. He/she
argued that, the challenge is to adjust the degree of
restriction in such a way that it is consistent with an
inflation which, although above target, has

decreased considerably. He/she stated that the
adjustments to the policy stance will be gradual,
given the expected non-linearity of the disinflationary
process, which would allow an evaluation of its
behavior and the monitoring of the prevailing risks.
He/she indicated that whether such changes are
continuous or not, will depend on the evolution of the
inflationary outlook as a whole.

**3. MONETARY POLICY DECISION**

The Governing Board evaluated the effects of the
shocks on inflation and its determinants, along with


the behavior of medium- and long-term inflation
expectations and the price formation process. It
acknowledged the disinflationary process in Mexico.
Nevertheless, it estimated that the outlook is still
challenging. Based on the above, and taking into
consideration the monetary policy stance already
attained and the persistence of the shocks that the
Mexican economy is facing, with the presence of all
its members, the Board decided unanimously to
maintain the target for the overnight interbank
interest rate at 11.25%. With this decision, the
monetary policy stance remains in the trajectory
required for inflation to converge to its 3% target
within the forecast horizon.

The Board will thoroughly monitor inflationary
pressures as well as all factors that have an
incidence on the foreseen path for inflation and its
expectations. In the next monetary policy meetings,
it will assess, depending on available information, the
possibility of adjusting the reference rate. It will take
into account the progress in the inflation outlook and
the challenges that prevail. It will also consider the
incidence of both the restrictive policy stance that has
been maintained and that prevailing in the future on
inflation throughout the horizon in which monetary
policy operates. Actions will be implemented in such
a way that the reference rate remains consistent at
all times with the trajectory needed to enable an
orderly and sustained convergence of headline
inflation to the 3% target during the forecast period.
The central bank reaffirms its commitment with its
primary mandate and the need to continue its efforts
to consolidate an environment of low and stable
inflation.

**4. VOTING**

Victoria Rodríguez, Galia Borja, Irene Espinosa,
Jonathan Heath, and Omar Mejía voted in favor of
maintaining the target for the overnight interbank
interest rate at 11.25%.

10


-----

**ANNEX**

The information in this Annex was prepared for this
meeting by the staff of Banco de México’s
Directorate General of Economic Research and
Directorate General of Central Bank Operations. It
does not necessarily reflect the considerations of the
members of the Governing Board as to the monetary
policy decision.

**A.1. External conditions**

**A.1.1. World economic activity**

During the fourth quarter of 2023, world economic
activity is estimated to have grown at a more
moderate rate than in the third one; nevertheless, it
remains resilient. Overall, advanced economies are
expected to have grown at a rate similar to that
observed in the third quarter while emerging
economies to have exhibited a lower dynamism.
Heterogeneity in economic activity persisted across
countries. Purchasing Managers’ Indices point to a
slight recovery in the services sector and

sluggishness in manufacturing activity at the global
level in early 2024 (Chart 1). Among key global risks,
the following stand out: the intensification of
geopolitical turmoil, the protraction of inflationary
pressures, tight financial conditions, and, to a lesser
extent, challenges to financial stability.

In the United States, economic activity grew at a
slower rate during the fourth quarter of 2023, as
compared to the third one. Said recovery was greater
than expected at the beginning of the quarter and it
was relatively dynamic. Gross Domestic Product
(GDP) grew at a seasonally adjusted quarterly rate
of 0.8%, after having increased 1.2% in the third
quarter (Chart 2).[1] The slower rate of growth
registered during the fourth quarter reflected the
lower contributions from inventory accumulation,
residential investment, and from public spending. In
contrast, net exports made a positive contribution,
and private consumption continued showing

resilience.

1 Expressed as a seasonally adjusted annualized quarterly rate,
US GDP growth was 3.3% in the fourth quarter of 2023, and 4.9%
in the third quarter of 2023.


**Chart 1**

**Global: Purchasing Managers’ Index:**

**production component**

Diffusion index, s. a.[1/ ]

60

58

56

54

52

50

Manufacturing

48 Manufacturing (excl. China)

46 Services

Services (excl. China)

44 32.5

24.8

42 23.7 January

20.7

40

J J J J J J J J J J J J J J J

2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 2024

s. a. / Seasonally adjusted figures.
1/ The index varies between 0 and 100 points. A reading above 50 points
is considered an overall increase compared to the previous month and
below 50 points, an overall decrease.
Note: Figures in the chart correspond to respective minimum levels of each
indicator, in the same order as the labels.
Source: IHS Markit.

**Chart 2**

**US: real GDP and components**

Quarterly percentage rate

and contribution in percentage points, s. a.

3.0

Private consumption expenditures
Residential investment

2.5 Nonresidential investment

Change in private inventories

2.0 Net exports

Government consumption expenditures

1.5 Total

1.0

0.5

0.0

-0.5

-1.0

I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV

2021 2022 2023

s. a. / Seasonally adjusted figures.
Source: Bureau of Economic Activity (BEA).

11


-----

US industrial production grew 0.1% in December
2023, after having remained stagnant in November.
Manufacturing activity and mining made progress,
which was partially offset by a setback in electricity
and gas generation. The automotive industry
continued to recover following the resolution of
strikes in November in said sector. Purchasing
Managers' Indices suggest that manufacturing
production would remain weak.

The US labor market remained tight during the fourth
quarter of 2023. The non-farm payroll continued
expanding, going from an average monthly creation
of 213 thousand new jobs during the third quarter to
an average of 227 thousand new positions per month
during the fourth quarter. In January, this indicator
increased by 353 thousand new jobs, making it the
largest monthly increase in a year. Initial claims for
unemployment insurance remained at low levels,
with 224 thousand new claims in the week that
ended on January 27. The unemployment rate
remained unchanged at 3.7% in January, for the third
consecutive month. New vacancies remained at
approximately 9.0 million in November and

December. During the fourth quarter, wage growth
showed relative stability, after having decreased in
the previous quarter. In January, however, average
hourly wages slightly increased.

In the euro area, economic activity remained
stagnant during the fourth quarter of 2023, after GDP
contracted at a seasonally adjusted quarterly rate of
0.1% during the previous quarter.[2] Such weak
performance was associated with low consumer
confidence, the persistence of geopolitical conflicts,
and tightening domestic financial conditions, which
have increasingly discouraged investment and
consumption. The services sector and industrial
activity have continued exhibiting weakness. The
unemployment rate remained unchanged at 6.4%
during November and December.

2 Expressed as a seasonally adjusted annualized quarterly rate,
the change in euro area GDP was 0.1% in the fourth quarter of
2023 and -0.5% in the third quarter of 2023.


As for the rest of the main advanced economies, in
most cases a moderate growth would have been
registered in the fourth quarter of 2023, while their
labor markets would have remained tight.

Most major emerging economies are expected to
have expanded during the fourth quarter of 2023.
However, heterogeneity in the performance of
countries and regions’ economic activity would have
continued. In Asia and Emerging Europe, available
information suggests a moderation in the pace of
growth in most countries. Specifically, China
decelerated. Its GDP grew at a seasonally adjusted
quarterly rate of 1.0%, after having expanded at a
rate of 1.5% in the third quarter.[3] Said economy
continued facing significant risks stemming from
problems in its real estate sector. In January,
Chinese authorities announced additional monetary
and financial measures to boost credit and stimulate
economic growth. Finally, Latin American economies
are expected to have grown at a somewhat
heterogeneous pace.

International commodity prices have shown a mixed
behavior since the last monetary policy decision in
Mexico. Oil prices increased due to the recent
attacks on vessels in the Red Sea, forecasts of
higher oil demand this year, and disruptions in US oil
production amid low temperatures. Meanwhile, gas
prices decreased at the end of January due to lower
energy demand stemming from forecasts of warmer
temperatures in the United States and increased
wind energy generation in Europe, which lowers the
demand for gas as an energy source. Grain prices
declined due to increases in corn production in the
United States and soybean production in South
America, as well as in wheat exports from Russia.
Sugar prices faced certain upward pressures due to
expected lower production attributed to adverse
weather conditions in producing regions and to the
imposition of taxes on exports in India. Overall, metal
prices increased due to expectations of higher
demand amid anticipations of a reduction in the
Chinese interest rate and liquidity injection by the
central bank of said country.

**A.1.2. Monetary policy and international financial**
**markets**

After having trended downwards in previous months,
headline inflation increased in most advanced
economies (Chart 3). This was generally due to

3 Expressed as an annual rate, China’s GDP growth was 5.2% in
the fourth quarter of 2023 and 4.9% in the third quarter of 2023.

12


-----

pressures on energy prices. On the other hand, core
inflation in this group of countries continued
decreasing. In the United States, annual headline
inflation measured by the consumer expenditure
deflator remained practically unchanged at 2.6%
between November and December. This was due to
a lesser deflation in energy prices combined with the
ongoing decline in food inflation and in the core
component. Annual core inflation decreased from
3.2% in November to 2.9% in December. The
country’s headline inflation measured by the CPI
index increased in annual terms from 3.1% in
November to 3.4% in December. Annual core
inflation declined from 4.0 to 3.9% during the same
period.

**Chart 3**

**Selected advanced economies: headline**

**inflation**

Annual percentage change

12

United States PCE 1/

10 United States CPI

Japan

8

Euro area 2/

6 United Kingdom

Canada

4

2

December

January

0

-2

J J J J J J J J J J J

2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 2024

1/ The personal consumption expenditures price index is used.
2/ Preliminary figures as of January.
Source: Bureau of Economic Analysis, Bureau of Labor Statistics, Eurostat,
Bank of Japan, the UK Office for National Statistics, and Statistics Canada.


Analysts’ short-term inflation forecasts for most
major advanced economies continued anticipating a
moderation in headline inflation in 2024. However,
this year it would remain above their central banks’
targets. Longer-term inflation expectations drawn
from financial instruments remained relatively stable
compared to mid-December figures.

In most emerging economies, annual headline
inflation decreased. This was due to lower pressures
on energy prices, food prices, and the core
component. However, in most of these economies,
headline inflation remains above their central banks’
targets. In some cases, including Chile, South Africa,
the Philippines, India, and Indonesia, headline
inflation was within each central bank's variability
interval. In China and Thailand, annual headline
inflation persisted at negative levels. In most of the
major emerging economies, core inflation declined.

In this context, since the last monetary policy
decision in Mexico, the central banks of the major
advanced and emerging economies have made
differentiated decisions regarding their reference
rates, depending on the evolution of each country's
economic indicators.

In the main advanced economies, central banks left
their reference rates unchanged, and most of them
continued reducing their securities’ holdings

gradually. Regarding future adjustments, overall,
central banks indicated that their actions will remain
dependent on information about the inflation outlook.
Additionally, some of them reported that they are
prepared to make additional adjustments, if
necessary, to bring inflation back to target. The
central banks of these economies are expected to
have completed their tightening cycle or be close to
completing it, thus paving the way for potential
reference rate cuts in 2024. As for market
expectations on their reference rates, based on the
latest available information, interest rates implicit in
interest rate swap curves (OIS) indicate that these
will decrease by at least 25 basis points for the end
of the second quarter in some of these economies
(Chart 4).

13


-----

**Chart 4**

**Reference rates and trajectories**

**implied in OIS curves[1/]**

Percent

7 **―― US Federal Reserve 2/ Bank of England** End of 2022 End of 2023 End of 2024

6 **― Bank of Japan**

**― European Central Bank deposit rate**
**― OIS implicit trajectory Feb 7, 2024**

5 **--- OIS implicit trajectory Dec 14, 2023**

4

3

2

1

Forecasts

0

-1

2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 2024

1/ OIS: Fixed floating interest rate swap where the fixed interest rate is
associated with the effective overnight reference rate
2/ For the observed reference rate of the U.S., the average interest rate of
the target range of the federal funds rate (5.00%- 5.25%) is used.
Source: Banco de México with data from Bloomberg.

Regarding recent monetary policy decisions in the
United States and the euro area, the following stand
out:

i) At its January meeting, the US Federal Reserve

left the target range for the federal funds rate
unchanged for the fourth consecutive decision,
between 5.25 and 5.50%. Additionally, the
Federal Reserve continued to reduce its balance
sheet. It noted that, when considering any
adjustment to the target range for the federal
funds rate, the Federal Open Market Committee
(FOMC) will carefully assess incoming data, the
evolution of the economic outlook, and the
balance of risks. It added that the Committee
does not deem it appropriate to reduce the target
range until there is greater confidence that
inflation is moving sustainably towards 2%.
Additionally, it reiterated that it is prepared to
adjust the monetary policy stance as necessary if
risks that potentially jeopardize the attainment of
the FOMC's objectives arise. During the press
conference, the chairman of that institution
indicated that they consider that the monetary
policy rate is likely at its peak in this tightening
cycle, and, if the economy overall evolves as
expected, it will probably be appropriate to start
reducing the restrictive monetary policy stance at
some point this year. In this regard, he indicated
that it is unlikely that the Committee will be

4 During the first half of 2024, the Governing Council will reinvest
in full the principal payments of maturing securities purchased
under the PEPP. In the second half of that year, it plans to reduce


sufficiently confident at its March meeting to do it
at that moment. He noted that reducing the
restrictive stance of monetary policy too soon or
excessively could lead to a setback in the
progress attained in disinflation, and that doing so
too late or insufficiently could disproportionately
weaken economic activity and employment. He
added that the FOMC is prepared to maintain the
current target range for the federal funds rate for
longer if appropriate. Expectations drawn from
financial instruments anticipated a 5.2% rate for
the first quarter of 2024 that would subsequently
decrease to levels close to 4.4% by the end of
2024 and to 3.4% by the end of 2025.

ii) At its January meeting, the European Central

Bank (ECB) left its reference rates unchanged for
the third consecutive decision. Thus, its

refinancing, key lending, and key deposit rates
remained at 4.50, 4.75, and 4.0%, respectively.
Its Governing Council reiterated that it considers
interest rates to be at levels that, if maintained for
a sufficiently long period, will contribute

substantially to timely return inflation to its target.
The Council reiterated once again that it will
continue adopting a data-dependent approach to
determine the appropriate duration and degree of
monetary tightening. In the press conference, the
president of the institution mentioned that the
consensus within the Governing Council is that it
is still premature to discuss cuts in the reference
rate. Regarding its Pandemic Emergency

Purchase Program (PEPP), the Governing
Council continued with the normalization of its
balance sheet and expects to conclude

reinvestments of maturing securities purchased
under the PEPP by the end of 2024.[4]

In the main emerging economies, since the last
monetary policy decision in Mexico, a large number
of central banks have cut their reference rates, taking
into consideration the specific economic

circumstances of their countries. The Central Bank
of Brazil reiterated that the members of the
Committee anticipate additional cuts of the same
magnitude (50 basis points) in the next decisions if
the scenario evolves as expected. On the other
hand, the Central Bank of Chile increased the pace
of rate cuts from 75 basis points in its December
decision to 100 basis points in its January meeting.
In that last meeting, the Council noted that inflation
convergence to its target would materialize earlier
than expected and that the reference rate would

the portfolio by an average monthly amount of EUR 7.5 billion, and
then to conclude reinvestments by the end of 2024.

14


-----

reach its neutral level during the second half of 2024.
Although China’s reference rates remained

unchanged, its central bank continued implementing
alternative easing measures. In particular, it
announced a 50-basis-point cut in its reserve
requirement ratio and continued injecting liquidity
through its medium-term credit line. In contrast, the
central banks of Russia and Turkey continued
increasing their reference rates in their recent
monetary policy decisions.

Since the last monetary policy decision in Mexico,
international financial conditions remained stable,
following the moderate easing observed during the
previous months (Chart 5). This behavior reflected
increases in long-term interest rates, which were
offset by a more favorable performance in stock
markets. Thus, global government interest rates
generally reversed part of the decline they exhibited
in the last months of 2023 (Chart 6). In foreign
exchange markets, the US dollar appreciated. The
currencies of most emerging economies depreciated
against the US dollar (Chart 7). Finally, since the last
monetary policy decision, capital inflows into
emerging economies have been registered.

However, these flows registered a differentiated
behavior among asset classes, with net inflows of
equity assets and slight outflows from fixed-income
assets during most of the period.


**Chart 5**

**Financial Conditions Index[1/]**

Units


103

102

101

100


Financial Conditions Index - global
Financial Conditions Index - United States
Financial Conditions Index - euro area 2/

1/ The financial conditions index is constructed considering the effect of five
variables on economic activity: the reference interest rate, the 10-year
government bond, the spread of investment grade bonds over the
government debt bond with equivalent maturity, the ratio of a stock index
with 10-year average earnings per share, and the trade weighted exchange
rate.
2/ In the case of the euro area, the spread between the sovereign bonds of
France, Italy, Spain, the Netherlands, Belgium, Austria, Portugal and
Finland over the German 10-year bond is also considered. The vertical
black line indicates the last calendarized monetary policy meeting of Banco
de México.
Source: Prepared by Banco de México with data from Bloomberg and
Goldman Sachs.


**Chart 6**

**Change in selected financial indicators from**

**December 14 to February 7, 2023**

Percent; basis points Percentage, basis points


15%

10%


75

50


5%


25

0


0%

-5%


-10%


-25

-50


1/ MSCI Emerging Markets Index, which includes 24 countries.
DXY: a weighted average estimated by the Intercontinental Exchange (ICE)
of the nominal exchange rate of the main six currencies operated globally
with the following weights: EUR: 57.6%, JPY: 13.6%, GBP: 11.9%, CAD:
9.1%, SEK: 4.2%, and CHF: 3.6%.
Source: Bloomberg and ICE.

15


-----

**Chart 7**

**Selected emerging economies:**

**financial assets performance**

**as of December 7, 2023**

Percent, basis points Percent, basis points

**2-year** **10-year**

**Equity**
**Region** **Country** **Currencies** **interest** **interest** **CDS**

**markets**

**rates** **rates**

**Mexico** **2.05%** **6.19%** **-7** **-12** **-10**

**Brazil** **-0.75%** **1.62%** **-36** **-30** **-14**

**Latin**

**Chile** **-8.04%** **1.13%** **-77** **-21** **-6**

**America**

**Colombia** **1.74%** **11.56%** **-136** **-110** **-1**

**Peru** **-1.49%** **22.89%** **-88** **-38** **-10**

**Russia** **1.55%** **5.04%** **-156** **-200** **N.A.**

**Poland** **0.59%** **4.02%** **-22** **-11** **1**

**Emerging**

**Turkey** **-5.33%** **8.42%** **281** **49** **-8**

**Europe**

**Czechia** **-2.17%** **3.84%** **-152** **-40** **-1**

**Hungary** **-0.18%** **11.89%** **-104** **-50** **-10**

**China** **-0.53%** **-7.96%** **-31** **-26** **2**

**Malaysia** **-0.89%** **5.11%** **-4** **5** **1**

**India** **0.52%** **3.69%** **-23** **-18** **2**

**Asia**

**Philippines** **-1.11%** **7.58%** **4** **-13** **-5**

**Thailand** **-0.20%** **0.39%** **-14** **-19** **-2**

**Indonesia** **-0.92%** **1.46%** **-37** **-5** **-2**

**Africa** **South Africa** **-0.18%** **-0.10%** **-11** **-17** **-6**

Note: An upward adjustment indicates currency appreciation. Interest rates
correspond to swap rates at the specified terms, except for Hungary, where
government securities with 3-year maturities were used as a reference. For
the Philippines, a 2-year swap rate was used, and for Russia, 2-year and
3-year swap rates were used. The latest CDS data for Russia is as of June
1, 2022.
Source: Bloomberg.

**A.2. Current situation of the Mexican economy**

**A.2.1. Mexican markets**

In the international context described above, the
Mexican peso appreciated. Interest rates on
government securities showed mixed movements for
the short and medium terms, and moderate
increases for the long term.

Since Mexico's last monetary policy decision, the
Mexican peso has traded in a range of 76 cents,
between 16.78 and 17.54 pesos per US dollar.
(Chart 8). During this period, the currency
appreciated 2.05%. This adjustment occurred in an
environment where trading conditions slightly
improved.


**Chart 8**

**Mexican peso exchange rate**

MXN/USD

26

Mexican peso

25 100-day moving average

24 50-day moving average

23

22

21

20

19

18

17

16

J M  M  J  S  N  J  M  M J   S  N  J M  M  J  S  N  J M  M  J  S  N  J

2020 2021 2022 2023 2024

Source: Prepared by Banco de México.

Interest rates on government securities registered
decreases in the long-term segment and increases
in some short-term nodes (Chart 9). The yields on
real-rate instruments exhibited limited changes. In
this context, breakeven inflation implicit in spreads
between nominal and real rates of market
instruments decreased by up to 12 basis points
(Chart 10). Trading conditions in the government
debt market slightly improved (Chart 11).

**Chart 9**

**Nominal yield curve of government securities**

Percent, basis points

11.50 40

11.00 30

20

10.50

10

10.00

0

9.50

-10

9.00 -20

8.50 -30

December-7th 2023 February-1st 2024 Change (December-7th 2023 to February-1st 2024)

Trading range over the period

Source: PIP.

16


-----

**Chart 10**

**Breakeven inflation and inflation risk implied in**

**government securities’ yields [1/]**

Basis points

600


**Chart 12**

**Interbank funding rate implied in TIIE swaps**

PercentPercent

12.50


550

500


450

400


350

300


3.50

|Col1|Col2|
|---|---|
|11.50 10.50 9.50 8.50 7.50 6.50 5.50 4.50|Banxico overnight rate (reference rate) Implied interest rate in TIIE swaps for 01/02/24 Implied interest rate in TIIE swaps for 07/12/23|
|||


250


J A  J   O   J   A  J   O   J  A   J   O  J   A   J   O

2021           2022          2023          2024


J M     S     J     M     S      J     M     S     J

2021               2022               2023             2024


Note: Shaded areas represent the range since the last monetary policy
decision.
Source: Prepared by Banco de México with Bloomberg data.

**A.2.2. Economic activity in Mexico**

The Mexican economy experienced robust growth in
2023, although during the last quarter economic
activity slowed down significantly. According to the
flash estimate published by INEGI, Mexico's GDP
registered a seasonally adjusted quarterly variation
of 0.08% in the last quarter of the year (Chart 13).

Regarding domestic demand, private consumption
continued trending upwards in November 2023. As
for its components, consumption of imported goods
continued showing a high level of dynamism, while
consumption of domestic goods and services
remained sluggish. Although gross fixed investment
remained at high levels, it slowed as a result of lower
growth in construction spending and a certain loss of
dynamism of investment in machinery and

equipment. As for external demand, during the
October-December 2023 period, the average dollar
value of manufacturing exports fell slightly with
respect to the third quarter. This was the result of
decreases in both automotive shipments and the
aggregate of all other manufacturing exports (Chart
14).

17


1/ The horizontal lines refer to the respective averages observed from
September 2008 to date.
Source: PIP.

**Chart 11**

**Mexican financial markets’ performance**

Percent, basis points


11.6

11.2

10.8

10.4

10.0

9.6

9.2

8.8

8.4


16.6


19.6

19.1


60,000

58,000


18.6

18.1


56,000

54,000


17.6

17.1


52,000

50,000


48,000


M-bond


6.7

6.4

6.1

5.8

5.5

5.2

4.9

4.6

4.3

4.0

3.7

Inflation-indexed bonds


Range in 2023 Range since previous monetary policy Dec 7, 2023 Feb 1, 2024

decision

Source: Prepared by Banco de México.

Regarding expectations for the path of the monetary
policy reference rate, information implicit in the
interest rate swap curve does not incorporate any
adjustment for the February decision and a first cut
of 25 basis points in March 2024 (Chart 12).
Similarly, most analysts surveyed by Citibanamex
anticipate that the reference rate will remain
unchanged in the February decision and that the first
25 basis-point cut will be made in March 2024.


Range in 2023 Range since previous monetary policy Dec 7, 2023 Feb 1, 2024


-----

**Chart 13**

**Gross Domestic Product**

Quarterly percentage change, s. a.


5

15.39

4

3

2

1

0

-1

-2

-3

-19.03 Q-IV 1/

-4

I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV

2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023

s. a. / Seasonally adjusted figures. The chart’s range was adjusted to
facilitate its reading.
1/ The figure corresponfing to the fourth quarter of 2023 refers to the
quarterly GDP flash estimate published by INEGI.
Source: Mexico’s System of National Accounts (SCNM, for its Spanish
acronym), INEGI.

**Chart 14**

**Total manufacturing exports**

Indices 2019 = 100, s. a.

160

Total

Automotive

140

Non-automotive

120

100

80

60

10.4 December

40

J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O D

2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023

s. a. / Seasonally adjusted series and trend series based on data in nominal
US dollars. The former is represented by a solid line and the latter by a
dotted line. The chart’s range was adjusted to facilitate its reading.
Source: Prepared by Banco de México with data from the Tax
Administration Service (SAT, for its Spanish acronym), the Ministry of the
Economy (SE, for its Spanish acronym), Banco de México, the National
Institute of Statistics and Geography (INEGI, for its Spanish acronym).
Mexico’s Merchandise Trade Balance. The National System of Statistical
and Geographical Information (SNIEG, for its Spanish acronym).
Information of national interest.

On the production side, during the OctoberNovember 2023 period, services showed less
dynamism than in previous quarters, with a
differentiated behavior among sectors. Industrial
activity registered a deceleration in its growth rate
(Chart 15). Within manufacturing activity, light
vehicle production contracted significantly both in
November and December, while the aggregate of the
rest of manufacturing production continued showing
weakness. Construction was at historically high
levels, although with a notable moderation in its rate
of expansion (Chart 16).


**Chart 15**

**Global Indicator of Economic Activity**

Indices 2019 = 100, s. a.

115

Total

Secondary activities

110 Tertiary activities

Primary activities

105

100

95

90

78.3

76.3 October
70.5 November

85

J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O N

2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023

s. a. / Seasonally adjusted and trend series. The former is represented by
a solid line and the latter by a dotted line. The range of the chart was
narrowed to facilitate reading.
Source: Mexico’s System of National Accounts (SCNM, for its Spanish
acronym), INEGI.

**Chart 16**

**Industrial activity [1/]**

Indices 2019 = 100, s. a.

125

115

105

95

85 Total

Mining (12%)

75

Manufacturing (63%)

Construction (19%)

65

Utilities (6%)

November

55

J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O N

2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023

s. a. / Seasonally adjusted series and trend series. The former is
represented by a solid line and the latter by a dotted line.
1/ Figures in parenthesis correspond to their share in the total in 2018.
Source: Mexico’s System of National Accounts (SCNM, for its Spanish
acronym), INEGI.

Regarding the cyclical position of the economy, the
point estimate of the output gap remained in positive
territory in the last quarter of 2023, although it
declined at the margin and continued without being
statistically different from zero (Chart 17). The labor
market continued showing strength. At the end of
2023, with seasonally adjusted figures, the national
unemployment rate registered a level similar to that
of the previous month, while the urban

unemployment rate decreased (Chart 18). Both rates
remained at historically low levels. Between the end
of 2023 and the beginning of 2024, the number of
newly created IMSS-insured jobs continued

18


-----

increasing with seasonally adjusted data, albeit at a
slower pace than in the first half of 2023. Finally, in
November, unit labor costs in the manufacturing
sector increased and partially reversed the

decreases of September and October (Chart 19).

**Chart 17**

**Output gap estimates [1/]**

Percent of potential output, s. a.

12

8

4

0

-4

-8


115

110

105

100

95

90


**Chart 19**

**Productivity and unit labor costs**

**in the manufacturing sector [1/]**

Indices 2019 = 100, s. a.


-12

-16

-20

-24


Global Economic Activity Index
(IGAE) 2/

Gross Domestic Product 2/


95% confidence interval 3/ December


J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O N

2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023

s. a. / Seasonally adjusted series and trend series. The former is
represented by a solid line and the latter by a dotted line. The chart’s range
was adjusted to facilitate its reading.
1/ Productivity based on hours worked.
Source: Prepared by Banco de México with seasonally adjusted data of the
Monthly Manufacturing Industry Survey and industrial activity indicators of
Mexico’s System of National Accounts (Sistema de Cuentas Nacionales de
México, SCNM), INEGI.

In December 2023, domestic financing to the private
sector continued showing dynamism. Within it, bank
lending to firms kept expanding, and thus its real
annual variation was at levels similar to those
observed at the beginning of that year (Chart 20). As
for portfolio quality, delinquency rates of commercial
bank credit to the private sector remained at low
levels in December 2023. In the case of consumer
portfolio, although it continues at levels similar to
those registered before the onset of the pandemic,
delinquency rates increased and extended the
upward trend observed since the first half of 2023.

As for lending to households, the bank housing
portfolio continued increasing. Meanwhile,

commercial bank consumer credit continued

registering high growth rates, although some
moderation was observed in certain segments. The
dynamism of commercial bank credit to the private
sector continued to be driven mainly by a greater
demand for financing from firms and households.
This behavior is in line with the dynamic recovery
that Mexico’s economic activity has exhibited since
2021 as well as with the strength of the labor market.

As for the cost of financing, interest rates on bank
credit to firms remained stable and at high levels in
December 2023. Corporate credit intermediation
margins continued to be generally lower than those

19

|Economic Activity Index 2/ Domestic Product 2/ Q confidence interval 3/ Decem|-IV ber|
|---|---|


J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O D

2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023

s. a. / Calculations based on seasonally adjusted figures.
1/ Output gap estimated with a tail-corrected Hodrick-Prescott filter; see
Banco de México (2009), “Inflation Report, April-June 2009”, p.69.
2/ GDP flash estimate up to Q4-2023 and IGAE implicit up to December
2023, consistent with said timely figure.
3/ Output gap confidence interval calculated with a method of unobserved
components.
Source: Prepared by Banco de México with INEGI data.

**Chart 18**

**National and urban unemployment rates**

Percent, s. a.

6.5

6.0

5.5

5.0

4.5

4.0

3.5

3.0

Urban unemployment rate

2.5

National unemployment rate
December

2.0

J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O D

2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023

s. a. / Seasonally adjusted series and trend series. The former is
represented by a solid line and the latter by a dotted line.
Source: Prepared by Banco de México with data from ENOE, ETOE (from
April to June 2020), and ENOE new edition (ENOE[N]) from July 2020 to
December 2022.


-----

observed prior to the pandemic. Interest rates on
mortgages remained at levels similar to those
observed prior to the health emergency. Within
consumer credit, credit card interest rates have been
adjusting with a lag to changes in the reference rate.
Last, interest rates on payroll loans have remained
relatively stable since August 2021.

As for portfolio quality, delinquency rates of bank
credit to the private sector remained at low levels in
December 2023. In the case of consumer portfolio,
although said rates continue at levels lower than
those registered prior to the onset of the pandemic,
they showed increases and have extended the
upward trend observed since the first half of 2023.

**Chart 20**

**Performing credit from commercial banks**

**to the non-financial private sector**

Annual percentage change

20

15

10

5

0

-5

Consumption

-10 Mortgage 1/

2/

Non-financial private firms

-15

December

-20

M J S D M J S D M J S D M J S D M J S D M J S D M J S D

2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023

1/ Adjusted to account for the withdrawal from and the incorporation of
nonbank financial intermediaries to the credit statistics.
2/ Adjusted for valuation effects due to movements in the exchange rate.
Source: Banco de México.

**A.2.3. Development of inflation and inflation**
**outlook**

Annual headline inflation rose from 4.32 to 4.88%
between November 2023 and January 2024. This
result was due to the increase in non-core inflation,
while core inflation continued decreasing (Chart 21
and Table 1).


14 CPI
13 Core
12 Non-core
11
10

9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0

-1 January
-2
-3

J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J

2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 2024

Source: INEGI.

Annual core inflation decreased from 5.30 to 4.76%
between November 2023 and January 2024. As for
its components, there was a differentiated behavior
between merchandise and services inflation. The
former remained on a downward trajectory, while the
latter continued without showing a clear downward
trend (Chart 22). During this period, annual
merchandise inflation decreased from 5.33 to 4.37%.
This reflected the mitigation of the shocks derived
from the pandemic and the military conflict in
Ukraine, as well as the lower levels of the exchange
rate compared to those observed at the beginning of
2023. In particular, annual food merchandise
inflation fell from 6.78 to 5.54% and non-food
merchandise inflation decreased from 3.62 to 2.97%
(Chart 23). Annual services inflation remained at
high levels, affected by pressures related to
operating costs and their pass-through to consumer
prices due to the recovery of demand after the
confinement. During the same period, it went from
5.28 to 5.25%.

20


**Chart 21**

**Consumer Price Index**

Annual percentage change

|CPI|Col2|Col3|Col4|
|---|---|---|---|
|CPI Core Non-core||||
||Core|||
||Non-core|||
|||||
|||||
|||||
|||||
|||||
|||||
|||||
|||||
|||||
|||||
|||||
|||||
|||||


-----

**Chart 22**

**Merchandise and services core price subindex**

Annual percentage change

12

Merchandise

11 Services

10

9

8

7

6

5

4

3

2

1

January

0

J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J

2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 2024

Source: INEGI.

**Chart 23**

**Merchandise core price subindex**

Annual percentage change

16

Food, beverages and tobacco

14 Non-food merchandise

12

10

8

6

4

2

January

0

J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J

2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 2024

Source: INEGI.

Annual non-core inflation increased from 1.43 to
5.24% between November 2023 and January 2024
(Chart 24 and Table 1). This result was mainly due
to the increase from 2.85 to 9.75% in the annual
inflation of agricultural and livestock products. Within
this category, fruit and vegetables inflation rose from
5.59 to 21.78% in the same period. In this regard, in
January the annual variations in both tomato and
onion prices contributed more than half of the annual
inflation of fruits and vegetables. In contrast, the
annual inflation of livestock products decreased from
0.62 to -0.19% between these dates. The annual
inflation of energy products rose from -1.64 to 0.21%
during the same period, mainly influenced by the
higher annual variation of L.P. gas prices, which rose
from -15.49 to -7.59%.


Source: INEGI.

Regarding inflation expectations drawn from the
survey conducted by Banco de México among
private sector specialists, between November 2023
and January 2024, the median corresponding to
headline inflation at the end of 2024 increased from
4.00 to 4.17%. That corresponding to the core
component remained stable, going from 4.10 to
4.06%. Inflation expectations for the end of 2025
remained practically unchanged. In particular, the
median of headline inflation expectations went from
3.74 to 3.71% while that of the core component went
from 3.76 to 3.72%. The median of headline inflation
expectations for the next four years decreased from
3.76 to 3.70%, while that corresponding to the core
component fell from 3.77 to 3.70%. The medians of
headline and core inflation expectations for the long
term (5 to 8 years) remained stable, at around
3.50%. Finally, compensation for inflation and
inflationary risk was at a level similar to that observed
in the previous monetary policy decision, although it
registered some volatility during the period.
Regarding its components, inflation expectations
implied by market instruments decreased slightly.
Meanwhile, the inflation risk premium, which
declined between November and December,

reversed this adjustment in January.

Headline inflation is still foreseen to converge to the
target in the second quarter of 2025. This forecast is
subject to risks. On the upside: i) persistence of core
inflation at high levels; ii) foreign exchange
depreciation; iii) greater cost-related pressures; iv) a
greater-than-expected resilience of the economy; v)
climate-related impacts; and vi) the intensification of
geopolitical conflicts. On the downside: i) a greaterthan-anticipated slowdown of the world economy; ii)

21


**Chart 24**

**Non-core price subindex**

Annual percentage change


25

20

15

10

5

0

-5

Non-core

-10 Agricultural and livestock products

Energy and government-authorized prices January

-15

J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J

2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 2024


-----

a lower pass-through effect from some cost-related
pressures, and iii) that the lower levels registered by
Mexico’s exchange rate in relation to the first months
of 2023 contribute more than anticipated to reduce


certain pressures on inflation. The balance of risks
for the trajectory of inflation within the forecast
horizon remains biased to the upside.


**Table 1**

**Consumer Price Index and components**

Annual percentage change

**Item** **November 2023** **December 2023** **January 2024**

**CPI** **4.32** **4.66** **4.88**

**SubyacenteCore** **5.30** **5.09** **4.76**

**Merchandise** **5.33** **4.89** **4.37**

Food, beverages and tobacco 6.78 6.25 5.54

Non-food merchandise 3.62 3.28 2.97

**Services** **5.28** **5.33** **5.25**

Housing 3.74 3.64 3.64

Education (tuitions) 6.60 6.60 6.63

Other services 6.28 6.46 6.29

**No SubyacenteNon-core** **1.43** **3.39** **5.24**

**Agricultural and livestock products** **2.85** **5.66** **9.75**

Fruits and vegetablesFruits abd vegetables 5.59 11.68 21.78

Livestock productsLivestock 0.62 0.68 -0.19

**Energy and government-authorized prices Energéticos y Tarifas Aut. por Gobierno** **0.24** **1.46** **1.41**

Energy productsEnergy -1.64 0.06 0.21

Government-authorized pricesTarifas Autorizadas por Gobierno 4.84 4.82 4.29

Source: INEGI.


22


-----

-----

-----

