-----

-----

**FOREWARNING**
This document is provided for the reader’s convenience
only. The translation from the official Spanish version was
made by Banco de México’s staff. Discrepancies may
arise between the original document in Spanish and its
English translation. For this reason, the original Spanish
version is the only official document.


**1. PLACE, DATE AND PARTICIPANTS**

**1.1. Place: Meeting held by virtual means.**

**1.2. Date of Governing Board meeting: March 20,**
2024.

**1.3. Participants:**

- Victoria Rodríguez, Governor.

- Galia Borja, Deputy Governor.

- Irene Espinosa, Deputy Governor.

- Jonathan Heath, Deputy Governor.

- Omar Mejía, Deputy Governor.

- Rogelio Eduardo Ramírez, Secretary of Finance

and Public Credit.

- Gabriel Yorio, Undersecretary of Finance and

Public Credit.

- María Elena Méndez, Secretary of the Governing

Board.

Prior to this meeting, preliminary work by Banco de
México’s staff analyzing the economic and financial
environment as well as the developments in inflation
and the determinants and outlook for inflation, was
conducted and presented to the Governing Board
(see Annex).

**2. ANALYSIS AND RATIONALE BEHIND THE**
**GOVERNING BOARD’S VOTING**

**_International environment_**

**Most members mentioned that global economic**
**activity is expected to grow during the first**
**quarter of 2024 at a slightly higher rate than in**
**the previous quarter. They added that economic**
**performance remains heterogeneous across**
**countries. Some members pointed out that during**
the first quarter of the year higher dynamism is
expected for emerging economies, while advanced
economies are anticipated to continue showing
sluggishness. **One member stated that different**
indicators continue pointing to a weakness in the
manufacturing sector in advanced economies.


Nevertheless, **some members noted that private**
consumption in the United States is expected to
continue showing resilience. **One** member

highlighted that private consumption in that country
has recently exhibited mixed signals. He/she
emphasized the lower-than expected growth of retail
sales. He/she argued that the above could reflect the
fact that consumers are more aware of a labor
market that shows signs of moderation, in a context
where access to credit has become more limited.
**Some members underlined the expected slowdown**
in the euro area, given the moderation in
consumption. One member added the weakening of
investment and of external demand in that region, in
an environment of tight financial conditions. Another
member added the slowdown in industrial

production. He/she highlighted that the United
Kingdom, after having been in a technical recession
during the second half of 2023, exhibited modest
growth due to the dynamism of services.

**Some members noted that economic activity in**
advanced economies is expected to grow at a lower
rate overall in 2024. **One member stated that the**
outlook for US economic growth in 2024 was revised
to the upside during 2023. Regarding emerging
economies, **another member argued that they are**
expected to exhibit greater dynamism in 2024 than
in 2023, considering this group without China. One
member underlined that the Chinese economy is
foreseen to continue slowing down despite the
monetary and fiscal stimuli, given the lesser
confidence among economic agents and the
difficulties in its real estate sector. Another member
stated that risks to world economic activity remain
balanced and that prospects of a sharp deceleration
have become less and less likely. Nevertheless,
he/she warned about several risks, such as the
possible escalation of geopolitical conflicts; the
implementation of protectionist measures in some
systemically important economies in a context of
electoral processes; the protraction of tight financial
conditions; a stronger deceleration of the Chinese
economy; and economic impacts caused by climaterelated factors, which have been more frequent and
severe.

**Some members indicated that labor markets in the**
major economies remain tight. **One member**
highlighted the case of the United States. Another
member pointed out that some of the recent US
employment data have been stronger than

expected. However, **one member underlined that**
unemployment gaps have slightly narrowed, while
wage growth rates have moderated and, in some
cases, exhibit a decreasing trend. He/she pointed

1


-----

out that the number of job vacancies in that country
has shown a sustained decline whereas non-farm
payroll has stabilized at levels close to its historical
average.

**The majority stated that headline inflation**
**continues decreasing in a large number of**
**economies, although some members noted that it**
has done so at a slower rate. **One member**
highlighted that disinflation has continued due to the
easing of the shocks resulting from the pandemic
and the military conflict in Ukraine, as well as central
banks’ restrictive monetary policy stances. However,
**another member mentioned that in certain cases**
inflation rebounded in its most recent readings due
to the higher energy prices. One member indicated
that, after these rebounds, it declined. **Most**
**members underlined that both in advanced and**
**emerging** **economies** **core** **inflation** **has**

**decreased** **more** **gradually** **than** **headline**

**inflation.** **In this regard, they highlighted**
**services inflation’s resistance to decline. One**
member emphasized the recent increase in inflation
of services excluding housing in the United States.
**Another member argued that the persistence of**
services inflation is a widespread phenomenon,
even in economies that exhibit some slack, which
could be largely explained by a reversal in
consumption patterns rather than by demandrelated pressures. He/she mentioned that food and
merchandise inflation have also declined in a
sustained manner.

**The majority pointed out that commodity prices**
**have remained relatively stable. One member**
underlined the decline in sugar and wheat prices, as
well as the increase in some energy products and
gold prices. He/she mentioned that futures markets
anticipate a rebound in some agricultural products’
prices.

**Most members stated that world inflation is**
**foreseen** **to** **continue** **decreasing.** **They**

**underlined that in most economies it is**
**estimated that inflation will converge to its target**
**in 2025. One member highlighted that in some**
cases, such as in the United States, convergence is
expected to occur in early 2026. Another member
mentioned that there are still risks to the global
disinflationary process, such as those related to a
possible escalation of geopolitical turmoil and
adverse climate-related factors.

**Some members stated that in their last policy**
meetings most central banks of advanced

economies left their reference rates unchanged
once again. Most members mentioned that in its


**last five monetary policy meetings the US**
**Federal Reserve left the target range for the**
**federal funds rate unchanged. Meanwhile,** **one**
member noted that for the first time in nearly two
decades the Bank of Japan increased the range for
its target rate after a long period of negative interest
rates. He/she added that said central bank removed
its yield curve control policy but indicated that it will
continue purchasing debt instruments and

maintaining an accommodative monetary policy
stance. On the other hand, he/she underlined that
various monetary authorities in Latin America and
Emerging Europe lowered their policy rates, while no
adjustments were registered in Asia. **Some**
members highlighted that central bank officials in
advanced economies have remained cautious about
starting a rate cutting cycle. **Some members**
emphasized that the chairman of the US Federal
Reserve stated that it will not be appropriate to
reduce the target range until there is greater
confidence that inflation is moving sustainably
toward its target. **One member underlined that the**
Federal Reserve reiterated that risks to achieving
the employment and price stability goals are moving
into better balance. **Some members noted that, in**
advanced economies, the number of reference rate
cuts expected by markets for this year has
decreased. **One member pointed out that markets**
expect the cycle of rate cuts to remain

heterogeneous among economies. **Another**

member mentioned that market expectations
regarding the start of monetary easing in major
economies have been postponed. **One member**
argued that, in the environment of uncertainty
associated with the disinflationary process, central
banks’ actions must seek an orderly adjustment of
the economy and financial markets, and that for this
reason abrupt adjustments in interest rates or an
excessively data-dependent strategy could

contribute to generating even greater volatility.
He/she argued that an approach of gradual
adjustments would put central banks in a better
position to continue addressing the prevailing
challenges more efficiently.

**Most members mentioned that the US Federal**
**Reserve is expected to begin cutting interest**
**rates this year.** **One member pointed out that**
expectations suggest a first interest rate cut in June.
**The majority specified that the median of**
**projections by the members of the Federal Open**
**Market** **Committee** **(FOMC)** **continues**

**anticipating a total reduction of 75-basis-points**
**throughout the year.** **One member mentioned that**
said central bank increased its estimate for the
federal funds rate in the long term, compared to what

2


-----

was reported in December 2023. **The majority**
**stated that the normalization of the US monetary**
**policy stance could be slower than previously**
**anticipated.**

**Some members underlined that international**
financial markets exhibited higher risk appetite,
although some members noted that adjustments in
the main variables were largely limited. **One**
member attributed the higher risk appetite to the
resilience of economic activity, to the lower
likelihood of a sharp slowdown materializing, and to
expectations regarding an eventual downward
adjustment in reference rates by the major central
banks. The majority underlined that government
**bond yields increased. One member considered**
that the above reflected an improvement in
economic activity figures in the United States. Some
members added that stock market indices registered
increases, largely driven by the technology sector,
and that the US dollar slightly depreciated. **One**
member mentioned that emerging markets continue
registering heterogeneous behavior by asset class.
He/she stated that the equity market registered
gains, accompanied by all-time-high inflows, while in
the fixed income market outflows continued being
observed. Another member highlighted that market
and analyst expectations regarding the future
trajectory of the Federal Reserve's federal funds rate
adjusted upwards without volatility episodes. He/she
pointed out that, with this adjustment, the
discrepancy between the Fed's projections and
market and analyst expectations, which had been a
matter of concern for financial stability, was
significantly reduced. One member mentioned that,
looking ahead, a temporary bout of volatility in
financial markets cannot be ruled out, considering
the electoral processes taking place this year.

**_Economic activity in Mexico_**

**Most members mentioned that economic activity**
**is expected to show greater dynamism during**
**the first quarter of 2024 relative to the weakness**
**of the previous quarter. One member pointed out**
that this higher growth would occur after a significant
slowdown in the fourth quarter of 2023, which
resulted from a weakening of the three sectors of the
economy. He/she added that, considering this
slowdown, GDP grew at a rate of 3.2% in 2023.
**Most members pointed out that there was a**
**slight reactivation of industrial activity in**
**January, mainly supported by the construction**
**sector.** **One member stated that this rebound**
occurred after two months of negative readings.
He/she highlighted the improvement in the


manufacturing industry of transportation equipment.
He/she noted that this took place after significant
contractions in the production of light vehicles at the
end of last year. Another member pointed out that
manufacturing remained sluggish. **One member**
highlighted that the timely indicator of economic
activity anticipates that in February the IGAE would
have registered an annual variation of 2.4%.

**Regarding domestic demand, all members**
**mentioned that consumption continued trending**
**upwards during the fourth quarter of 2023. Some**
members underlined the growth in consumption of
imported goods. **One member noted that, in**
contrast, consumption of domestic goods and
services continued exhibiting a lower dynamism.
**Another member highlighted that the high growth**
rate of credit for consumption, revenues from
remittances, the wage policy, and the increase in
social program transfers would continue stimulating
consumption. Regarding investment, **some**

members pointed out that it continued supporting
aggregate demand, although it slightly stagnated at
high levels. Some members indicated that it slowed
down due to a moderation in the machinery and
equipment component. **One member noted that**
residential construction weakened. However,

**another** member underlined that investment

reached an annual variation of 15.4% in December
2023. He/she stated that imports of capital goods
rebounded strongly in January. Regarding external
**demand, most members mentioned that during**
**the last quarter of 2023 and in early 2024 it**
**continued showing weakness.** **One member**
stated that this could be a lagged effect of the
automotive strike in the United States, as well as of
a sluggish manufacturing sector in that country.
However, **another member indicated that both**
automotive and non-automotive exports remain at
relatively high levels.

**One member considered that in the first half of 2024**
investment in infrastructure projects is expected to
continue contributing to growth and private

consumption to keep expanding. He/she added that
the dynamism of economic activity is estimated to
decrease in the second half of the year. **Another**
member mentioned that in 2024 the expansion of
domestic demand is anticipated to outweigh the
decline in external demand resulting from the
expected slowdown of the US economy. He/she
added that the US economy, particularly its industrial
production component, is expected to rebound in
2025, thus leading to a significant increase in
external demand. He/she expressed that economic
activity in Mexico in 2025 could exhibit greater

3


-----

dynamism if fiscal consolidation does not proceed as
foreseen. He/she argued that to achieve this
consolidation higher public revenues, lower federal
spending, and less transfers to Pemex are required.
He/she pointed out that, in the possible event of a
lack of extraordinary revenue, spending would need
to be reduced significantly to bring the deficit down
to 2.6%. **One member explained that domestic**
spending is anticipated to moderate in 2025 due to
the fiscal consolidation efforts planned for that year.
He/she underlined that, in contrast, private

investment associated with the nearshoring process
could provide an additional boost to economic
activity. He/she considered that risks to economic
activity remain balanced. He/she stated that, even
though the US economy could slow down more than
expected, the effects of nearshoring could also be
greater than anticipated.

**Most members mentioned that the output gap**
**remained in positive territory during the fourth**
**quarter of 2023. One** member indicated that the
economy exhibits tightness. Some members noted
that the point estimate of this gap decreased at the
margin. One member stated that it is still not
statistically different from zero. **Another member**
indicated that it would narrow to a greater extent in
2025. One member argued that the evolution of the
economy's cyclical conditions should be monitored,
given the mixed signals observed in economic
activity figures due to their implications for inflation.

**Most members pointed out that the labor market**
**remained** **strong.** **They** **underlined** **that**

**unemployment rates continue at particularly low**
**levels. One member indicated that these readings**
are similar to those registered throughout 2023.
However, **another member underlined that, while**
the labor market remains strong, there could be
signs of moderation. He/she pointed out that growth
of formal employment has decelerated since mid2023. He/she added that, in recent quarters, the
rates of formal job creation and destruction have
decreased. He/she pointed out that, although net
employment creation is positive, it has slowed down.
**The majority pointed out that wages continue**
**growing at high rates.** However, **one member**
noted that they are growing at slower rates
compared to previous years.

**_Inflation in Mexico_**

**Most members highlighted the progress in**
**disinflation in Mexico.** **Some members underlined**
that both headline and core inflation are visibly below
the high levels reached during this inflationary
episode. One member stated that from March 2023


to February 2024 the inflation gap, which refers to
the difference between observed inflation and the
3% target, decreased from 3.85 to 1.40 percentage
points. He/she added that, during the same period,
the core component, which better reflects the trend
in inflation, declined by 345 basis points. He/she
underlined that during 2023 and so far in 2024, core
inflation has clearly shown a downward trend. Some
members pointed out that disinflation has been the
result of both the easing of the shocks and the level
of monetary restriction attained.

**Most members indicated that, after having**
**increased in late 2023 and in January 2024,**
**annual headline inflation decreased in February**
**to 4.40%.** **They noted that this decline reflected a**
**slight reversion exhibited by the non-core**
**component, which had been exerting pressure**
**on it, as well as a further decline in the core**
**component.** **One** member highlighted that

February’s annual headline inflation figure is merely
the first decline after three consecutive months of
increases. **Another member pointed out that**
February’s readings were lower than anticipated by
the central bank.

**The majority mentioned that non-core inflation**
**decreased in February to 3.67%. One member**
added that this partially reversed the upward
trajectory that it had started to follow in 2023. Some
members underlined that fruit and vegetables
inflation, which had undergone significant pressures
in December 2023 and January 2024, decreased in
February. One member warned that, despite the
above, it still remains at double-digit levels. Another
member mentioned that this subindex had been
affected by a supply shock associated with climaterelated factors. He/she argued that, considering the
characteristics of said shock, its effects on headline
inflation were anticipated to dissipate and not be
long-lasting.

**Most members stated that annual core inflation**
**declined in February to 4.64%. One member**
highlighted that this has been the lowest level since
June 2021, when the rate hiking cycle began.
However, **another member specified that the**
reading of the second fortnight of February was
higher than that of the first one. One member noted
that, despite the decrease, and considering the
shocks it has undergone, core inflation remains at
levels higher than those exhibited prior to the
pandemic. He/she indicated that this component has
continuously exhibited figures above 3% for over
seven years. He/she considered that its resistance
to decline has intensified in recent years. He/she

4


-----

indicated that wage growth rates, relative to those
observed before the pandemic, have contributed to
the above. He/she argued that wage growth has not
been accompanied by increases in labor

productivity.

**Most members pointed out that core inflation**
**components continued exhibiting a mixed**
**behavior. They highlighted the downward**
**trajectory** **of** **merchandise** **inflation,** **while**

**recalling that services inflation has not shown a**
**downward inflection point.** **One member detailed**
that the former has decreased for fifteen consecutive
months, mainly supported by the behavior of nonfood merchandise prices, which exhibited monthly
and annual variations below their historical

averages. He/she asserted that the above has
allowed several indicators of core inflation to
continue trending downwards. **Another member**
stated that the annual variation of non-food
merchandise prices registered 2.75% in February,
while that of food merchandise prices exhibited
5.25%. **One member argued that the favorable**
behavior of merchandise inflation is due to both the
fading of shocks and to the exchange rate
appreciation, which has helped to reduce the costs
of imported intermediate goods and the prices of
imported final goods.

**All members agreed that services inflation has**
**shown persistence. One member pointed out that**
it registered 5.30% in February. **Another member**
stated that, since September 2022, it has been at
levels around such figure. He/she added that more
than 70% of the items comprising this subindex are
growing at seasonally adjusted annualized monthly
rates above 5%, and the figures for both January
and February accumulated more new pressures
compared to last year, especially in the components
of housing and other services. He/she estimated that
services inflation is being primarily affected by nonfood commodity prices and by wage dynamics, and
that, for this reason, in his/her opinion, it is key to
maintain inflation expectations anchored. **One**
member specified that, regarding the services
inflation components, the annual variations of the
segments of educational services and other services
remained above 6% in February, while that of
housing services has stagnated at around 3.7%.
**Another member stated that the elevated levels of**
services inflation is a global phenomenon. He/she
expressed that it is attributed to the continued impact
of the shocks associated with the pandemic. He/she
argued that, in view of the reversal in consumption
patterns, the pass-through of costs in the services
sector has taken place in a lagged and incomplete


manner. He/she thus considered that its behavior is
a necessary adjustment in the economy, although its
evolution must be monitored.

**The majority mentioned that long-term inflation**
**expectations drawn from the survey conducted**
**by Banco de México remain anchored at 3.5%.**
**One member considered it a challenge that these**
expectations remain above 3%. Regarding mediumterm expectations, **another member commented**
that those for the next 4 years are at 3.7%, above
the historical average registered prior to 2020. One
member highlighted that short-term expectations
have remained relatively stable. **Another member**
stated that expectations for the end of 2024 and
2025 have continued improving. **Some members**
noted that inflation expectations for all terms drawn
from surveys remain above the central bank’s
projections. In this regard, one member pointed out
that in the survey by Citibanamex of March 20, not a
single respondent anticipates an inflation rate of
3.5% or less by the end of the year, 71.4% of
respondents expect inflation to be above 4%, and
14.3% consider that inflation will surpass the 4.4%
level of February. **Another** member argued that,
following the recent significant inflationary episode,
two stages in the evolution of these expectations
should be considered: an initial one, where they
consolidate at their historical averages, and a
subsequent one, where they become anchored at
the 3% target over a longer-term horizon. **Some**
members noted that breakeven inflation has
declined for all terms. One member mentioned that
the risk premium has been around its historical
average. However, another member specified that
breakeven inflation still remains at levels above 4%
for all terms. He/she attributed its decline to both the
fall in inflation expectations implicit in these
instruments and to the reduction in inflation risk
premia, which appear to be closely correlated with
the behavior of headline inflation. **One member**
noted that inflation expectations drawn from market
instruments for the average of 1-5 years are at
around 4.3%, while those for 6-10 years remain at
around 3.3%.

**The majority mentioned that the central bank’s**
**inflation forecasts were adjusted marginally for**
**some quarters. One member noted that the**
forecast for headline inflation for the first quarter of
2024 was revised downwards, due to a lower-thananticipated inflation of agricultural and livestock
products. In particular, the majority highlighted
**slight upward adjustments in the forecast of**
**core inflation for the first quarter of 2024 and the**
**following** **two** **quarters.** **Some** members

5


-----

commented that these revisions consider a more
persistent services inflation. However, one member
added that services inflation is foreseen to decrease
gradually in the coming quarters. Another member
specified that forecasts for 2025 remain unchanged.
**Some members pointed out that headline inflation is**
still projected to converge to target in the second
quarter of 2025. One member argued that these
inflation forecasts consider the monetary policy
actions implemented by Banco de México, as well
as prospects of a continued easing of different
pressures on inflation. Thus, **some members**
underlined that the outlook of a continuing
disinflationary process is maintained.

**All members considered that the balance of risks**
**for the trajectory of inflation within the forecast**
**horizon remains biased to the upside. However,**
**some members stated that this does not mean that**
the inflationary outlook will be as adverse as the one
faced in 2022 and early 2023. One member
highlighted that at that stage an upward bias implied
the possibility that inflation would rise more than
anticipated. He/she added that, in the current phase
of disinflation, the upward bias means that, if risks
materialize, inflation could decline more slowly than
expected. **Another** member noted that the

inflationary outlook has improved significantly
compared to what was observed at the end of 2022.
He/she underlined that tail risks such as disruptions
in global supply chains, supply-related pressures on
commodities, and the possibility of inflation
becoming entrenched at elevated levels have been
mitigated. In this regard, he/she added that while
some inflation components, such as food

merchandise, had shown greater persistence, they
had registered a significant fall. He/she emphasized
that, although some risks prevail, they are now more
similar to those faced prior to the pandemic, and
therefore their effect on inflation could be more
limited.

**Among upward risks, all members warned about**
**the persistence of core inflation, particularly its**
**services component. One member stated that this**
represents the main challenge to achieve the
convergence of inflation to its target. However,
**some members considered that this risk may have**
moderated during the disinflation phase. **One**
member pointed out that empirical evidence
suggests that this risk diminishes as inflation
decreases. Another member mentioned that
historically the dynamics of this subindex tends to be
more persistent. Some members added the
possibility of demand-related pressures. **One**
member underlined that manufacturing capacity


utilization reached new highs which, along with a
positive output gap, point in that direction. Similarly,
**some members mentioned the challenges that**
could result from the fiscal stimulus. **One member**
noted that the expansionary fiscal policy is reflected
in the high growth of the monetary aggregates.
**Another** member added the possibility of

downgrades in both Mexico’s sovereign debt and
Pemex’s credit ratings.

**All members warned about the possibility of**
**greater cost-related pressures of various nature.**
However, some members noted that while this risk
is still present, potential cost-related pressures are
not anticipated to be of the same magnitude as those
observed during the pandemic and at the beginning
of the war in Ukraine. **Some members highlighted**
the increasing risks stemming from the escalation of
geopolitical conflicts. **One member noted that**
attacks on vessels in the Red Sea have led to
shipping delays and raised sea freight costs.
However, he/she indicated that, taking into account
that it is a phenomenon confined to this region, their
impact is significantly lower than the disruptions
caused by pandemic-induced bottlenecks. **Some**
members highlighted the risk of a foreign exchange
depreciation. **One member pointed out that**
episodes of volatility derived from the uncertainty of
the presidential elections in Mexico and the United
States could also affect the trajectory of inflation.

**Most members underlined the risks associated**
**with water scarcity and climate-related impacts.**
**One member stated that shocks related to climate**
change have been increasingly severe and frequent,
resulting in greater adverse effects on prices. As an
additional risk, he/she stated that non-core inflation
could turn out to be higher than expected and very
close to its average levels. In particular, he/she
added that while the gasoline price policy has aided
in maintaining non-core inflation below its historical
average, there is no certainty that this policy will be
upheld indefinitely. As for risks to the downside,
**another member noted that the possibility of a**
greater-than-anticipated deceleration of the global
economy has gained relevance. In this regard,
he/she noted that in systemically important

economies, such as the United States and the euro
area, households’ financial position has

deteriorated, which could affect economic activity
amid high interest rates. He/she also argued that the
significant credit expansion in Mexico could suggest
that households’ leverage levels have increased.

6


-----

**_Macrofinancial environment_**

**The majority considered that the Mexican peso**
**continues showing resilience mainly due to the**
**country's solid macroeconomic fundamentals**
**compared** **to** **those** **of** **other** **emerging**

**economies, as well as to a high volatility-**
**adjusted spread between domestic and external**
**interest rates. They highlighted that the foreign**
**exchange market continues operating in an**
**orderly manner, in a context where markets and**
**most analysts expect a downward adjustment in**
**the interest rate differential between Mexico and**
**the United States. They underlined that since the**
**last monetary policy meeting, the peso has**
**appreciated. They noted that trading conditions**
**in the foreign exchange market improved. One**
member argued that the reduction in exchange rate
volatility and in the implied skew in foreign exchange
options suggest a lower demand for hedging amid a
possible depreciation of the Mexican peso, which
contrasts with other election years. He/she stated
that this lower demand, as well as the positioning
observed in short-term foreign exchange derivatives
markets, could magnify a depreciation of the
Mexican peso in the event of an episode of high-risk
aversion, and thus periods of volatility cannot be
ruled out. **Another member warned that certain**
expectations displaying a bias towards depreciation
in the medium term still prevail.

**Most members noted that government bond**
**yields increased moderately. They highlighted**
**that this was consistent with the increases in**
**sovereign interest rates observed globally. One**
member stated that capital inflows to pesodenominated financial assets have concentrated in
Cetes. He/she added that the derivatives market
incorporates a 25-basis-point cut in the reference
rate in the March decision, in line with specialists'
surveys, while the reference rate is foreseen to end
2024 below 10%. **Another member pointed out that**
the Mexican stock market performed negatively, in
part resulting from lower-than-expected corporate
results. **One member stated that sovereign risk**
indicators registered limited adjustments.

**Regarding financing in the economy, the**
**majority highlighted that it continued increasing**
**due** **to** **the** **expansion** **of** **the** **domestic**

**component. Some members noted that the**
external component declined. **One** member

mentioned that the expansion of domestic financing
sources continued reflecting the acquisition of longterm instruments, which is consistent with the
offered yield given the level of the reference rate.


**Most members highlighted that credit granted by**
**commercial banks has continued expanding,**
**although they specified that it has occurred at a**
**slower pace. They emphasized that, in particular,**
**the growth of credit granted to firms has**
**moderated.** **One member stated that consumer**
credit has also decelerated. Some members added
that according to the survey of banks, overall lending
conditions have tightened in some segments. Most
**members stated that, in general, delinquency**
**rates remain stable. However, they noted these**
**have somewhat increased for the consumer loan**
**portfolio.**

**_Monetary policy_**

**The Governing Board evaluated the easing of the**
**effects of the shocks on inflation and its**
**determinants, along with the behavior of**
**medium- and long-term inflation expectations**
**and** **the** **price** **formation** **process.** **It**

**acknowledged** **the** **disinflationary** **process**

**underway since the last time the reference rate**
**was adjusted; nevertheless, it considered the**
**challenges and risks that prevail, which requires**
**monetary policy to continue being managed**
**prudently. Based on the above, with the**
**presence of all its members, the Board decided**
**by majority to lower the target for the overnight**
**interbank interest rate by 25 basis points to**
**11.00%. With this decision, the monetary policy**
**stance remains restrictive and will continue**
**being conducive to the convergence of inflation**
**to the 3% target in the forecast horizon.**

**The Board will thoroughly monitor inflationary**
**pressures as well as all factors that have an**
**incidence on the foreseen path for inflation and**
**its expectations. In the next monetary policy**
**meetings, it will make its decisions depending**
**on available information. It will take into account**
**the progress in the inflation outlook and the**
**challenges that prevail. It will also consider the**
**incidence of both the restrictive policy stance**
**that has been maintained and that prevailing in**
**the future on inflation throughout the horizon in**
**which monetary policy operates. Actions will be**
**implemented in such a way that the reference**
**rate remains consistent at all times with the**
**trajectory needed to enable an orderly and**
**sustained convergence of headline inflation to**
**the 3% target during the forecast period. The**
**central bank reaffirms its commitment with its**
**primary mandate and the need to continue its**
**efforts to consolidate an environment of low and**
**stable inflation.**

7


-----

**One** **member pointed out that the current**
inflationary episode has gone through different
phases, which have had different implications for
monetary policy decisions. He/she recalled that
inflation came to exhibit a marked upward trend due
to the shocks of the pandemic and the military
conflict in Ukraine. He/she highlighted that, in
response, Banco de México increased the reference
rate in a timely and decisive manner. He/she noted
that by the end of 2022 the shocks began to ease,
which, together with the monetary policy stance
attained, contributed to the beginning of the
disinflation phase. He/she argued that, considering
the above, the magnitude of reference rate
increases was reduced. He/she added that in March
2023, the reference rate was set at 11.25%,
remaining at that level since then. He/she mentioned
that during this period the monetary policy stance
continued strengthening, as the real ex-ante rate
continued increasing due to the decline in inflation
expectations. He/she stated that, considering the
average of headline inflation expectations for the
next 12 months, the reference rate went from 6.38%
in March 2023 to the current level of 7.43%. He/she
noted that this figure is clearly above the estimated
neutral range of between 1.8 and 3.4%. He/she
indicated that in light of an extremely complex
inflationary period, a level of monetary restriction
unseen since the adoption of the inflation targeting
regime has been required. He/she expressed that
since the last reference rate increase, the disinflation
process has progressed significantly. He/she
highlighted that headline and core inflation are at
levels significantly below the peaks reached during
this inflationary episode. He/she considered that the
current environment is less adverse than that faced
in 2022 and the first months of 2023. Thus, he/she
argued that current and future conditions are
conducive to a reduction in the reference rate.
He/she emphasized that this does not mean that the
fight against inflation has come to an end, nor is it a
sign of complacency. He/she underlined that there is
still a long road that remains to be covered to reach
the target and risks continue to prevail. He/she
expressed that monetary policy should continue
being managed prudently and that the assessment
of additional rate cuts would be made on a meetingby-meeting basis, depending on available

information. He/she added that when

macroeconomic conditions allow for additional
adjustments, these would be gradual. He/she
highlighted that the monetary restriction has been
relevant for disinflation and is expected to remain so
over the forecast horizon. He/she indicated that the
restrictive stance will continue contributing to
maintain long-term inflation expectations anchored


and to promote an orderly behavior of financial
markets, including the foreign exchange market.
He/she stated that during this complex inflationary
period, the central bank's firm commitment to its
primary mandate of price stability has remained
unwavering. He/she considered that, looking ahead,
in its effort to consolidate an environment of low and
stable inflation, said firm commitment will remain a
constant.

**Another** **member underlined that the level of**
monetary restriction attained has facilitated

consistent progress in disinflation. He/she pointed
out that this has been achieved through both the
exchange rate and expectations channels. However,
he/she emphasized that, although inflation has
decreased, the balance of risks for its expected
trajectory remains biased to the upside. Among main
risks, he/she highlighted: i) that, despite the
monetary restriction, domestic economic activity
continues showing resilience and that demandrelated pressures may slow down or even reverse
the fall in inflation; ii) that core inflation persists at
high levels; iii) that non-core inflation stabilizes at
levels higher than those estimated by Banco de
México's forecasts; and iv) that a greater-thananticipated depreciation of the national currency is
observed. He/she warned that the materialization of
these risks could hinder the convergence of inflation
to its target over the planning horizon. He/she
forewarned about the possibility of Banco de
México's inflation forecasts having to be revised
upwards in the near future due to an unexpected
behavior in some of the determinants of inflation.
He/she stated that an inflation rate far from its target,
a balance of risks for inflation biased to the upside,
and the strength of economic activity and credit,
despite a historically high ex-ante real rate, evidence
that monetary policy in Mexico has had to face
additional challenges, such as pressures stemming
from wage increases and an expansionary fiscal
policy. In this context, he/she considered that, at this
moment, a reference rate cut could be interpreted by
markets as Banco de México's tolerance to higher
inflation levels. He/she indicated that some analysts
and market participants have acknowledged that the
macroeconomic environment is still uncertain to
consider adjusting the level of monetary restriction.
He/she noted that the consensus is that at this
meeting the Governing Board will make a first cut to
the reference rate. He/she pointed out that, at the
same time, the market foresees inflation levels
higher than the central bank's forecasts. He/she
expressed that prudence must be exercised in the
signals conveyed to the markets, in a context in

8


-----

which the disparity between inflation expectations
and the central bank's forecasts has been widening.

**One** **member highlighted several factors to consider**
for this decision before beginning any cycle of
reference rate cuts: i) that the balance of risks for
inflation remains biased to the upside and is
uncertain; ii) that services inflation does not show a
downward trend or signs of an imminent decline
soon; iii) that analysts' inflation expectations for the
end of 2024 are above the central bank's forecasts,
and thus they do not anticipate that the intermediate
inflation target will be attained; iv) that the output gap
is positive and certain indicators suggest demandrelated pressures; v) that the labor market continues
showing strength; and vi) that credit growth is not
slowing down, while the monetary base is growing
above 14%. In this context, he/she considered that it
is still not time to begin a rate cutting cycle. However,
he/she expressed that there is some room for an
isolated fine-tuning in order to maintain a restrictive,
but not overly restrictive, monetary policy stance.
He/she pointed out that since the last reference rate
increase, the real ex-ante rate has risen by more
than 100 basis points due to the decline in one-year
inflation expectations. He/she noted that this rate,
currently near 7.5%, allows some room for a 25basis-point reduction to ensure a restrictive stance
within the range of 7 to 7.5%. He/she added that the
interest rate spread relative to the United States
provides a certain margin to set the target rate
irrespective of the Federal Reserve’s anticipated
monetary policy stance. He/she stated that in a
context that calls for prudence, before making an
additional adjustment to the reference rate, there
should be greater certainty about the convergence
of inflation to its target before considering a
monetary easing cycle. He/she noted that a major
challenge in implementing the fine tuning will be to
convince markets that it is not yet time to start a
cutting cycle, and thus the premature expectation by
analysts that this cycle will materialize must be
avoided. He/she also cautioned against comparing
the current monetary policy stance with that of other
episodes as each has its own difficulties,

circumstances, and causes. He/she warned that,
based on international evidence, the most common
mistake in inflationary episodes is to begin monetary
policy easing prematurely. He/she indicated that the
central bank’s credibility in its commitment to its
primary mandate must be maintained. He/she
underlined that it must be made clear that the focus
is centered on the long term. He/she expressed that
it must be communicated that the decline in inflation
is insufficient and that there is still a long road to be
covered. He/she considered that if inflation and its


expectations do not decrease in a clear and
continuous manner in the coming months, the target
rate should not be lowered. He/she pointed out that,
in his/her opinion, monetary policy in Mexico has
limited effectiveness, and thus a restrictive, elevated
and lasting monetary policy stance is required.
He/she warned that unlike previous episodes, this
time inflationary persistence is higher. He/she added
that the current global monetary conditions, the
domestic economy's cyclical position, and the
expansionary fiscal policy are consistent with the
need for a more restrictive policy stance. Therefore,
he/she argued that room to lower the target rate
might be very limited. He/she finally pointed out that
a firm stance must be taken in view of an uncertain
inflationary outlook biased to the upside.

**Another** **member** noted that, although the

disinflation process has continued and inflation
expectations remain stable and anchored, the
current situation is still uncertain. In this regard,
he/she mentioned that inflation forecasts were
revised marginally upwards for the next three
quarters and that the balance of risks for inflation
continues to be biased to the upside. He/she argued
that the monetary restriction attained since

September 2022 has operated with different lags in
each of the transmission channels. He/she pointed
out that the real rate has reached a level of 7.43%,
while the multilateral real exchange rate has
accumulated an appreciation of 18% since

September 2022. He/she highlighted that the
acquisition of long-term instruments by the private
sector has remained at around 2% of GDP for the
last year and a half, which is twice the average level
observed between 2010 and 2018. He/she

emphasized that domestic financing has recently
shown some moderation in its growth rate,
especially for firms, where the pass-through to
financing rates has been more widespread

throughout this tightening cycle. He/she estimated
that the monetary policy stance will continue to be
robust and will remain in restrictive territory if the
reference rate is reduced by 25 basis points. He/she
stated that the transmission channels will continue
operating to enable the orderly and sustained
convergence of inflation to the target. He/she noted
that Mexico's real interest rate in relation to the
inflationary gap is higher than that of most emerging
countries and that its magnitude has allowed to face
the inflationary challenges. He/she expressed that,
given the complexity of the disinflationary process
and the tight conditions in the economy, especially
in the labor market, it will be necessary to maintain
a restrictive stance in the forecast horizon. He/she
indicated that future monetary policy actions should

9


-----

be dependent on incoming data and on the evolution
of inflation determinants. He/she considered that the
monetary policy statement should convey a cautious
tone. He/she added that the proposed reduction
should not be interpreted as a normalization process
of monetary policy or complacency with the level of
inflation, but rather as one that seeks to calibrate the
current level of monetary restriction with the
evolution of inflation and its outlook. He/she stated
that communication should encourage markets to
adjust their expectations to what is likely to be a
slower and longer-lasting cycle compared to past
episodes, with a clear commitment to strengthen the
country's economic and financial stability.

**One** **member elaborated on the reasons he/she**
considers that a reduction in the reference rate is not
premature. He/she highlighted the importance of
making an appropriate assessment of the

inflationary outlook, considering the origin of
pressures, their nature, dynamics, and the road
covered. He/she recalled that during 2021 and 2022
an inflationary period clearly different from the
previous ones was faced, characterized by atypical
shocks that led to tail risks, whose effects have been
perceived in a differentiated and lagged manner.
He/she highlighted that given this scenario, fifteen
consecutive increases were made, accumulating
725 basis points, elevating the reference rate to its
historical high, and maintaining it at that level for
practically one year, which represents the longest
pause observed after a rate hiking cycle. He/she
pointed out that, as a result of this forceful monetary
policy action and the mitigation of shocks, significant
progress has been made in the disinflationary
process, and thus we are now in a better position.
He/she also deemed necessary not only to monitor
whether the balance of risks remains biased to the
upside, but also its evolution in response to the
mitigation of tail risks, taking into account disruptions
in supply chains, supply-related pressures, or if
inflation becomes entrenched at elevated levels.
He/she added that the passive tightening of around
100 basis points unseen in previous cycles has been
achieved thanks to the progress in communication
tools, such as the use of forward guidance. He/she
pointed out that maintaining a restrictive stance will
continue to be necessary, as challenges prevail and
there is a road that remains to be covered. He/she
stated that even if the rate is lowered, the monetary
policy stance would remain clearly in restrictive
territory, would continue exerting an influence
through its channels, and would remain sufficiently
robust in light of changes in the policy stance relative
to other economies. He/she deemed it highly
relevant that monetary policy should be


implemented gradually, not only in terms of
magnitude but duration. He/she considered that this
is appropriate in an environment where challenges,
such as the persistence of services inflation, prevail.
He/she noted that gradualism in terms of duration
means that one adjustment does not imply a
continuous cycle has begun. He/she stated that
while it is not prudent to set a specific range for the
ex-ante real rate, given the challenges imposed on
communication, it is appropriate to adjust its level in
view of the significant improvement in the
inflationary landscape and outlook, although this
does not imply bringing it back to its pre-pandemic
levels. Finally, he/she highlighted that the challenge
ahead is to adjust the level of tightening in a way that
acknowledges the significant progress in inflationary
dynamics, while also addressing the challenges that
still prevail on the path towards the 3% target.

**3. MONETARY POLICY DECISION**

The Governing Board evaluated the easing of the
effects of the shocks on inflation and its
determinants, along with the behavior of mediumand long-term inflation expectations and the price
formation process. It acknowledged the

disinflationary process underway since the last time
the reference rate was adjusted; nevertheless, it
considered the challenges and risks that prevail,
which requires monetary policy to continue being
managed prudently. Based on the above, with the
presence of all its members, the Board decided by
majority to lower the target for the overnight
interbank interest rate by 25 basis points to 11.00%.
With this decision, the monetary policy stance
remains restrictive and will continue being conducive
to the convergence of inflation to the 3% target in the
forecast horizon.

The Board will thoroughly monitor inflationary
pressures as well as all factors that have an
incidence on the foreseen path for inflation and its
expectations. In the next monetary policy meetings,
it will make its decisions depending on available
information. It will take into account the progress in
the inflation outlook and the challenges that prevail.
It will also consider the incidence of both the
restrictive policy stance that has been maintained
and that prevailing in the future on inflation
throughout the horizon in which monetary policy
operates. Actions will be implemented in such a way
that the reference rate remains consistent at all
times with the trajectory needed to enable an orderly
and sustained convergence of headline inflation to
the 3% target during the forecast period. The central
bank reaffirms its commitment with its primary

10


-----

mandate and the need to continue its efforts to
consolidate an environment of low and stable
inflation.

**4. VOTING**

Voting in favor of lowering the target for the overnight
interbank interest rate by 25 basis points to 11.00%
were Victoria Rodríguez, Galia Borja, Jonathan
Heath, and Omar Mejía. Irene Espinosa voted in
favor of maintaining the target at 11.25%.

**5. DISSIDENT OPINIONS / VOTES**

**Vote. Irene Espinosa**

The level of monetary restriction attained so far has
allowed the disinflation process to progress, mainly
through the exchange rate and expectations
channels, given that domestic demand and credit do


not show signs of weakness. Moreover, the labor
market remains tight and the point estimate for the
output gap continues in positive territory, which
confirms the Mexican economy’s resilience.

Headline inflation is still far from target, the balance
of risks for our inflation forecasts remains biased to
the upside, and economic activity continues
exhibiting dynamism despite the historical increase
in the real interest rate. This is evidence that
monetary policy has had to face additional
challenges, such as pressures from wage increases
and an expansionary fiscal policy, to steer inflation
towards the 3% target. Furthermore, the fact that
markets anticipate that inflation will be higher than
our forecasts indicates that is premature to begin
reducing monetary restriction. Doing so could
jeopardize the convergence of inflation and thus the
credibility of this central bank’s commitment to its
primary mandate of price stability.

11


-----

**ANNEX**

The information in this Annex was prepared for this
meeting by the staff of Banco de México’s
Directorate General of Economic Research and
Directorate General of Central Bank Operations. It
does not necessarily reflect the considerations of the
members of the Governing Board as to the monetary
policy decision.

**A.1. External conditions**

**A.1.1. World economic activity**

World economic activity is expected to have grown
during the first quarter of 2024 at a slightly higher
rate than that observed in the previous quarter.
Nevertheless, the dynamics of economic activity
would continue being heterogeneous across

countries. Overall, compared to the fourth quarter of
2023, growth is expected to be sluggish in advanced
economies and more dynamic in emerging

economies. Purchasing Managers' Indices point to a
modest growth in services and manufacturing
activity at the global level. Nevertheless,

manufacturing in advanced economies would have
remained weak (Chart 1). Among global risks, the
following stand out: the intensification of geopolitical
turmoil; the protraction of inflationary pressures; tight
financial conditions; and, to a lesser extent,
challenges to financial stability.

In the United States, available indicators point to a
moderate growth during the first quarter of 2024
compared to the previous quarter, although analysts'
expectations have been revised upwards. The above
took place after Gross Domestic Product (GDP) grew
at a seasonally adjusted quarterly rate of 0.8%
during the fourth quarter of 2023.[1] The moderation in
growth registered during the first quarter of the year
would reflect the lower contributions from net
exports, public spending, and private consumption
(Chart 2).

1 Expressed as a seasonally adjusted annualized quarterly rate,
the change in US GDP was 3.2% in the fourth quarter of 2023.


s. a. / Seasonally adjusted figures.
1/ The index varies between 0 and 100 points. A reading above 50 points
is considered an increase compared to the previous month and below 50
points, a decrease.
Note: Figures in the chart correspond to respective minimum levels of each
indicator, in the same order as the labels.
Source: IHS Markit.

**Chart 2**

**US: real GDP and components**

Quarterly percentage rate and contribution

in percentage points, s. a.

3.0

Private consumption expenditures
Residential investment

2.5 Nonresidential investment

Change in private inventories

2.0 Net exports

Government consumption expenditures

1.5 Total

1.0

0.5

0.0

-0.5

-1.0

I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV I

2021 2022 2023 2024

s. a. / Seasonally adjusted figures.
Note: The shaded area refers to Atlanta Federal Reserve's GDPNow
forecasts as of March 19.
Source: BEA and Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta.

12


60

58

56

54

52

50

48

46

44

42

40

J

2020


**Chart 1**

**Purchasing Managers’ Index:**

**production component for advanced,**

**emerging and global economies**

Diffusion index, s. a. [1/]

February

26.5 Manufacturing developed
20.8 Services developed
37.8 Manufacturing emerging
31.6 Services emerging
32.5 Manufacturing global
23.5 Services global

J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J

2021 2022 2023 2024

|Private consumption expenditures Residential investment Nonresidential investment Change in private inventories Net exports Government consumption expenditures Total|Col2|Col3|Col4|
|---|---|---|---|
|I II III IV 2021|I II III IV 2022|I II III IV 2023|I 2024|


-----

In February 2024, US industrial production grew at a
seasonally adjusted monthly rate of 0.1%, after
having contracted in the previous month. This result
is attributed to progress in the mining and
manufacturing sectors, due partly to the recovery
from adverse weather conditions in January.
Purchasing Managers' Indices suggest that

manufacturing production would remain somewhat
sluggish.

The US labor market remained tight. The non-farm
payroll continued expanding, going from a creation
of 229 thousand new jobs in January to 275
thousand new positions in February. However, the
figures for this indicator corresponding to the
previous two months were revised downwards. Initial
claims for unemployment insurance remained at low
levels, registering 209 thousand new claims in the
week that ended on March 9. Nevertheless, some
indicators have shown signs of less tight conditions.
The unemployment rate increased from 3.7% in
January to 3.9% in February. New vacancies
remained at approximately 8.9 million in January,
significantly below the peak level reached in March
2022, although they continue being above prepandemic levels. In February, average hourly wages
grew at a slower annual rate of 4.5%, after having
increased in January to 4.7%.

In the euro area, economic activity is expected to
have remained weak during the first quarter of 2024,
after GDP stagnated during the fourth quarter of
2023.[2] Economic activity would continue being
affected by the moderation in consumption,
investment and external demand, in an environment
of tight financial conditions. The labor market in this
region remains robust. The unemployment rate
declined from 6.5% in December to 6.4% in January,
in a context in which the labor participation rate has
been increasing.

For the rest of the major advanced economies, in
general, moderate growth is expected in the first
quarter of 2024. In particular, economic activity in the
United Kingdom is expected to recover, after having
contracted during the previous two quarters. Labor
markets in this group of economies would have
remained tight.

Economic activity in most major emerging

economies is expected to have registered greater

2 Expressed as a seasonally adjusted quarterly rate, the change
in euro area GDP was 0.0% during the fourth quarter of 2023.
Expressed as an annualized rate, the change was -0.2%.

3 Expressed as an annual rate, China’s GDP growth was 5.2% in


dynamism in the first quarter of 2024. In the
particular case of China, during the first quarter of the
year economic activity is expected to have increased
at a faster pace than in the previous quarter, in which
it grew at a seasonally adjusted quarterly rate of
1.0%.[3] During January and February, there was an
expansion in consumption, industrial production and
fixed investment in that country. During the first
quarter of the year, growth was also supported by the
increase in exports and tourism associated with the
Lunar New Year holiday, which was celebrated
without mobility restrictions for the first time since the
onset of the pandemic. However, said economy
continues facing significant risks stemming from the
weakness of its real estate sector, low confidence by
economic agents, as well as trade and technological
restrictions imposed by some countries.

International commodity prices have shown a mixed
behavior since Mexico’s last monetary policy
decision. Oil prices increased on the expectation of
higher demand from the United States, while
inventories decreased worldwide. Moreover,

potential supply disruptions due to geopolitical
tensions in the Middle East and Russia, and the
agreement between members of the Organization of
the Petroleum Exporting Countries and allied
countries (OPEC+) to extend production cuts,
pressured prices upwards. However, the expectation
of higher production in the United States has helped
to partially contain these price pressures.

Meanwhile, reference gas prices decreased

between February and early March, as a result of
lower demand due to warmer temperatures in the
northern hemisphere. Subsequently, prices rose in
reaction to the announcement of lower US gas
production in the first quarter of the year and to the
attacks on Russian infrastructure. Grain prices
declined due to increases in corn production in the
United States and Brazil, as well as to a greater
accumulation of inventories in the United States. A
higher wheat production in Russia also contributed
to this decline, while China registered a lower
demand. Metal prices, in general, trended upwards
in light of the outlook for less restrictive financial
conditions due to greater confidence regarding the
beginning of a rate cutting cycle by the major central

the fourth quarter of 2023.

13


-----

banks. The increase in gold prices, which reached
historical highs, was noteworthy.

**A.1.2. Monetary policy and international financial**
**markets**

Headline annual inflation continued declining in most
advanced economies (Chart 3). In some cases, its
most recent reading rebounded due, in general, to
higher pressures on energy prices. Core inflation
continued declining gradually, with some persistence
in services inflation. In the United States, annual
headline inflation measured by the CPI increased
from 3.1% in January to 3.2% in February. This was
due to a lower deflation in energy prices, while food
and core inflation continued declining. The annual
variation of the latter fell from 3.9% in January to
3.8% in February. However, on average, monthly
core inflation accelerated in the last two months,
driven partly by the services component. Headline
inflation in that country, measured by the Personal
Consumption Expenditures Price Index (PCEPI),
decreased in annual terms from 2.6% in December
to 2.4% in January. Annual core inflation went from
2.9% to 2.8% in the same time period.

Analysts' inflation forecasts for most major advanced
economies foresee a moderation in headline inflation
throughout 2024 from its current levels. However,
they estimate that it would remain at levels above
their central banks' inflation targets. Longer-term
inflation expectations drawn from financial

instruments for these economies remained relatively
stable compared to early-February figures.

**Chart 3**

**Selected advanced economies:**

**headline inflation**

Annual percentage change

12

United States PCE 1/

10 United States CPI

Japan
Euro area

8

United Kingdom
Canada

6

4

2

February

January

0

January

-2

J J J J J J J J J J

2019 2020 2021 2022 2023

1/ The personal consumption expenditures price index is used.
Source: Bureau of Economic Analysis, Bureau of Labor Statistics, Eurostat,
Bank of Japan, the UK Office for National Statistics, and Statistics Canada.


Since Mexico’s last monetary policy decision, annual
headline inflation declined in a large number of
emerging economies. This was due to lower
pressures on the prices of food, the core component
and, in some cases, of energy. In most of the main
emerging economies, core inflation declined.

Although in most of these economies headline
inflation remains above their respective central
banks' specific targets, in some of them headline
inflation was within each central bank's variability
interval. Such was the case in South Africa, Czechia,
Hungary, Poland, Philippines, India, Indonesia, and
Brazil. In Thailand, annual headline inflation
persisted at negative levels, while in China it
rebounded to 0.7% in February, after having
registered negative rates for four consecutive
months. This was due to pressures on food prices
and, to a lesser extent, on transportation and
communication.

In this context, since Mexico’s last monetary policy
decision, the central banks of the major advanced
and emerging economies have made decisions
regarding their reference rates in a heterogeneous
manner, depending on the evolution of each
country's economic indicators.

In the main advanced economies, most central
banks left their reference rates unchanged and
continued reducing their securities' holdings

gradually. Regarding future actions, overall, central
banks indicated that their decisions will remain
dependent on information about the inflation outlook.
Some of these institutions also reported that they are
prepared to make additional adjustments, if
necessary, in order to bring inflation back to target.
As for market expectations on reference rates, based
on the latest available information, interest rates
implicit in interest rate swap curves (OIS) registered
a moderation in expectations of rate cuts (Chart 4).
These thus anticipate that reference rates will be
lowered by at least 25 basis points by the end of the
third quarter in these economies.

14


-----

**Chart 4**

**Reference rates and trajectories**

**implied in OIS curves[1/]**

Percent

7 **― US Federal Reserve 2/** End of End of End of

**― Bank of England** 2022 2023 2024

6 **― Bank of Japan**

**― European Central Bank deposit rate**
**― OIS implicit trajectory Mar 20, 2024**

5 **--- OIS implicit trajectory Feb 8, 2024**

4

3

2

1 Forecasts

0

-1

2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 2024 2025

1/ OIS: Fixed floating interest rate swap where the fixed interest rate is
associated with the effective overnight reference rate.
2/ For the observed reference rate of the U.S., the average interest rate of
the target range of the federal funds rate (5.00%- 5.25%) is used.
Source: Bloomberg.

At its March meeting, the US Federal Reserve left
the target range for the federal funds rate unchanged
for the fifth consecutive decision, between 5.25 and
5.50%. Additionally, it continued reducing its balance
sheet. It reiterated that, when considering any
adjustment to the target range for the federal funds
rate, the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC)
will carefully assess incoming data, the evolution of
the economic outlook, and the balance of risks. It
indicated again that the Committee judges that the
risks associated with achieving its employment and
inflation goals are moving into better balance. It
reiterated that the Committee does not expect it to
be appropriate to reduce the target range until it has
gained greater confidence that inflation is moving
sustainably toward 2%. It also emphasized that the
Committee would be prepared to adjust the stance
of monetary policy as appropriate, if risks emerge
that could impede the attainment of the Committee's
goals.

During the press conference, the Federal Reserve
chairman reiterated that the reference rate is likely at
its peak for this monetary cycle, and, if the economy
overall evolves as expected, it will probably be
appropriate to start reducing the restrictive monetary
policy stance at some point this year. He indicated
that they are committed to both sides of their dual
mandate and that an unexpected weakening in the
labor market could also warrant a monetary policy
response. He again mentioned that the FOMC is
prepared to maintain the current target range for the
federal funds rate for longer, if appropriate. Finally,
he commented on the reduction in the size of its
balance sheet and indicated that, although no


decision was made during the meeting, the
Committee judged, in general, that it would be
appropriate to slow down the pace of the reduction
relatively soon.

Regarding adjustments to the Committee's

forecasts, between December and March the
median for the annual growth rate was revised
upwards from 1.4 to 2.1% for the fourth quarter of
2024, from 1.8 to 2.0% for the fourth quarter of 2025,
and from 1.9 to 2.0% for the fourth quarter of 2026.
The median of headline inflation forecasts remained
unchanged at 2.4% for the end of 2024, was revised
slightly upwards from 2.1 to 2.2% for that of 2025,
and remained at 2.0% for that of 2026. The median
of the Committee's expectations for the federal funds
rate for the end of 2024 remained at 4.6%, and thus
three 25-basis-point cuts continue to be anticipated
for 2024. However, there were members who revised
their estimates to the upside. The median of
expectations for the federal funds rate for the end of
2025 increased from 3.6 to 3.9%, which implies that
expectations of reference rate cuts for that year were
revised from 100 to 75 basis points. For the end of
2026, the expected level rose from 2.9 to 3.1%.
Expectations drawn from financial instruments
anticipate an interest rate level of 5.2% for the end of
the second quarter of 2024, and subsequently
decrease to levels close to 4.7% for the end of that
year and to 3.8% for the end of 2025.

At its March meeting, the European Central Bank
(ECB) left its reference rates unchanged for the
fourth consecutive decision. Thus, its refinancing,
key lending, and key deposit rates remained at 4.50,
4.75, and 4.0%, respectively. Its Governing Council
reiterated that it considers interest rates to be at
levels that, if maintained for a sufficiently long period,
will contribute substantially to a timely return of
inflation to its target. The Council reiterated once
again that it will continue adopting a data-dependent
approach to determine the appropriate duration and
degree of monetary tightening.

At the press conference, the ECB president pointed
out that no interest rate cuts were discussed, but that
debate on the reduction of its restrictive stance had
begun. She noted that progress in disinflation
continues, but that there is still not enough
confidence and that more evidence is needed
regarding progress of inflation convergence towards
its target. Regarding its Pandemic Emergency
Purchase Program (PEPP), the Governing Council
continued with the normalization of its balance sheet
and reiterated that it expects to conclude the

15


-----

reinvestments of maturing securities purchased
under the PEPP by the end of 2024.

At its March meeting, the Bank of Japan raised its
reference rate from -0.1% to a range of 0.0 to 0.1%,
after having kept it at negative levels for more than
eight years. This was the first reference rate increase
since 2007. It also eliminated the yield curve control
that kept the target level of the interest rate on tenyear Japanese government bonds (JGBs) at around
0%. Despite the above, said central bank anticipated
that it will maintain accommodative financial
conditions for some time.[4]

In the main emerging economies, since Mexico’s last
monetary policy decision some central banks have
cut their reference rates, taking into consideration
the specific economic circumstances of their
countries. In China, the central bank cut the five-year
Loan Prime Rate (LPR) by 25 basis points in
February, and in March it left it, along with the shortand medium-term monetary policy rates,

unchanged. Some central banks decided not to
further adjust their reference rates after having done
so in previous decisions. The Central Reserve Bank
of Peru left its reference rate unchanged after having
lowered it for the sixth consecutive time. The central
banks of Russia and Turkey also kept them
unchanged after raising them consecutively in
several previous meetings.

Since Mexico’s last monetary policy decision,
international financial conditions remained relatively
stable (Chart 5). Medium- and long-term rates in the
main advanced economies increased moderately
from the level registered at the beginning of
February. Meanwhile, stock markets in both
advanced and emerging economies performed
favorably (Chart 6). In foreign exchange markets, the
US dollar depreciated slightly. However, the
currencies of most emerging economies depreciated
marginally against the US dollar (Chart 7). Finally,
since the last monetary policy decision, capital
inflows into emerging economies have been
registered. However, these flows exhibited a
differentiated behavior among asset classes, with
net inflows of equity assets and slight outflows from

4 The Bank of Japan considered that the 2% inflation target could
be achieved in a stable and sustainable manner towards the end
of its economic projection period. It noted that the quantitative and
qualitative monetary easing (QQE) scheme with yield curve
control, as well as the negative interest rate have fulfilled their
function. However, it will continue with purchases of JGBs in
approximately the same amount as before and, in the case of a
rapid increase in long-term interest rates, the central bank will
respond nimbly by increasing the amount of such purchases and


fixed-income assets during most of the period.

**Chart 5**

**Financial conditions index[1/]**

Units

103

Tightening

102

101 Easing

100

99

98

97

96

J J     J     J     J     J     J     J     J

2020        2021       2022        2023       2024

Financial Conditions Index - global
Financial Conditions Index - United States
Financial Conditions Index - euro area 2/

1/ The financial conditions index is constructed considering the effect of five
variables on economic activity: the reference interest rate, the 10-year
government bond, the spread of investment grade bonds over the
government debt bond with equivalent maturity, the ratio of a stock index
with 10-year average earnings per share, and the trade weighted exchange
rate.
2/ In the case of the euro area, the spread between the sovereign bonds of
France, Italy, Spain, the Netherlands, Belgium, Austria, Portugal and
Finland over the German 10-year bond is also considered. The vertical
black line indicates the last calendarized monetary policy meeting of Banco
de México.
Source: Bloomberg and Goldman Sachs.

by adopting measures such as fixed-rate purchase operations and
the Funds-Supplying Operations against Pooled Collateral
Additionally, it suspended purchases of exchange-traded funds
(ETFs) and real estate investment trusts (J-REITs). It will also
reduce gradually the amount of commercial paper (CP) and
corporate bond purchases to suspend them in about a year.
Finally, it indicated that it will grant loans under several of its
funding programs with an interest rate of 0.1% and a duration of
one year.

16


-----

**Chart 6**

**Change in selected financial indicators from**

**February 8 to March 20, 2024**

Percent; basis points Percentage, basis points


15%

10%


75

50


5%


25

0


0%

-5%


moderate adjustments to the upside (Chart 8). Stock
markets were affected by corporate reports
mentioning a less favorable outlook than anticipated.

The Mexican peso traded in a range of 63 cents,
between 16.65 and 17.28 pesos per US dollar since
the last monetary policy decision. During the period,
the Mexican peso appreciated by 2.22%, primarily
influenced by the nominal interest rate spread
between Mexico and the United States (Chart 9).
This occurred in an environment characterized by
the best trading conditions since early 2020.

**Chart 8**

**Mexican markets’ performance**

Percent, MXN/USD and index


-10%

-15%


-25

-50


-75


60,000

58,000

56,000

54,000

52,000

50,000

48,000


1/ MSCI Emerging Markets Index, which includes 24 countries.
2/ DXY: a weighted average estimated by the Intercontinental Exchange
(ICE) of the nominal exchange rate of the main six currencies operated
globally with the following weights: EUR: 57.6%, JPY: 13.6%, GBP: 11.9%,
CAD: 9.1%, SEK: 4.2%, and CHF: 3.6%.
Source: Bloomberg.

**Chart 7**

**Selected emerging economies: financial assets**

**performance as of February 1, 2024**

Percent, basis points Percent, basis points


10.0

9.6


9.2

8.8


8.4


6.1

5.8

5.5

5.2

4.9

4.6

4.3

4.0

3.7


19.6

19.1

18.6

18.1

17.6

17.1

16.6


Range in 2024 Range since previous monetary policy decision Feb 1, 2024 Mar 14, 2024


Note: An upward adjustment indicates currency appreciation. Interest rates
correspond to swap rates at the specified terms, except for Hungary, where
government securities with 3-year maturities were used as a reference. For
the Philippines, a 2-year swap rate was used, and for Russia, 2-year and
3-year swap rates were used. The latest CDS data for Russia is as of June
1, 2022.
Source: Bloomberg.

**A.2. Current situation of the Mexican economy**

**A.2.1. Mexican markets**

In the international context described, the Mexican
peso appreciated against the US dollar since
Mexico’s last monetary policy decision and its
volatility decreased. Interest rates registered


J M  M  J  S  N  J  M M J  S  N  J M  M  J  S  N  J M  M  J  S N  J M

2020 2021 2022 2023 2024

Source: Bloomberg.


17


-----

Interest rates on government securities increased up
to 32 basis points along the entire curve (Chart 10).
The yields on real-rate instruments increased up to
55 basis points. In this context, breakeven inflation
implicit in spreads between nominal and real rates of
market instruments decreased by up to 20 basis
points (Chart 11). These adjustments occurred in an
environment where trading conditions somewhat
improved.

**Chart 10**

**Nominal yield curve of government securities**

Percent, basis points

12.0 35

#REF! 30

11.5

25

11.0 20

10.5 15

10

10.0

5

9.5 0

9.0 -5

-10

8.5

-15

8.0 -20

February 1, 2024
March 14, 2024
Change (February 1, 2024 to March 14, 2024)
Trading range over the period

Source: PIP.

**Chart 11**

**Breakeven inflation and inflation risk implied**

**in government securities’ yields[1/]**

Basis points

600

550

500

450

400

350

3-year

300 10-year

20-year
30-year

250

J A J O J A J O J A J O J

2021 2022 2023 2024

1/ The horizontal lines refer to the respective averages observed from
September 2008 to date.
Source: PIP.

Regarding expectations for the path of the monetary
policy reference rate, information implicit in the
interest rate swap curve incorporates the first 25basis-point cut in March 2024 and an expectation of
9.78% for the target rate for the end of 2024 (Chart
12). Similarly, most analysts surveyed by


Citibanamex anticipate that the first 25 basis-point
cut will be made in March 2024.

**Chart 12**

**Interbank funding rate implied in TIIE swaps**

|Col1|Chart 12 bank funding rate implied in TIIE swaps Percent|
|---|---|
|||
|10.50 9.50 8.50 7.50 6.50 5.50 4.50|Banxico overnight rate (reference rate) Implied interest rate in TIIE swaps for 03/14/24|


2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023

s. a. / Seasonally adjusted figures. The chart’s range was adjusted to
facilitate its reading.
Source: Mexico’s System of National Accounts (SCNM, for its Spanish
acronym), INEGI.

18


4.50

3.50


Implied interest rate in TIIE swaps for 02/01/24

J A  J   O   J   A  J   O   J  A   J   O  J   A   J   O

2021           2022          2023          2024


Note: Shaded areas represent the range since the last monetary policy
decision.
Source: PIP.

**A.2.2. Economic activity in Mexico**

The Mexican economy slowed down considerably at
the end of 2023, as Mexico’s GDP registered a
seasonally adjusted quarterly variation of 0.08%
(Chart 13). While information for the first quarter of
2024 is limited, economic activity is expected to have
shown greater dynamism during said period
compared to the weakness observed in the fourth
quarter of 2023.


**Chart 13**

**Gross Domestic Product**

Quarterly percentage change, s. a.


5

4

3

2

1

0

-1

-2

-3

-4


Q-IV


I


II III IV I


II III IV I


II III IV I


II III IV I


II III IV I


II III IV I


II III IV


-----

Regarding the evolution of domestic demand,
available information up to the fourth quarter of 2023
indicates that private consumption continued

trending upwards, reflecting a moderate positive
trajectory of consumption of domestic goods and
services, while consumption of imported goods
remained at high levels. Gross fixed investment,
which had been exhibiting dynamism in previous
quarters, lost momentum. As for this indicator’s
components, the machinery and equipment segment
slowed down significantly, while investment in
construction slightly contracted. Regarding external
demand, in early 2024, the value of manufacturing
exports decreased and remained sluggish. This was
the result of decreases in automotive shipments and
stagnation in the rest of manufacturing exports
(Chart 14).

**Chart 14**

**Total manufacturing exports**

Indices 2019 = 100, s. a.

160

Total

Automotive

140

Non-automotive

120

100

80

60

10.4 January

40

J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J

2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 2024

s. a. / Seasonally adjusted series and trend series based on data in nominal
US dollars. The former is represented by a solid line and the latter by a
dotted line. The chart’s range was adjusted to facilitate its reading.
Source: Prepared by Banco de México with data from the Tax
Administration Service (SAT, for its Spanish acronym), the Ministry of the
Economy (SE, for its Spanish acronym), Banco de México, the National
Institute of Statistics and Geography (INEGI, for its Spanish acronym).
Mexico’s Merchandise Trade Balance. The National System of Statistical
and Geographical Information (SNIEG, for its Spanish acronym).
Information of national interest.

On the production side, at the end of 2023, services
exhibited sluggishness and a differentiated behavior
across sectors (Chart 15). In January 2024, industrial
production increased moderately, after having
decreased at a monthly rate for two consecutive
months (Chart 16). Within its components,

construction increased and remained at historically
high levels. Manufacturing production grew at the
margin, while still exhibiting weakness.


s. a. / Seasonally adjusted series and trend series. The former is
represented by a solid line and the latter by a dotted line. The chart’s range
was adjusted to facilitate its reading.
1/ Figures as of December 2023.
2/ Figures as of January 2024 from the Monthly Indicator of Industrial
Activity.
Source: Mexico’s System of National Accounts (SCNM, for its Spanish
acronym), INEGI.

**Chart 16**

**Industrial activity[1/]**

Indices 2019 = 100, s. a.

125

115

105

95

85 Total

Mining (12%)

75

Manufacturing (63%)

Construction (19%)

65

Utilities (6%)

January

55

J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J

2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 2024

s. a. / Seasonally adjusted series and trend series. The former is
represented by a solid line and the latter by a dotted line.
1/ Figures in parenthesis correspond to their share in the total in 2018.
Source: Mexico’s System of National Accounts (SCNM, for its Spanish
acronym), INEGI.

Regarding the cyclical position of the economy, as a
result of the deceleration of the economy observed
in the fourth quarter of 2023, the point estimate of the
output gap decreased at the margin, although it
remained in positive territory and continued without
being statistically different from zero (Chart 17). In
January 2024, the labor market continued showing
strength. Specifically, based on seasonally adjusted
figures, both national and urban unemployment rates
remained at low levels, similar to those registered in
December 2023 (Chart 18). In February 2024, the
number of newly created IMSS-insured jobs
continued increasing, with seasonally adjusted data.

19


**Chart 15**

**Indicators of economic activity**

Indices 2019 = 100, s. a.


115

110

105

100

95

90

85

J

2017


December

January

A J O J

2024


-----

Lastly, in January 2024, unit labor costs in the
manufacturing sector decreased, although they
remained at relatively high levels (Chart 19).

**Chart 17**

**Output gap estimates[1/]**

Percent of potential output, s. a.

12

8

4

0

-4

-8

-12

Global Economic Activity

-16 Index (IGAE) 2/

Gross Domestic Product 2/

-20 Q-IV

95% confidence interval 3/ December

-24

J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O D

2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023

s. a. / Calculations based on seasonally adjusted figures.
1/ Output gap estimated with a tail-corrected Hodrick-Prescott filter; see
Banco de México (2009), “Inflation Report, April-June 2009”, p.69.
2/ GDP flash estimate up to the fourth quarter of 2023 and IGAE up to
December 2023.
3/ Output gap confidence interval calculated with a method of unobserved
components.
Source: Prepared by Banco de México with INEGI data.

**Chart 18**

**National and urban unemployment rates**

Percent, s. a.

6.5

6.0

5.5

5.0

4.5

4.0

3.5

3.0

Urban unemployment rate

2.5

National unemployment rate January

2.0

J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J

2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 2024

s. a. / Seasonally adjusted series and trend series. The former is
represented by a solid line and the latter by a dotted line.
Source: Prepared by Banco de México with data from ENOE, ETOE (from
April to June 2020), and ENOE new edition (ENOE[N]) (from July to
December 2022).


115

Unit labor costs 140.7

110 Productivity

105

100

95

90

January

85

J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J

2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 2024

s. a. / Seasonally adjusted series and trend series. The former is
represented by a solid line and the latter by a dotted line. The chart’s range
was adjusted to facilitate its reading.
1/ Productivity based on hours worked.
Source: Prepared by Banco de México with seasonally adjusted data of the
Monthly Manufacturing Industry Survey and industrial activity indicators of
Mexico’s System of National Accounts (Sistema de Cuentas Nacionales de
_México, SCNM), INEGI._

In January 2024, domestic financing to the private
sector showed some moderation in its growth rate,
after having exhibited dynamism in 2023. Regarding
its components, bank lending to firms and
households reduced its growth rate slightly with
respect to the previous months (Chart 20). However,
high growth rates continued to be observed in
several segments, especially in consumer credit.

As for the cost of financing, interest rates on bank
credit to firms did not show significant changes in
January 2024 and thus remained at high levels.
However, corporate credit intermediation margins in
this segment continued to be generally lower than
pre-pandemic ones. Interest rates on mortgages
remained at levels similar to those observed prior to
the health emergency. Within consumer credit, credit
card interest rates continued increasing slightly in
October 2023, and thus they have been adjusting
with a lag to changes in the reference rate. Lastly,
interest rates on payroll loans have remained
relatively stable since August 2021.

20


**Chart 19**

**Productivity and unit labor costs**

**in the manufacturing sector[1/]**

Indices 2019 = 100, s. a.


-----

As for portfolio quality, delinquency rates of bank
credit to the private sector remained at low levels in
January 2024. In the case of consumer portfolio,
these indicators increased during that month,
extending the upward trend observed since the first
half of 2023. Despite the above, said rates remain at
levels lower than those registered prior to the onset
of the pandemic.

**Chart 20**

**Performing credit from commercial banks**

**to the private sector**

Annual percentage change

15

10

5

0

-5

-10 Consumption

Mortgage 1/

-15

Firms2/ January

-20

J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J

2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 2024

1/ Adjusted to account for the withdrawal from and the incorporation of nonbank financial intermediaries to the credit statistics.
2/ Adjusted for valuation effects due to movements in the exchange rate.
Source: Banco de México.

**A.2.3. Development of inflation and inflation**
**outlook**

Annual headline inflation decreased from 4.88% in
January to 4.40% in February 2024. This result
mainly derived from the reduction in non-core
inflation, although the core component also
contributed to the decrease (Chart 21 and Table 1).

Annual core inflation decreased from 4.76 to 4.64%
between January and February 2024. This

performance reflected the continued decline in
annual merchandise inflation, while services inflation
remained without showing a clear inflection point to
the downside (Chart 22). During the mentioned
period, annual merchandise inflation decreased from
4.37 to 4.11%, marking fifteen consecutive months
of decline. Specifically, annual food merchandise
inflation decreased from 5.54 to 5.25% and non-food
merchandise inflation did so from 2.97 to 2.75%
(Chart 23). Meanwhile, annual services inflation
increased from 5.25 to 5.30% during the same
period, as it remained affected by pressures related
to operating costs and their pass-through to
consumer prices. As to its components, annual
housing inflation increased from 3.64 to 3.73% and
inflation of services other than housing and
education adjusted upwards from 6.29 to 6.36%.


Annual inflation of education services remained at
high levels, although during the referred period it fell
from 6.63 to 6.39%.

**Chart 21**

**Consumer Price Index**

Annual percentage change

14 CPI
13 Core
12 Non-core
11
10

9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0

-1 February
-2
-3

J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J

2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 2024

Source: INEGI.


**Chart 22**

**Merchandise and services’ core price subindex**

Annual percentage change

12

Merchandise

11 Services

10

9

8

7

6

5

4

3

2

1

February

0

J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J

2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 2024

Source: INEGI.

21


-----

**Chart 23**

**Merchandise core price subindex**

Annual percentage change


16

Food, beverages and tobacco

14 Non-food merchandise

12

10

8

6

4

2

February

0

J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J

2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 2024


Source: INEGI.

Between January and February 2024, annual noncore inflation decreased from 5.24 to 3.67% as a
result of the decline from 9.75 to 4.77% in annual
inflation of agricultural products (Chart 24 and Table
1). Within the latter component, annual inflation of
fruit and vegetables decreased from 21.78 to 15.00%
and inflation of livestock products declined from
-0.19 to -3.23%. In contrast, annual inflation of
energy products rose from 0.21 to 2.28% during the
same period, driven mainly by the increase from 2.12
to 3.86% in the annual variations of gasoline prices
and from -7.59 to -2.18% in LP gas prices.

**Chart 24**

**Non-core price subindex**

Annual percentage change

25

20

15

10

5

0

-5

Non-core

-10 Agricultural and livestock products

Energy and government-authorized prices February

-15

J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J

2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 2024

Source: INEGI.


Regarding inflation expectations drawn from the
survey conducted by Banco de México among
private sector specialists, between January and
February 2024 the median for headline inflation for
the end of 2024 decreased from 4.17 to 4.10% and
that for core inflation remained stable at 4.06%.
Expectations for headline inflation for the end of
2025 decreased marginally. The median of headline
inflation expectations adjusted from 3.71 to 3.70%,
while that of core inflation shifted from 3.72 to 3.69%.
The medians of headline inflation expectations for
the next four years adjusted slightly downwards,
from 3.70 to 3.68% both for headline and core
inflation. The medians of headline and core inflation
expectations for the long term (5 to 8 years)
remained stable at 3.50%. Finally, breakeven
inflation has decreased since the previous monetary
policy decision. Regarding its components, inflation
expectations implied by market instruments

decreased slightly. Similarly, the inflation risk
premium adjusted downwards.

Headline inflation is still projected to converge to its
target in the second quarter of 2025. This forecast is
subject to risks. On the upside: i) persistence of core
inflation; ii) foreign exchange depreciation; iii)
greater cost-related pressures; iv) a greater-thanexpected resilience of the economy; v) climaterelated impacts, and vi) the intensification of
geopolitical conflicts. On the downside: i) a greaterthan-anticipated slowdown of the world economy; ii)
a lower pass-through from some cost-related
pressures, and iii) that the lower levels registered by
Mexico’s exchange rate in relation to the first months
of 2023 contribute more than anticipated to reduce
certain pressures on inflation. The balance of risks
for the trajectory of inflation within the forecast
horizon is considered to remain biased to the upside.

22


-----

**Table 1**

**Consumer Price Index and components**

Annual percentage change

**Item** **December 2023** **January 2024** **February 2024**

**CPI** **4.66** **4.88** **4.40**

**SubyacenteCore** **5.09** **4.76** **4.64**

**Merchandise** **4.89** **4.37** **4.11**

Food, beverages and tobacco 6.25 5.54 5.25

Non-food merchandise 3.28 2.97 2.75

**Services** **5.33** **5.25** **5.30**

Housing 3.64 3.64 3.73

Education (tuitions) 6.60 6.63 6.39

Other services 6.46 6.29 6.36

**No SubyacenteNon-core** **3.39** **5.24** **3.67**

**Agricultural and livestock products** **5.66** **9.75** **4.77**

Fruits and vegetablesFruits abd vegetables 11.68 21.78 15.00

Livestock productsLivestock 0.68 -0.19 -3.23

**Energy and government-authorized prices Energéticos y Tarifas Aut. por Gobierno** **1.46** **1.41** **2.75**

Energy productsEnergy 0.06 0.21 2.28

Government-authorized pricesTarifas Autorizadas por Gobierno 4.82 4.29 3.87

Source:INEGI.


-----

-----

