-----

-----

**FOREWARNING**
This document is provided for the reader’s convenience
only. The translation from the official Spanish version was
made by Banco de México’s staff. Discrepancies may
arise between the original document in Spanish and its
English translation. For this reason, the original Spanish
version is the only official document.


**1. PLACE, DATE AND PARTICIPANTS**

**1.1. Place: Meeting held by virtual means.**

**1.2. Date of Governing Board meeting: September**
25, 2024.

**1.3. Participants:**

- Victoria Rodríguez, Governor.

- Galia Borja, Deputy Governor.

- Irene Espinosa, Deputy Governor.

- Jonathan Heath, Deputy Governor.

- Omar Mejía, Deputy Governor.

- Rogelio Ramírez de la O, Secretary of Finance and

Public Credit.

- Gabriel Yorio, Undersecretary of Finance and

Public Credit.

- María Elena Méndez, Secretary of the Governing

Board.

Prior to this meeting, preliminary work by Banco de
México’s staff analyzing the economic and financial
environment as well as the developments in inflation
and the determinants and outlook for inflation, was
conducted and presented to the Governing Board
(see Annex).

**2. ANALYSIS AND RATIONALE BEHIND THE**
**GOVERNING BOARD’S VOTING**

**_International environment_**

**Some** **members** of the Board mentioned that
available indicators suggest that during the third
quarter of 2024 world economic activity grew at a rate
similar to that of the previous quarter. One member
considered that it has continued expanding at a
moderate pace. **Most members highlighted that**
**performance** **was** **heterogeneous** **across**

**countries. One member noted that, relative to the**
first half of the year, the lower rate of expansion in
advanced economies has been offset by a strongerthan-anticipated recovery in emerging economies.
**Most members noted that growth continues**
**being driven mainly by the services sector. Some**
members highlighted the sluggishness in

manufacturing. One member underlined that, looking


ahead, the expectation of a mild slowdown in global
growth in 2024 and 2025 prevails, and thus a “soft
landing” is still anticipated. However, he/she
cautioned that such scenario is subject to high
uncertainty. He/she warned that among the most
relevant risks for global economic performance are
those associated with the electoral process in the
United States, the loss of dynamism in the Chinese
economy, the escalation of geopolitical conflicts, and
the high level of fiscal deficits in several economies.
In the case of the United States, **another member**
considered that the fading of factors that once
supported the resilience of its economy, such as the
financial position of households, which is already
weakening, suggests that some downward risks
have gained relevance. **One member added that,**
according to analysts, the probability of a recession
in that country in the next 12 months is still low.
However, he/she recalled that about 80% of them
consider that the full impact of interest rates on that
economy has not yet materialized.

**Most members noted that labor markets in the**
**major advanced economies have shown signs of**
**lower dynamism. Some members pointed out that**
unemployment gaps have been narrowing in several
of these economies, except for the euro area, as
noted by **one member.** **In the case of the United**
**States, most members highlighted the better**
**balance between supply and demand in the labor**
**market. Some members pointed out that wage**
growth in that country has been declining. They
indicated that the unemployment rate has been
increasing and is above 4%.

**Most members agreed that the disinflation**
**process continues at the global level. Some**
members noted the differentiated behavior of
inflation across countries. **Some** members

highlighted that headline inflation in advanced
economies is currently closer to central banks'
targets, as compared to the beginning of the year.
**One member added that in these economies, the**
trimmed mean indicator of headline inflation shows a
downward trend. **Most members mentioned that**
**the recent moderation of headline inflation in**
**these economies was mainly due to reductions in**
**the non-core component. One member detailed**
that the latter is associated with lower food inflation.
He/she added that, in contrast, in some cases, core
inflation rebounded at the margin. **Some members**
highlighted that this component, especially the
services segment, continues showing persistence.
However, **one member argued that, although core**
inflation is declining moderately, it lies below the
levels of the beginning of 2024. In the particular case

1


-----

of the United States, some members highlighted the
favorable behavior of headline inflation, which
decreased from 2.9% in July to 2.5% in August.
Regarding emerging economies, **one member**
mentioned that inflation’s behavior has been more
favorable in Asia and emerging Europe than in Latin
America. He/she pointed out that in a large number
of emerging economies, headline inflation lay within
the central banks' variability range. Another member
commented that it registered decreases in these
economies due to a moderation in food and energy
inflation. However, he/she acknowledged that the
core component remains elevated.

Regarding international commodity prices, **some**
members mentioned that energy prices trended
downwards due to the expectation of increased
production by OPEC. One member argued that the
expectation of lower global economic growth was
also a contributing factor. **Another member added**
that there was a rebound in wheat, corn and sugar
prices due to climate-related factors affecting various
regions. He/she stated that metal prices also
increased due to supply issues in Russia.

**All members highlighted that the US Federal**
**Reserve cut the target range for the federal funds**
**rate by 50 basis points. Most members noted that**
**the magnitude of the adjustment had not been**
**fully incorporated by the markets ahead of the**
**decision. One member commented that rate cuts of**
such magnitude have only occurred in episodes of
marked deceleration, such as in 2001, 2008 and
2020. However, he/she pointed out that in the press
conference, the chairman of that institution argued
that the labor market and the economy continue
showing a solid performance, and thus he foresees
that the magnitude of the rate cut could help maintain
the strength of the labor market and the economy.
**Some members highlighted that in its statement the**
Federal Open Market Committee indicated that has
gained greater confidence that inflation is moving
sustainably toward its target. **One member added**
that commitment to the maximum employment
mandate was also highlighted. **Another member**
underlined the reference that risks to achieving its
employment and inflation goals are in balance. Some
members indicated that the Federal Open Market
Committee projections point to an additional
cumulative loosening of 50 basis points for the
remainder of 2024. **One member added that**
additional cuts of 100 basis points are expected in
2025. However, **another member pointed out that**
the chairman of said institution mentioned that there
is no predefined trajectory for the reference rate.


**The majority noted that the central banks of other**
**advanced** **economies** **also** **lowered** **their**

**reference rates. They detailed that the European**
**Central Bank and the Bank of Canada cut their**
**reference rates again by 25 basis points. One**
member highlighted that these institutions did not
commit to a predetermined path for the reference
rate and that they maintained a data-dependent
approach. As for the European Central Bank's
decision, **some members indicated that said**
institution noted the resistance to decline of the
services component. **One member added that said**
central bank also emphasized the tightness of the
euro area's labor market. **Another member stated**
that the rate cut was implemented while that
institution still anticipates a slight rebound in inflation
towards the end of the year. Regarding the Bank of
Canada, he/she highlighted that, in its monetary
policy statement, it noted that downside risks to
inflation continue gaining relevance. Some members
pointed out that the Bank of England left its reference
rate unchanged. One member indicated that this was
in line with the cautious tone of its previous policy
decision. Some members commented that the Bank
of Japan also left its target rate unchanged, although
a second-rate hike is expected for the rest of the
year. **Some members mentioned that markets**
anticipate that, looking ahead, the moderation of
monetary restriction will continue in most advanced
economies. **One member estimated that the**
monetary policy normalization cycle will be a
discontinuous process, in terms of both sequence
and magnitude. Regarding emerging economies,
**another member highlighted the heterogeneity of**
their monetary cycles. However, he/she detailed that
most of them are expected to continue reducing their
monetary restriction until they converge to their
neutral positions in 2025. One member noted that the
Bank of Brazil increased its reference rate by 25
basis points and stated that the inflationary outlook
will require a more restrictive monetary policy stance.

**The majority commented that volatility in**
**international financial markets eased in the last**
**few weeks. They noted that given the prospects**
**of reference rate cuts by several central banks,**
**government interest rates decreased, mainly**
**short-term ones. They mentioned that gains in**
**the main stock market indexes and a generalized**
**depreciation of the US dollar were registered.**
**One member added that in recent weeks the**
performance of financial markets showed greater
heterogeneity by region and asset class.

2


-----

**_Economic activity in Mexico_**

**All members agreed that Mexico's economic**
**activity is undergoing a period of weakness. The**
**majority indicated that it has registered a visible**
**loss of dynamism since the last quarter of 2023.**
**One member underlined that the national accounts**
data published at the end of August showed
downward revisions for the most recent quarterly
variations, indicating that the economy has been
practically stagnant. **Another member stated that**
data for the second quarter showed that the
slowdown has taken place in both supply and
demand. **One member attributed the economic**
weakness to the uncertain environment associated
with idiosyncratic factors, as well as to the
expectation of a lower US economic activity and to
the ongoing electoral process in that country.
**Another member estimated that the lack of**
economic dynamism is a consequence of the
stagnation of US manufacturing production, which
affects the export sector, and of a slowdown in
investment, which typically occurs around federal
government transitions. He/she considered that
despite the signs of a slowdown, an economic
contraction is not anticipated. Most members added
**that information available at the beginning of the**
**third quarter shows a certain rebound. One**
member stated that the IGAE of July increased at a
seasonally adjusted monthly rate of 0.6%. **Some**
members pointed out that this expansion partly
reflected the growth in primary activities. **One**
member noted that this sector rose 11.6% at the
margin. **Another member highlighted that although**
July figures suggest a slight progress, the economy
is expected to maintain its relatively low dynamism
throughout the planning horizon.

Regarding the sectoral performance of economic
activity, **some members emphasized the slowdown**
in secondary and tertiary activities. **One member**
pointed out that sluggish industrial production has
affected wholesale trade, which together with a
weaker evolution of other services has made the
tertiary sector lose dynamism. **Some members**
warned that there is a generalized weakening in
manufacturing components. **One** member pointed
out that two thirds of the subsectors that comprise it
register negative annual variations. Some members
noted that in recent months economic activity
improved slightly, associated with a certain rebound
in construction. **One member mentioned that,**
although building construction has shown dynamism,
civil engineering works have slowed down due to the
completion of different government projects.


**Regarding** **domestic** **demand,** **the** **majority**

**indicated that consumption slowed down. Some**
**members considered that it has even stagnated.**
**Most members highlighted that this component**
**contracted in the second quarter. One member**
stated that it registered a negative quarterly variation
of 2.20% in seasonally adjusted annualized figures.
He/she member indicated that this setback is the first
one since mid-2020. **Most members noted a**
**contraction in consumption of imported goods.**
**One member pointed out that social transfer**
payments were brought forward to the first quarter,
and thus their absence in the second quarter would
have partly explained the observed trend in
consumption. He/she argued that these payments
resume in the third quarter, consumption is expected
to rebound to some extent. He/she added that,
looking ahead, other factors would also support
consumption dynamics, such as the increase in
income from remittances denominated in pesos,
boosted by the recent exchange rate depreciation, as
well as wage revisions. However, **another member**
mentioned that several indicators related to

consumption as well as timely data indicate that its
moderation will continue.

**Most members pointed out that investment has**
**continued registering a lack of dynamism since**
**mid-2023. They noted that this was observed in**
**all its categories. As for external demand,** **one**
member indicated that it has remained sluggish.
**However, most members pointed out that the**
**value of both automotive and non-automotive**
**manufacturing** **exports** **showed** **some**

**reactivation in July. One member noted that this**
was mainly due to an improvement in shipments to
the United States.

Regarding the cyclical position of the economy,
**some members indicated that the point estimate of**
the output gap calculated with GDP data continued
narrowing from positive levels. **Some members**
pointed out that it is expected to remain close to zero
in the remainder of 2024 and to be persistently
negative in 2025. **One member stated that a**
significant negative gap is unlikely, since a recession
is not expected. **Another member indicated that**
some slack indicators, such as the labor market,
remain in positive territory. One member noted that
the indicator based on principal components has
become less positive, in light of a slightly negative
consumption gap. He/she recalled that, in general,
measuring economic slack involves a high degree of
uncertainty. However, he/she pointed out that hard
data confirm the economic slowdown. He/she
considered that the cyclical conditions of the

3


-----

economy could continue to be a relevant factor in the
price formation process.

**Some members stated that Mexico's economic**
activity is expected to expand at a moderate pace in
2024 and 2025. Some members considered that the
balance of risks to growth of economic activity
remains biased to the downside. **One member**
argued that a downward risk factor that has gained
relevance is the possibility of a lower-than-expected
growth of the US economy, to the detriment of
Mexico's external demand. He/she added that
another risk is the environment of high uncertainty
that prevails due to both domestic and external
factors.

**All members indicated that the labor market**
**remains solid. Most members highlighted that**
**the unemployment rate remains close to its**
**historic lows.** **One member underlined that labor**
force participation rates are at levels similar to those
observed prior to the pandemic. **Another member**
stated that both the participation rate and the
employment-to-working-age population ratio remain
high. **However, all members acknowledged that**
**job creation has slowed down.** **One member**
indicated that recent readings suggest that after
having shown high dynamism, growth of employed
population has aligned more closely with its prepandemic trend. **Another member underlined that**
the slowdown in job creation is visible both in the
employed population reported by the ENOE and in
IMSS-insured jobs. He/she detailed that lower job
creation is more noticeable in construction,

manufacturing and trade, and therefore it seems to
be closely associated with the weakness of the
industrial sector. **One member added that the**
slowdown in the pace of employment growth could
intensify due to the weakness of the prevailing
economic activity. Some members mentioned that,
nevertheless, wage increases remain high. **One**
member detailed that average IMSS-insured wages
increased by 4.5% in real terms. **Another member**
highlighted that the annual variation of nominal
wages of IMSS-insured workers stood at 9.7% in
August. He/she added that the negotiation of
contractual wages in private firms resulted in an
increase of 9.3% in the same month. However, one
member argued that wage growth shows some
moderation. **Another member added that the**
distribution of wage revisions in recent years has
been affected by past inflation figures and by
increases in the minimum wage. He/she pointed out
that these benchmarks are expected to be lower in
2025, which would influence wage dynamics.


**_Inflation in Mexico_**

**Most members agreed that Mexico's inflation**
**outlook has been improving, after the significant**
**global shocks of previous years. However, they**
**forewarned that it still faces challenges. One**
member stated that the current level of core inflation
is evidence of this improvement. **Some members**
considered that the gradual reversal of the shocks
associated with the pandemic and geopolitical
conflicts as well as a timely and consistent restrictive
monetary policy by the central bank have contributed
to the significant disinflation progress. One member
pointed out that this process has been

heterogeneous across inflation components and
non-linear.

**Most members underlined that headline inflation**
**decreased from 5.57% in July to 4.66% in the first**
**fortnight of September. One member highlighted**
that headline inflation started to decrease after
having increased for five consecutive months.
**Another member warned that, although headline**
inflation is beginning to resume a downward trend, it
is still above the levels observed in October 2023.
**The majority pointed out that this decline was**
**mainly due to the partial reversal of the effects of**
**the supply shocks that have affected non-core**
**inflation. They commented that this reversal was**
**already anticipated. One member noted that non-**
core inflation’s contribution was greater than that of
core inflation. **Another member detailed that**
headline inflation was affected by the prices of
various fruits and vegetables, along with increases in
some energy prices mainly due to higher

international references. **Some** members

emphasized that given the nature of the shocks and
the fact that their effects concentrated in few CPI
items, these did not lead to a generalized increase in
prices. **One member added that various trend**
indicators, such as inflation’s trimmed mean, showed
low sensitivity to these shocks. He/she noted that,
instead, what took place was an adjustment of
relative prices. **Another member pointed out that**
there are no signs of a pass-through of the
aforementioned shocks, which are temporary, to the
core component.

**All members noted that core inflation continued**
**trending downwards, registering 3.95% in the**
**first fortnight of September. Some members**
emphasized that this component has clearly trended
downwards for almost two years. **One member**
underlined that it is currently at levels unseen since
the first quarter of 2021. Some members highlighted
that since November 2022, when it peaked during the

4


-----

current inflationary episode, this indicator has
decreased 456 basis points. **Some members noted**
that the rate of decline of this component has slowed
down recently. Nevertheless, **one member pointed**
out that the average of the last 6 months of the
seasonally adjusted annualized monthly variation,
which stands at 3.4%, better reflects its most recent
favorable behavior.

**Some members noted that annual merchandise**
inflation stood at 2.94% in the first fortnight of
September. **One member emphasized that such**
level had not been reached since early 2016. **Most**
**members mentioned that in its last reading food**
**merchandise inflation was 3.95%, while that of**
**non-food merchandise was 1.69%, in both cases**
**clearly** **below** **their** **respective** **historical**

**averages.** **One member stated that these values**
have not yet reached their respective historical
minimum values. He/she specified that the 3-month
averages of the seasonally adjusted annualized
monthly variations of these subcomponents are at
2.72 and 1.14%, respectively. **Another member**
detailed that the last time food merchandise inflation
was below 4.0% was eight years ago. One member
recalled that, in this episode, both components
reached their highest levels since the inflation
targeting regime was adopted in Mexico. **Some**
members considered that merchandise inflation will
hardly continue declining.

**All members stated that services inflation**
**continues showing persistence. Some members**
mentioned that between July and the first fortnight of
September it went from 5.22 to 5.15%. One member
noted that it remained at levels close to those
registered over the past 14 months. **Another**
member highlighted that it has been above 5% since
the second fortnight of July 2022, exhibiting a lateral
behavior since then. **One member stated that the**
components of services inflation have exhibited a
differentiated behavior among them. He/she pointed
out that the improvement in the category of other
services has been the most notable compared to the
levels reached at the beginning of 2023. He/she
argued that its recent increase partly responds to the
rise in tourism services prices, which are volatile.
He/she highlighted that in the first fortnight of
September, the variation at the margin of services
excluding education, housing and tourism

was -0.07%, laying below its historical average and
being the lowest variation for an equivalent fortnight
since 2020. He/she added that while services
inflation remains high, it is necessary to acknowledge
the signs of improvement. **Another member stated**
that the dynamics of services prices have been highly


correlated with the evolution of wages. He/she noted
that this has resulted in relevant costs in several key
subcomponents, such as housing and other services.
He/she indicated that these cost-related pressures
have passed on to final prices, given the resilience
that the economy had exhibited. However, he/she
argued that this behavior is unlikely to continue
indefinitely, given that, in view of the decline in
inflation and minimum wage increases lower than
those observed in previous years, wage revisions are
expected to moderate.

**With** **respect** **to** **non-core** **inflation,** **most**

**members indicated that it declined significantly**
**from 10.36% in July to 6.73% in the first fortnight**
**of September. One member highlighted that this**
component interrupted the upward trend it had been
displaying since last February. Another member
added that said reversal was greater than expected.
**The majority stated that this was due to the**
**decline in inflation both of agricultural and**
**livestock products and of energy. Some members**
pointed out that annual inflation of agricultural and
livestock products decreased from 13.72 to 6.50%,
while inflation of energy products shifted from 9.17 to
7.92% in the same period. Some members recalled
that the non-core component is highly volatile. **One**
member added that at times it exhibits a significant
downward trend, improving headline inflation’s
performance, but at other times it exerts an upward
influence.

**Some** members considered that inflation

expectations drawn from surveys remained relatively
stable. Some members mentioned that these remain
above Banco de México's forecasts. **One member**
stated that, overall, they continue without showing a
downward trend. He/she indicated that the median of
headline inflation expectations for year-end 2024
increased, while those for the end of 2025 and the
next 12 months declined. Another member pointed
out that short-term expectations have evolved in line
with their historical averages and noted that their
dynamics are unlike those observed during 2021 and
2022. **One member underlined that, according to**
surveys, core inflation is projected to lie at levels
similar to the current ones by the end of 2025. Some
members commented that medium- and long-term
expectations remain at levels above target. **One**
member noted that expectations for the next 4 years
increased, while those for the next 5 to 8 years
remained unchanged. **Another member attributed**
the resistance to decline of headline inflation
expectations to the anticipated behavior of the noncore component, since medium- and long-term
expectations of core inflation have registered

5


-----

downward adjustments. Regarding inflation

expectations drawn from market instruments, some
members reported that these declined marginally.
**One member added that they have exhibited inertia.**
**Another member stated that they also remain above**
Banco de México's forecasts. **One member noted**
that there was a decrease in the risk premium and in
the breakeven inflation rate derived from market
instruments.

**Most members mentioned that forecasts for**
**headline and core inflation were revised slightly**
**downwards for some quarters in the short term.**
**Some members commented that, in the case of**
headline inflation, it was due to a faster-thananticipated reversal in supply shocks. **Most**

**members stated that headline inflation is**
**expected to resume its downward trend, and core**
**inflation, to continue trending downwards. Some**
members pointed out that headline inflation is still
expected to converge to the target in the fourth
quarter of 2025. **One member added that core**
inflation is also foreseen to register 3% in that same
quarter.

**The majority considered that the balance of risks**
**for the trajectory of inflation within the forecast**
**horizon remains biased to the upside. One**
member argued that such bias persists even when
accounting for the observed and expected weakness
of economic activity. **Another member highlighted**
that, after the global shocks, the inflation

environment continues improving. **One member**
specified that, based on risk distribution estimates
derived from economic conditions for core inflation,
the latter has improved throughout the year.

**Most members mentioned the persistence of**
**core inflation as an upward risk. Some members**
specifically highlighted the services component. One
member added the risk that merchandise inflation
may rebound, reverting to its historical average, and
that services inflation fails to decrease due to
domestic pressures. **Some member underlined the**
risk of a greater exchange rate depreciation. **One**
member mentioned the possibility of climate-related
impacts on the prices of agricultural and livestock
products. **Some members pointed to the risk of**
greater cost-related pressures. **One member noted**
the possibility of additional increases to the minimum
wage in early 2025. However, **another member**
commented that as the economic slowdown
deepens, the pass-through of costs is expected to
face limits.

Regarding risks to the downside, **some members**
highlighted the possibility of a lower-than-anticipated


economic activity in Mexico or in the United States.
**One member warned that, in his/her opinion, said**
risk has become more relevant. **Another member**
added that the impact of the exchange rate
depreciation on inflation could be of lesser magnitude
than anticipated, as well as the risk of a lower passthrough of certain cost-related pressures.

**_Macrofinancial environment_**

**Most members stated that since the last**
**monetary policy decision financial markets in**
**Mexico continued registering volatility. Some**
members mentioned that, nevertheless, said

volatility has moderated recently. **One member**
added that trading conditions improved, which was
most clearly observed in the fixed-income market.
**Most members underlined that the Mexican peso**
**has traded within a broad range. They indicated**
**that the peso has experienced depreciation**
**episodes, and that such depreciation partially**
**reversed.** **Some** members pointed out that the
exchange rate volatility derived from idiosyncratic
factors, as well as from the unwinding of carry trade
positions against the yen and the evolution of the
electoral process in the United States. One member
considered that the effects of these factors were
partially attenuated by the Federal Reserve’s
monetary policy decision. Some members argued
that, in an uncertain environment, further bouts of
financial volatility cannot be ruled out. One member
emphasized that said volatility could be observed in
the coming months, particularly in November, given
the electoral process in the United States. **Another**
member underlined that the bias towards

depreciation in medium-term expectations prevails
and could materialize due to both idiosyncratic and
global factors. However, **one member added that**
Mexico has robust fundamentals and that the riskadjusted interest rate spread remains among the
most attractive. **Another member considered that**
the central bank should remain vigilant of the orderly
behavior of financial markets.

**Most members noted that the government bond**
**yield curve decreased, especially at the short**
**end.** **One member commented that a similar**
behavior was observed in the interest rate derivatives
market. He/she indicated that the implied trajectory
for the monetary policy rate in TIIE swaps anticipates
a level of 10.46% for the monetary policy decision of
September, 10.14% for the policy decision of
November, and 9.81% for the end of the year. He/she
underlined that a 50-basis point decrease is not ruled
out in the November or December decisions. He/she
added that the consensus of surveyed analysts

6


-----

anticipates an adjustment of 25 basis points at this
monetary policy meeting and a 10.00% policy rate by
the end of 2024. He/she noted that risk premia have
decreased in both default protection insurance and
the spread between yield rates on bonds issued by
the Mexican government and those issued by the US
Treasury. He/she highlighted that the stock market
was not immune to the uncertainty and exhibited high
levels of variability. Another member stated that said
market performed slightly unfavorably, due to the
expectation of lower local growth and increased
uncertainty. He/she stated that financial conditions
tightened further reaching their highest level since
October 2022, as a result of the behavior of variables
related to the foreign exchange market and country
risk. He/she noted that the economic policy
uncertainty index increased significantly in August
and September, due to both domestic and external
factors. One member mentioned that, regarding
capital flows, there were inflows to fixed-income
markets for all maturities.

With respect to financing in the economy, **another**
member stated that in July financing to the nonfinancial private sector continued increasing, albeit at
a slower pace than in recent months. He/she
specified that domestic financing to this sector grew
at an annual rate of 3.3%, exhibiting a lower
dynamism compared to 2023. He/she added that, in
the same month, commercial bank credit to
businesses, consumption and housing also grew at
more moderate rates. Regarding credit risk, he/she
noted that delinquency levels remain low and stable.

**_Monetary policy_**

**The Governing Board assessed the behavior of**
**inflation and its determinants, as well as of**
**inflation expectations. It considered the nature of**
**the shocks that have affected the non-core**
**component and the projection that their effects**
**on headline inflation will continue dissipating**
**over the next quarters. It took into account core**
**inflation’s trajectory and the fact that it is**
**anticipated to continue decreasing. It estimated**
**that, although the outlook for inflation still calls**
**for a restrictive monetary policy stance, its**
**evolution implies that it is adequate to reduce the**
**level of monetary restriction. Thus, with the**
**presence of all its members, the Board decided**
**by majority to lower the target for the overnight**
**interbank interest rate to 10.50%.**

**Looking ahead, the Board expects that the**
**inflationary** **environment** **will** **allow** **further**

**reference rate adjustments. It will consider that**
**global shocks will continue fading and the effects**


**of the weakness in economic activity. It will take**
**into account the incidence of the restrictive**
**monetary policy stance that has been maintained**
**and that prevailing in the future on the evolution**
**of inflation throughout the horizon in which**
**monetary policy operates. Actions will be**
**implemented in such a way that the reference**
**rate remains consistent at all times with the**
**trajectory needed to enable an orderly and**
**sustained convergence of headline inflation to**
**the 3% target during the forecast period. The**
**central bank reaffirms its commitment with its**
**primary mandate and the need to continue its**
**efforts to consolidate an environment of low and**
**stable inflation.**

**One** **member considered that macroeconomic**
conditions and the prospective assessment of the
inflationary environment suggest that the reference
rate can be adjusted downwards once again by 25
basis points to a level of 10.50%. He/she argued that
the level of monetary restriction would thus moderate
in line with the inflation outlook. He/she highlighted
that key factors in this decision are that, first, the
supply shocks that exerted upward pressure on noncore inflation are dissipating and are expected to
continue to do so. In this regard, he/she reiterated
that headline inflation has resumed a downward
trajectory, which is expected to persist over the
following quarters. Second, he/she noted the
substantial progress in reducing core inflation, which
better reflects the medium-term trend of inflation, as
well as the expectation that this component will
continue declining. Third, he/she stressed that the
economic environment is conducive to a sustained
moderation in inflationary pressures. He/she

emphasized that the decline in inflation abroad,
especially in the United States, along with the
weakening of economic activity in Mexico will
continue to support this trend. He/she considered
that it should be communicated that, going forward,
the inflationary environment is expected to allow for
further reductions in the reference rate. He/she
emphasized that, given the levels that core inflation
has already attained, the magnitude of adjustments
could be evaluated. He/she indicated that, in this
process, the incidence of both the restrictive policy
stance that has been maintained and that prevailing
on inflation throughout the horizon in which monetary
policy operates will be considered. He/she also
argued that it must be acknowledged that inflationary
pressures persist, as the effects of the shocks
associated with the pandemic and the military conflict
in Ukraine have not fully dissipated. In that regard,
he/she highlighted that a restrictive monetary policy
stance continues being necessary, like the one that

7


-----

would prevail even after the adjustment to the
reference rate proposed in this monetary policy
meeting and any potential adjustments in future
meetings has been made. He/she added that it is
essential to reinforce the message that Banco de
México will remain committed to attaining its primary
mandate of ensuring the stability of the peso’s
purchasing power, as this is the most effective way
to contribute to the country’s development.

**Another** **member explained that, since the last**
monetary policy meeting, headline inflation and its
components have performed slightly better than
anticipated, opening the possibility of easing
monetary restriction. He/she expressed that the
press release should emphasize that the proposed
25-basis point reduction to the reference rate
indicates progress in the right direction; however, this
does not imply that the fight against inflation is over,
given that significant risks prevail. He/she noted the
importance of conveying that future decisions will be
based on incoming information. He/she warned that
the coming months will likely bring significant
uncertainty due to both external and domestic
factors. Therefore, he/she stated that the monetary
policy stance must remain sufficiently restrictive to
ensure the continuation of the disinflation process.
He/she highlighted the role played in this process by
the exchange rate as a monetary policy transmission
mechanism. He/she recalled that, under the floating
exchange rate regime, the pass-through effect can
be limited if market confidence in the central bank’s
commitment to its primary mandate remains strong.
He/she mentioned that, although weak economic
activity is expected to contribute to the disinflationary
process, this possibility has not yet materialized.
He/she added that services inflation, which better
reflects domestic pressures, keeps showing a
resistance to decline and remains at high levels.
He/she estimated that said persistence could
continue given the resilience of private consumption.
He/she noted that non-core inflation is still above the
level needed for headline inflation to converge to the
target. He/she added that further shocks that could
divert it from its expected downward trajectory cannot
be ruled out. He/she considered that unless a clear
downward trend in this component consolidates,
easing the monetary restriction should be

approached with great vigilance. In short, he/she
argued that significant risks and a high level of
uncertainty persist, which could jeopardize

disinflation, and therefore future decisions should be
made with caution. He/she estimated that adopting a
risk management approach will enhance the
credibility of this central bank in its commitment with
its primary mandate and will increase the likelihood


of achieving the convergence of inflation to the
target.

**One** **member noted that the inflationary outlook is**
consistent with ongoing adjustments to the reference
rate. He/she also mentioned that a decrease in the
tightness conditions of the economy can be
observed, while the distributions of medium- and
long-term inflation expectations remain stable and
anchored. He/she stated that monetary restriction is
well-positioned to manage different risks. Also,
he/she emphasized that, despite volatility in financial
markets in recent months, several metrics indicate an
improvement in trading conditions in both debt and
foreign exchange markets. He/she argued that,
consequently, no deterioration in the functioning of
the monetary policy transmission mechanisms is
perceived, including the multilateral real exchange
rate, which he/she noted is at levels comparable to
those observed in 2015. As a result, he/she
considered that medium-term determinants of
inflation suggest that the process of convergence will
continue. Nevertheless, he/she commented that,
when adjusting the reference rate, the following
factors must be taken into account: i) that the
monetary policy stance is sufficiently restrictive to
ensure the convergence of inflation to its target within
the forecast horizon; ii) that it is as efficient as
possible to facilitate orderly adjustments in price
dynamics, financial markets, and the economy
overall; and iii) that it allows the continued
management of risks to inflation on both sides of the
balance of risks. He/she considered that throughout
the monetary restriction cycle, the response of the
reference rate was more than proportional to the
increase in inflation in terms of both magnitude and
duration. He/she added that the downward

recalibration, which began in March this year, has
been both prudent and gradual, aiming to maintain a
monetary policy stance that mitigates upward risks to
inflation. He/she pointed out that this has led to a
slower monetary cycle compared to previous
episodes. He/she warned that, despite the improved
inflationary outlook, new bouts of volatility cannot be
ruled out, which will continue to require caution from
the central bank. He/she stated that, if the distribution
of risks to inflation continues improving, it may be
advisable to adopt a path of continuous datadependent adjustments, in such a way that the policy
stance is consistent with the constitutional mandate
at all times.

**Another** **member** considered that, although

headline inflation has resumed a downward trend,
more certainty is still needed that progress in the
inflation outlook is significant before lowering the

8


-----

reference rate. He/she warned that long-term
inflation expectations have been anchored for some
time at levels above target because in the past the
central bank did not maintain a restrictive policy
stance for the necessary duration to consolidate
inflation at 3%. He/she argued that, in contrast, the
previous reference rate cuts were initiated

prematurely, and expansionary and accommodative
policy stances were maintained when inflation was
above target. In this regard, he/she noted that
between 2009 and 2016 the ex-ante real interest rate
averaged at levels close to zero. He/she deemed that
the above contributed to generating the perception
that the central bank was content with inflation being
slightly below 4%. He/she added that, in the current
juncture, core inflation, which reflects the mediumterm trend of inflation, is slightly below 4%. He/she
deemed that, as a result, markets currently anticipate
that the existing level of inflation will be tolerated until
the end of 2025, leading to a continuous reduction in
the reference rate. He/she pointed out that this new
opportunity must now be leveraged to avoid sending
the message of complacency as in the past, by
prematurely and automatically confirming a ratecutting cycle. He/she argued that, in contrast, the
degree of certainty about an adjustment of the
monetary policy stance should be assessed in each
decision. He/she added that emphasis should be
placed on core inflation, which is sensitive to
monetary policy actions, rather than on non-core
inflation, which is highly volatile. He/she warned that
it is necessary to break the persistence of services
inflation in order to achieve a further decline in core
inflation. He/she commented that the larger-thanexpected cut to the federal funds rate should be
considered within the context of the Federal
Reserve’s dual mandate. He/she stated that since
Banco de México has a sole inflation mandate, the
evolution of economic activity should not be
overestimated in policy decisions, while more
certainty is required regarding the direction and
magnitude of the new phase in the economic cycle in
order to assess if the reaction function needs to be
recalibrated. He/she also reiterated that lack of
growth in Mexico is not attributed to the monetary
policy stance, but rather to other domestic and
external factors. He/she stressed the importance of
attaining the 3% inflation target despite the
challenging outlook for the rest of 2024 and for 2025.
He/she indicated that having greater confidence that
core inflation continues trending downwards and that
the inflationary outlook continues improving will allow
assessing the level of monetary restriction needed to
reach the inflation target, without undermining the
credibility of the commitment to the price stability
mandate.


**One member recalled that in March the Governing**
Board decided to begin lowering the reference rate,
given the significant progress in the inflation outlook.
He/she highlighted the decrease in both headline and
core inflation from their peaks and a less adverse
balance of risks compared to previous years. He/she
commented that the disinflationary process has
continued albeit with both upward and downward
risks, and therefore has considered it congruent to
adopt a gradual approach in conducting monetary
policy. He/she added that starting in the June
decision, risks to the downside began taking on more
significance, and thus since then there were
arguments supporting the continuation of

adjustments to the monetary policy stance. He/she
stated that the above arguments still hold and new
ones have emerged, further widening the room for
adjustment. He/she highlighted: i) that core inflation
continues trending downwards and that its trajectory
has not been affected by shocks to the non-core
component, which have started to reverse faster than
anticipated; ii) that the evolution of economic activity
continues suggesting an increased slack, as the
output gap has closed and is expected to turn
negative towards the end of 2024; iii) that in recent
weeks volatility in the Mexican peso’s exchange rate
has moderated, and although additional episodes of
depreciation cannot be ruled out, the risk of a greater
pass-through to prices would be offset by other
factors, such as the economy's cyclical conditions;
and iv) that the magnitude of the Federal Reserve's
reference rate cut, previously observed only during
periods of marked economic weakness, creates
room for adjustment in terms of the relative policy
stance, and the signs of a slowdown in the US
economic activity and labor market have further
implications for demand and for the anticipated slack
conditions in Mexico. He/she estimated that the
inflationary context allows to anticipate the continuity
in adjustments to the level of restriction. He/she
added that, in the absence of further shocks,
discussions could begin regarding the level of
reference rate cuts. He/she emphasized that, given
the high degree of restriction achieved, even with
additional adjustments, the reference rate will remain
restrictive, which will be necessary throughout the
forecast horizon. He/she considered that continuing
to adjust the level of monetary restriction is not only
timely but also necessary to conduct monetary policy
efficiently, while addressing the prevailing risks and
considering the progress in the inflation outlook,
ensuring that a policy stance aligned with

convergence is maintained.

9


-----

**3. MONETARY POLICY DECISION**

The Governing Board assessed the behavior of
inflation and its determinants, as well as of inflation
expectations. It considered the nature of the shocks
that have affected the non-core component and the
projection that their effects on headline inflation will
continue dissipating over the next quarters. It took
into account core inflation’s trajectory and the fact
that it is anticipated to continue decreasing. It
estimated that, although the outlook for inflation still
calls for a restrictive monetary policy stance, its
evolution implies that it is adequate to reduce the
level of monetary restriction. Thus, with the presence
of all its members, the Board decided by majority to
lower the target for the overnight interbank interest
rate to 10.50%.

Looking ahead, the Board expects that the
inflationary environment will allow further reference
rate adjustments. It will consider that global shocks
will continue fading and the effects of the weakness
in economic activity. It will take into account the
incidence of the monetary policy stance that has
been maintained and that prevailing in the future on
the evolution of inflation throughout the horizon in
which monetary policy operates. Actions will be
implemented in such a way that the reference rate
remains consistent at all times with the trajectory
needed to enable an orderly and sustained
convergence of headline inflation to the 3% target


during the forecast period. The central bank reaffirms
its commitment with its primary mandate and the
need to continue its efforts to consolidate an
environment of low and stable inflation.

**4. VOTING**

Voting in favor of the decision were Victoria
Rodríguez, Galia Borja, Irene Espinosa, and Omar
Mejía. Jonathan Heath voted in favor of maintaining
the target for the overnight interbank interest rate at
10.75%.

**5. DISSIDENT OPINIONS / VOTES**

Vote: Jonathan Heath.

We need to be patient in order for the current
monetary policy stance to have the desired effect on
the persistence in services inflation. Furthermore,
initiating a cycle of monetary easing prematurely
could send a signal of complacency and that we are
content with the high levels of headline inflation,
since adjustments to the monetary policy stance at
the margin are a more relevant signal than the level
of the monetary restriction per se. For the moment,
we need a bit more time to confirm the trend the
current positive signals seem to suggest as well as
to assess if we need to adjust our reaction function
given the global cyclical and monetary conditions we
will face in the coming months.

10


-----

**ANNEX[]**

The information in this Annex was prepared for this
meeting by the staff of Banco de México’s
Directorate General of Economic Research and
Directorate General of Central Bank Operations. It
does not necessarily reflect the considerations of the
members of the Governing Board as to the monetary
policy decision.

**A.1. External conditions**

**A.1.1. World economic activity**

World economic activity would have expanded
during the third quarter of 2024 at a pace similar to
that observed in the previous one, maintaining
heterogeneity in the pace of growth across countries.
This would reflect, in general, the lower growth in
advanced economies compared to the second
quarter of 2024 and the greater dynamism in
emerging economies. Purchasing Managers' Indices
of August show in increasing divergence between
the manufacturing and services sectors. These
indicators suggest a slowdown in manufacturing
activity in emerging economies, continued weakness
in this sector in advanced economies, and progress
in the services sector at the global level (Chart 1).
World merchandise trade improved during the
quarter ending in July relative to the previous three
months. Among key global risks, the following stand
out: the intensification of geopolitical turmoil, the
protraction of inflationary pressures, greater volatility
in financial markets, and, to a lesser extent, the
challenges to financial stability.

Available indicators in the United States suggest that
gross domestic product (GDP) growth in the third
quarter of 2024 would be similar to that of the second
quarter, which was 0.7% at a seasonally adjusted
quarterly rate (Chart 2).[1] This performance would be
supported by the strength of domestic demand,
mainly private consumption and non-residential
investment.

 Note: In the electronic version of this document the data to
generate all the charts and tables can be obtained by clicking on
them, except for those that are not produced or elaborated by
Banco de México.


s. a. / Seasonally adjusted figures.
1/ The index varies between 0 and 100 points. A reading above 50 points
indicates an expansion and below 50 suggests a contraction. A reading
equal to 50 points indicates no change.
Source: IHS Markit.

**Chart 2**

**US: real GDP and components**

Quarterly percentage rate and contribution

in percentage points, s. a.

3.0

Private consumption expenditures
Residential investment

2.5 Nonresidential investment

Change in private inventories

2.0 Net exports

Government consumption expenditures

1.5 Total

1.0

0.5

0.0

-0.5

-1.0

I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV I II III

2021 2022 2023 2024

s. a. / Seasonally adjusted figures.
Note: The shaded area refers to Atlanta Federal Reserve's GDPNow
forecasts as of September 17.
Source: BEA and Reserve Bank of Atlanta.

1 Expressed as a seasonally adjusted quarterly rate, the change
in US GDP was 3.0% in the second quarter of 2024.

11


**Chart 1**

**Purchasing Managers' Index:**

**production component for advanced,**

**emerging and global economies**

Diffusion index, s. a.[1/]


62

60

58

56

54

52

50

48

46

44

42

40

J

2021


A J O J

2022


A J O J

2023


A J O J

2024


A J

|Chart 2 US: real GDP and components  Quarterly percentage rate and contribution  in percentage points, s. a.|Col2|Col3|Col4|
|---|---|---|---|
|Private consumption expenditures Residential investment Nonresidential investment Change in private inventories Net exports Government consumption expenditures Total||||
|I II III IV 2021|I II III IV 2022|I II III IV 2023|I II III 2024|


-----

US industrial production has remained virtually
stagnant since the fourth quarter of 2022. In August,
it increased at a seasonally adjusted monthly rate of
0.8%, after having contracted 0.9% in July. This rise
was due to an increase of 0.9% in manufacturing and
of 0.8% in mining. The sector of electricity and gas
generation stagnated compared to the previous
month. Purchasing Managers' Indices suggest that
manufacturing activity remained weak in September.

The US labor market continued showing signs of
easing, moving more clearly to a situation of better
balance between labor supply and demand. Nonfarm payrolls continued moderating their pace of
expansion. Between June and August, the threemonth moving average decreased from 147 to 116
thousand new positions on a monthly average,
considering that June and July figures were revised
downwards. The number of job vacancies decreased
from 7.9 million in June to 7.7 million in July. This
indicator has generally maintained a downward trend
since May 2022. After having trended upwards since
the end of April, initial claims for unemployment
insurance have decreased since the first week of
August and stood at 219 thousand new claims in the
week ending September 14. The unemployment rate
decreased marginally from 4.3% in July to 4.2% in
August. Lastly, the annual variation of average
hourly wages rose from 3.9% in July to 4.1% in
August, although this has moderated throughout the
year.[2]

Economic activity in the euro area is expected to
have expanded in the third quarter of 2024 at a
marginally faster pace than that observed in the
second quarter.[3] Available indicators suggest that
the dynamism in the services sector will continue
supporting the recovery, while manufacturing activity
would remain sluggish. The labor market continued
showing strength. The unemployment rate

decreased from 6.5% in June to 6.4% in July,
remaining at historic lows. However, the vacancy
rate has declined and is approaching pre-pandemic
levels.

Regarding the rest of the major advanced
economies, they are expected to expand in the third
quarter of 2024, although most would grow at a
slower pace compared to the previous quarter. Labor
markets in this group of economies have shown, in
general, signs of easing, although they have

2 Average hourly earnings of production and non-supervisory
employees.
3 Expressed as a seasonally adjusted quarterly rate, the change
in euro area GDP was 0.3% in the first quarter of 2024 and 0.2%
in the second quarter. Expressed as a seasonally adjusted


remained solid.

Most major emerging economies are expected to
have shown a greater dynamism in the third quarter
of 2024 compared to the previous quarter, mainly in
emerging Asia. In the particular case of China,
economic activity is expected to have expanded at a
greater pace during the third quarter of 2024
compared to the second quarter, in which it grew
0.7% at a seasonally adjusted quarterly rate.[4] This
acceleration would be explained, primarily, by the
increase in exports. In contrast, retail sales, fixed
investment, and industrial production continued
decelerating in August. In this regard, the Chinese
economy continues facing significant challenges,
due to the weakness of its real estate sector and of
domestic demand, as well as to trade and
technological restrictions imposed by some

countries. The aforementioned, despite the various
stimuli implemented by its authorities to boost
growth.

Since Mexico's last monetary policy decision,
international commodity prices have exhibited a
mixed behavior. Oil prices registered some volatility
associated partly with the conflicts in the Middle East
and Libya. Starting on September, prices decreased
due in part to the expectation of a lower demand from
China. The abovementioned despite the decision of
the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting
Countries and allied countries (OPEC+) to postpone
increasing production until December. By the third
week of September, prices rose somewhat due to
disruptions in oil production in Texas caused by
Hurricane Francine.

Natural gas reference prices generally increased,
although with some volatility. In Asia and Europe,
prices were subject to upward pressures partly due
to concerns about gas supply in the context of the
various geopolitical conflicts. In the United States,
prices increased due to production interruptions
caused by adverse weather conditions in that
country.

Grain prices behaved differently throughout the
period. During the first weeks of August, they
decreased due to the expectation of a greater supply
of grains. However, starting in mid-August, this trend
reversed due to adverse weather conditions in the

annualized quarterly rate, the change in euro area GDP was 1.3%
in the first quarter of 2024 and 0.8% in the second quarter of 2024.
4 Expressed as an annual rate, China’s GDP growth rate was
4.7% in the second quarter of 2024.

12


-----

Americas and Europe, while there was an
expectation of higher demand in several countries.

Industrial metal prices have exhibited some volatility
since Mexico's last monetary policy decision. At the
beginning of the period, prices were driven upwards,
partly because of the resilient growth of the US
economy, although this trend partially reversed due
to the expectation of lower demand from China.
Starting in the second week of September, prices
were subject to upward pressures associated with
prospects of loosening financial conditions. To a
large extent, this expectation also drove precious
metals prices upwards. Thus, gold prices reached
historical highs in the fourth week of September.

**A.1.2. Monetary policy and international financial**
**markets**

In various major advanced economies, annual
headline inflation decreased in its most recent
readings (Chart 3). This reflected lower pressures in
the non-core component. Meanwhile, services
inflation in the core component showed some
persistence. In advanced economies, headline
inflation was closer to their respective central banks'
targets than at the beginning of the year.

In the United States, annual headline inflation
measured by the consumer price index declined from
2.9% in July to 2.5% in August, largely as a result of
a deflation in energy prices. Although annual core
inflation remained relatively stable at 3.2% in July
and August, it is still lower than at the beginning of
the year. The reduction in core inflation so far this
year has been the result of a lower inflation in
services and a higher deflation in goods. Annual
inflation of the personal consumption expenditure
price index has advanced towards the 2% target,
standing at 2.5% in June and July, a level below
those observed earlier this year. Although annual
core inflation has remained relatively stable at
around 2.6% since May, it is below the levels
registered at the beginning of the year. The decline
that this component has shown so far this year has
reflected a reduction in the annual inflation of
services.


1/ The personal consumption expenditures price index (PCE) is used.
2/ The consumer price index (CPI) is used.
Note: The series include information up to August 2024, except for the
United States (PCE), for which the latest available data corresponds to July
2024.
Source: Bureau of Economic Analysis, Bureau of Labor Statistics, Eurostat,
Bank of Japan, the UK Office for National Statistics, and Statistics Canada.

In the euro area, annual headline inflation decreased
from 2.6% in July to 2.2% in August, after having
shown some resistance to decline in previous
months. The recent fall reflected a deflation in energy
prices and a moderate reduction in annual core
inflation. The latter stood at 2.8% in August, after
having remained practically unchanged at 2.9% in
the three previous months.

Analysts' inflation forecasts anticipate headline
inflation in several major advanced economies to be
at levels similar to current ones by the end of 2024,
with a continuing convergence towards their central
banks' inflation targets throughout 2025. Meanwhile,
longer-term inflation expectations drawn from
financial instruments for some of these economies
decreased slightly with respect to expectations
registered in the first week of August. Both short- and
long-term inflation expectations remain at levels
above inflation targets in various advanced

economies.

In emerging economies, the recent behavior of
annual headline inflation was heterogeneous. It rose
in several countries, partly due to a rise in energy
and food inflation, which in some cases has reversed
in recent readings. Despite the above, headline
inflation in a large number of these economies was
within the variability range considered by each of
their central banks.

In this context, since Mexico's last monetary policy
decision, the central banks of the major advanced

13


**Chart 3**

**Selected advanced economies:**

**headline inflation**

Annual percentage change


12

10

8

6

4

2

0

-2

J

2019


J J

2020


J J

2021


J J

2022


J J

2023


J J

2024


J


-----

and emerging economies adjusted their reference
rates in a differentiated manner, considering the
specific circumstances of each country.

In the main advanced economies, various central
banks continued adopting a less restrictive monetary
policy stance by lowering their reference rates and
continuing to gradually reduce their securities'
holdings. The US Federal Reserve cut the federal
funds rate for the first time since 2020 in its
September decision. Similarly, the Reserve Bank of
New Zealand announced its first rate cut in more
than four years in August, while the Bank of Canada
lowered its monetary policy rate for the third
consecutive month in September. The European
Central Bank also announced a decrease in its key
interest rates in September, after having left them
unchanged in July. Other central banks kept their
reference rates unchanged. One of them was the
Bank of England, after having previously lowered
them. In addition, the Bank of Japan decided not to
adjust its reference rate in its most recent decision,
after having raised it in previous months.[5]

Specifically, at its September meeting, the US
Federal Reserve reduced the target range for the
federal funds rate by 50 basis points (bps), after
having left it unchanged for eight consecutive
decisions. The target range is currently between 4.75
and 5.0%. The Federal Open Market Committee
(FOMC) noted that it has gained greater confidence
that inflation is moving steadily toward the 2% target
and that risks to achieving its employment and
inflation goals are roughly in balance. In addition, it
noted that in considering additional adjustments to
the target range for the federal funds rate, they will
carefully assess incoming data, the evolving outlook
and the balance of risks. It also reiterated its
commitment to return inflation to its 2% target and
added that it will support maximum employment.
Additionally, the Federal Reserve continued

reducing the size of its balance sheet.

During the press conference, the chairman of the
Federal Reserve stated that the recalibration of the
monetary policy stance will help to maintain the
strength of the economy and the labor market, and
will continue to enable further progress on inflation

5At its September meeting, the Bank of Japan maintained its
reference rate at around 0.25%, after having previously raised it
in its March and July decisions. Said central bank indicated that
high uncertainty persists regarding the country's economic activity
and prices, including the evolution of economic activity and prices
abroad, the behavior of commodity prices and the way in which
the country's companies set wages and prices. It pointed out that
it is necessary to monitor the evolution of the financial and foreign


as the process of moving toward a more neutral
stance begins. However, he noted that they do not
follow any pre-established monetary policy path and
that they will make decisions by evaluating
conditions meeting by meeting. He stated that if the
economy remains solid and inflation persists, they
can dial back monetary policy restraint more slowly.
In contrast, if the labor market were to weaken
unexpectedly or inflation were to fall more rapidly
than anticipated, the Committee will be prepared to
respond. He noted that the Committee's forecasts for
the federal funds rate are a baseline and that their
decisions will depend on the way the economy
evolves, noting that, if appropriate, they may go
faster, slower, or pause in recalibrating their
monetary policy. He stated that it should not be
assumed that 50 bps will be the new pace of rate
cuts going forward.

Regarding the adjustments to the Committee's
projections, between June and September, the
median headline inflation forecasts measured by the
personal consumption expenditure price index was
revised downwards from 2.6 to 2.3% for the end of
2024, from 2.3 to 2.1% for the end of 2025, and was
left unchanged at 2.0% for the end of 2026. Likewise,
the median GDP growth forecast was revised
downwards for the end of 2024 from 2.1 to 2.0%.
That for unemployment was revised upwards from
4.0 to 4.4% for the end of 2024, from 4.2 to 4.4% for
the end of 2025, and from 4.1 to 4.3% for the end of
2026. The Committee adjusted downwards the
median of its expectations for the federal funds rate
for the end of 2024 from 5.1 to 4.4%, suggesting an
additional 50 bps of rate cuts during the current year.
Similarly, expectations for the end of 2025 were
revised from 4.1 to 3.4%, which implies 100 bps of
additional rate cuts in 2025 compared to the end of
2024. For the end of 2026, expectations also
decreased, from 3.1 to 2.9%, that is, 50 bps of
additional rate cuts for that year. The long-term rate
expectation was revised upwards from 2.8 to 2.9%.

At its September meeting, the European Central
Bank cut its reference rates. It reduced its key
deposit and key lending rates by 25 bps and its
refinancing rate by 60 bps to 3.50, 3.90 and 3.65%,
respectively. Its Governing Council reiterated that it

exchange markets, as well as their impact on the country's
economic activity and prices. The governor of said institution
pointed out that if their economic and price projections are
achieved, they will increase interest rates and adjust accordingly
the degree of monetary support. Additionally, he indicated that the
risk of excessive inflation as a result of rising import prices has
decreased significantly and that they have some time to decide on
their monetary policy.

14


-----

will keep reference rates at sufficiently restrictive
levels for as long as necessary in order to ensure
that inflation returns to its target promptly. Once
again, it announced that it will maintain an approach
dependent on economic and financial data to
determine the appropriate duration and degree of
such tightening. At the press conference, the
president of said institution stated that, although the
future path of reference rates is clearly downwards,
it is not predetermined, neither in terms of sequence
nor in terms of the magnitude of rate cuts. Regarding
the Pandemic Emergency Program (PEPP), the
Governing Council will continue to reduce the
portfolio by an average of EUR 7.5 billion per month,
with reinvestments scheduled to be discontinued by
the end of 2024.

In the main emerging economies, some central
banks, mainly in Latin America, continued lowering
their reference rates. The central banks of South
Africa, the Philippines and Indonesia lowered their
reference rates for the first time in more than three
years. In China, after its central bank announced rate
cuts in several of its reference interest rates in July,
it determined not to make any adjustments in August.
However, in September, the governor of said central
bank announced a monetary stimulus package, as
well as measures to support the real estate sector
and the stock market. In particular: i) it reduced its
medium-term lending facility (MLF) rate by 30 bps;
ii) it announced that it will lower the interest rate on
seven-day reverse repurchase agreements by 20
bps; iii) it indicated that it will cut the loan prime rate
(LPR) and deposit rate by 20 to 25 bps; and, iv) it will
cut the reserve requirement ratio (RRR) by 50 bps. It
indicated that the latter could be reduced further,
possibly by 25 to 50 bps in the remainder of the year.
Meanwhile, some central banks continued leaving
their reference rates unchanged. In contrast, the
Bank of Brazil raised its reference rate by 25 bps in
September, after having lowered it for the last time in
May. Russia's central bank also increased recently
its reference rate by 100 bps, after having raised it
by 200 bps in its July decision.

Regarding future actions, the central banks

reiterated, in general, that further adjustments to
their reference rates will remain dependent on
incoming data and their implications for the inflation
outlook. Some of these institutions anticipate that
reference rates will remain at restrictive levels for
some time and announced that they are prepared to
make additional adjustments if necessary to bring
inflation back to target. Some of them suggested that
adopting a gradual approach to reducing monetary
restriction may be appropriate depending on the


evolution of economic conditions. As for markets'
expectations for monetary policy rates in major
advanced economies, reference rates implicit in
swap curves (OIS) for the end of 2024 were revised
downwards for some economies compared to the
level expected in the first week of August (Chart 4).
In the case of the United States, the anticipated level
of the federal funds rate at the end of 2024
decreased from 4.34 to 4.1%, according to
information from the federal funds rate futures
market. The expected levels for the reference rates
at the end of 2024 for the euro zone and Japan
remained around 3.0 and 0.3%, respectively, in the
same comparison.

**Chart 4**

**Reference rates and trajectories**

**implied in OIS curves[ 1/]**

Percent

7 **― US Federal Reserve 2/** End of End of End of End of

**― Bank of England** 2022 2023 2024 2025

6 **― Bank of Japan**

**― European Central Bank deposit rate**
**― OIS implicit trajectory Sept 25, 2024**

5 **--- OIS implicit trajectory Aug 8, 2024**

4

3

2

1 Forecasts

0

-1

2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 2024 2025

1/ OIS: Fixed floating interest rate swap where the fixed interest rate is
associated with the effective overnight reference rate.
2/ For the observed reference rate of the United States, the average interest
rate of the target range of the federal funds rate is used.
Source: Bloomberg.

In this context, since Mexico's last monetary policy
decision, international financial conditions eased
(Chart 5). Likewise, after the sharp increase in
volatility observed during July and the first week of
August, it gradually decreased. However, in
September there was a transitory increase in
volatility partly due to the release of US employment
data, which led to expectations of a possible
moderation in the growth rate of the US economy.

Regarding long- (10-year) and medium- (2-year)
term rates, these registered decreases in most of the
main advanced and emerging economies (Chart 6).
Starting in the second week of September, the slope
of the US yield curve (defined as the spread between
10-year and 2-year government bond rates) moved
into positive levels, after having been in negative
territory since July 2022. Stock markets in most
advanced and emerging economies registered gains

15


-----

after the declines at the end of July and the first week
of August. In the particular case of China, losses
were registered, caused partly by lower investor
confidence in economic growth, although these
reversed at the end of September due to the stimuli
announced by China's central bank and other
government agencies. As for foreign exchange
markets, the US dollar weakened against most
advanced and emerging market currencies

(Chart 7). Lastly, since the last monetary policy
decision, there have been net capital inflows to
emerging economies both in equity and fixed-income
assets.

**Chart 5**

**Financial conditions index[ 1/]**

Units


1/ DXY: weighted average estimated by the Intercontinental Exchange
(ICE) of the nominal exchange rate of the main six currencies operated
globally with the following weights: EUR: 57.6%, JPY: 13.6%, GBP: 11.9%,
CAD: 9.1%, SEK: 4.2%, and CHF: 3.6%.
Source: Bloomberg.

**Chart 7**

**Selected emerging economies: financial assets**

**performance starting on August 2, 2024**

Percent, basis points Percent, basis points


**Chart 6**

**Change in selected financial indicators from**

**August 8 to September 25, 2024 Percentage, basis points**


15%

10%


60

40


5%


20

0


0%

-5%


-10%

-15%


-20

-40


-60


103


Financial conditions index - global
Financial conditions index - United States
Financial conditions index - euro area 2/

1/ The financial conditions index is constructed considering the effect of five
variables on economic activity: the reference interest rate, the 10-year
government bond, the spread of investment grade bonds over the
government debt bond with equivalent maturity, the ratio of a stock index
with 10-year average earnings per share, and the trade-weighted exchange
rate.
2/ In the case of the euro area, the spread between the sovereign bonds of
France, Italy, Spain, the Netherlands, Belgium, Austria, Portugal and
Finland over the German 10-year bond is also considered. The vertical
black line indicates the last scheduled monetary policy meeting of Banco
de México.
Source: Bloomberg and Goldman Sachs.


Note: An upward adjustment indicates currency appreciation. Interest rates
correspond to government bonds at the specified terms, except for
Hungary, where government securities with 3-year maturities were used as
a reference. For the Philippines, a 2-year swap rate was used, and for
Russia, 2-year and 3-year swap rates were used. The latest CDS data for
Russia is as of June 1, 2022.
Source: Bloomberg.

16


-----

**A.2. Current situation of the Mexican economy**

**A.2.1. Mexican markets**

Since Mexico’s last monetary policy decision,
domestic financial markets exhibited a

heterogeneous performance by asset class. The
Mexican peso depreciated moderately against the
US dollar, although the period was characterized by
episodes of high volatility. Interest rates fell overall,
particularly in short-term bonds (Chart 8).

**Chart 8**

**Mexican markets’ performance**

Percent, MXN/USD and index


J   A    J    S    D M   J    S    D    M    J    S    D   M J    S

2021 2022 2023 2024


**Chart 9**


11.2

10.8

10.4

10.0

9.6

9.2

8.8

8.4


20.5

20.0

19.5

19.0

18.5

18.0

17.5

17.0

16.5

16.0


60,000

58,000

56,000

54,000

52,000

50,000

48,000

46,000


M-bond


7.5

7.0

6.5

6.0

5.5

5.0

4.5

4.0

Inflation-indexed bonds


Range in 2024 Range since previous monetary policy decision Aug 2, 2024 Sep 20, 2024

Source: Bloomberg and Proveedor Integral de Precios (PIP).

The Mexican peso depreciated by 1.17% as a result
of several factors, such as the unwinding of carry
trade positions against the yen, developments in
both the electoral outlook and the expectations on
monetary policy in the United States, and

idiosyncratic factors. During the period, the Mexican
peso traded in a range between MXN/USD 18.60
and 20.25 since the last monetary policy decision
(Chart 9). This behavior occurred in an environment
characterized by a deterioration in actual trading
conditions and in those implied in market

instruments.


Source: Banco de México.

Interest rates on government securities decreased
along the entire yield curve, with the adjustment of
up to 70 bps in short-term bonds (Chart 10) standing
out. Yields on real-rate instruments showed
decreases of up to 60 bps in the short and middle
part of the curve. In this context, breakeven inflation
implicit in spreads between nominal and real rates of
market instruments decreased (Chart 11). Despite
the described performance, the fixed-income market
exhibited a slight deterioration in trading conditions,
due to an increase in volatility during the period.

**Chart 10**

**Nominal yield curve of government securities**

Percent, basis points


Range in 2024 Range since previous monetary policy decision Aug 2, 2024 Sep 20, 2024


Trading range over the period

Source: Proveedor Integral de Precios (PIP).


17


-----

**Chart 11**

**Breakeven inflation and inflation risk implied in**

**government securities’ yields**

Basis points

600

550

500

450

400

350

3-year

300 10-year

20-year
30-year

250

J F A M J A O N J F A M J A O N J F A J J A O N J M A J J S

2021 2022 2023 2024

Source: Proveedor Integral de Precios (PIP).

Regarding expectations for the path of the monetary
policy reference rate, information implicit in the
interest rate swaps curve incorporates a high
probability of a decrease in reference rate in the
September 2024 decision. It also presents an
expectation of 9.81 and of 7.85% for the target rate
for the end of both 2024 and 2025, respectively
(Chart 12). In line with the information implicit in the
interest rate swap curve, the consensus of analysts
surveyed by Citibanamex anticipates a 25-bps cut at
the September meeting and a reference rate of
10.00% at the end of 2024.

**Chart 12**

**Interbank funding rate implied in TIIE swaps**

Percent

12.50

11.50

10.50

9.50

8.50

7.50

6.50

5.50 Banxico overnight rate (reference rate)

Implied interest rate in TIIE swaps for 09/20/24

4.50

Implied interest rate in TIIE swaps for 08/02/24

3.50

J  A  J  O  J  A  J  O  J  A  J  O  J  A  J  O  J  A  J  O

2021       2022       2023        2024       2025

Note: Gray lines represent the daily implicit curves since the last monetary
policy decision.
Source: Proveedor Integral de Precios (PIP).


**A.2.2. Economic activity in Mexico**

The weakness that the Mexican economy had
exhibited since the end of 2023 continued throughout
the second quarter of 2024 (Chart 13). This occurred
in a context of high uncertainty associated with
external and domestic factors.

**Chart 13**

**Gross Domestic Product**

Quarterly percentage change, s. a.

2.5

2.0

1.5

1.0

0.5

0.0

-0.5

-1.0


I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV I II

2021 2022 2023 2024

s. a. / Seasonally adjusted figures.
Source: Mexico’s System of National Accounts (SCNM, for its Spanish
acronym), INEGI.

Regarding domestic demand, consumption

remained weak during the period of April-June 2024.
Although consumption of domestic goods and
services recorded two monthly increases, these
were insufficient to reverse the contraction

registered in April. In turn, consumption of imported
goods decreased for three consecutive months,
although remaining at high levels. During the same
period, gross fixed investment increased, although
with less dynamism than in the first three quarters of
2023. In June, investment in construction partially
reversed the recovery observed in previous months.
Meanwhile, investment in machinery and equipment
remained sluggish. As for external demand, in July
2024, the value of manufacturing exports, both
automotive and non-automotive, rebounded (Chart
14).

08/08/2024

On the production side, after exhibiting weakness in 07/08/2024
the second quarter of the year, the Mexican 06/08/202405/08/2024
economy slightly improved in July (Chart 15). 02/08/2024
Primary sector activities rebounded significantly, 01/08/202431/07/2024
reaching their highest 30/07/2024level on record

18


-1.5


Q-II

II


-----

(Chart 16). At the same time, industrial activity
continued improving moderately compared to the
weakness observed between the last quarter of 2023
and the first four months of 2024 (Chart 17).
Regarding its components, construction registered a
positive trend in recent months, while manufacturing
remained weak. The services sector expanded, after
having been stagnant in June, although its
performance remained heterogeneous across its
segments.

**Chart 14**

**Manufacturing exports**

Indices 2021 = 100, s. a.

150

Total

140

Automotive

130 Non-automotive

120

110

100

90

July

80

J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J

2021 2022 2023 2024

s. a. / Seasonally adjusted series and trend series based on data in nominal
US dollars. The former is represented by a solid line and the latter by a
dotted line.
Source: Prepared by Banco de México with data from the Tax
Administration Service (SAT, for its Spanish acronym), the Ministry of the
Economy (SE, for its Spanish acronym), Banco de México, the National
Institute of Statistics and Geography (INEGI, for its Spanish acronym).
Mexico’s Merchandise Trade Balance. The National System of Statistical
and Geographical Information (SNIEG, for its Spanish acronym).
Information of national interest.

Regarding the cyclical position of the economy, in
the second quarter, the estimate of the output gap,
which had been becoming progressively less
positive given the weak economic activity, closed
(Chart 18). In July 2024, national and urban
unemployment rates decreased in their monthly
comparison, although they remained at historically
low levels (Chart 19). In August, the loss of
dynamism in the rate of creation of formal
employment affiliated to the IMSS accentuated.
Lastly, in July 2024, unit labor costs in the
manufacturing sector remained at high levels (Chart
20).


s. a. / Seasonally adjusted series and trend series. The former is
represented by a solid line and the latter by a dotted line.
Source: Mexico’s System of National Accounts (SCNM, for its Spanish
acronym), INEGI.

**Chart 16**

**IGAE: Primary sector activities**

Indices 2021 = 100, s. a.

112

110

108

106

104

102

100

98

96

94

92 July

July

90

J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J

2021 2022 2023 2024

s. a. / Seasonally adjusted series and trend series. The former is
represented by a solid line and the latter by a dotted line.
Source: Mexico’s System of National Accounts (SCNM, for its Spanish
acronym), INEGI.

19


**Chart 15**

**Global Indicator of Economic Activity**

Indices 2021 = 100, s. a.


112

110

108

106

104

102

100

98


J

2021


A J O J

2022


A J O J

2023


A J O J

2024


A J


-----

**Chart 17**

**Industrial activity[1/]**

Indices 2021 = 100, s. a.


**Chart 19**

**National and urban unemployment rates**

Percent, s. a.


135

130

125

120

115

110

105

100

95


J

2021


A J O J

2022


A J O J

2023


A J O J

2024


A J


6.5

6.0

5.5

5.0

4.5

4.0

3.5

3.0

2.5

2.0


A J O J

2022


A J O J

2023


A J O J

2024


s. a. / Seasonally adjusted series and trend series. The former is
represented by a solid line and the latter by a dotted line.
1/ Figures in parenthesis correspond to their share in the total in 2018.
Source: Mexico’s System of National Accounts (SCNM, for its Spanish
acronym), INEGI.

**Chart 18**

**Output gap estimates[1/]**

Percent of potential output, s. a.

12

8

4

0

-4

-8 Global Economic Activity Index

(IGAE) 2/

-12

Gross Domestic Product 2/

-16

95% confidence interval 3/

-20

Q-II

July

-24

J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J

2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 2024

s. a. / Calculations based on seasonally adjusted figures.
1/ Output gap estimated with a tail-corrected Hodrick-Prescott filter; see
Banco de México (2009), “Inflation Report, April-June 2009”, p.69.
2/ GDP flash estimate up to Q2-2024 and IGAE up to July 2024.
3/ Output gap confidence interval calculated with a method of unobserved
components.
Source: Prepared by Banco de México with INEGI data.


s. a. / Seasonally adjusted series and trend series. The former is
represented by a solid line and the latter by a dotted line.
Source: Prepared by Banco de México with ENOE data, INEGI.

**Chart 20**

**Productivity and unit labor costs**

**in the manufacturing sector[1/]**

Indices 2021 = 100, s. a.

108

Unit labor costs

106 Productivity

104

102

100

98

July

96

J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J

2021 2022 2023 2024

s. a. / Seasonally adjusted series and trend series. The former is
represented by a solid line and the latter by a dotted line.
1/ Productivity based on hours worked.
Source: Prepared by Banco de México with seasonally adjusted data of the
Monthly Manufacturing Industry Survey and industrial activity indicators of
Mexico’s System of National Accounts (Sistema de Cuentas Nacionales de
_México, SCNM), INEGI._

In July 2024, domestic financing to the private sector
continued growing at a moderate pace compared to
the dynamism observed throughout 2023.

Commercial bank lending to firms registered a
reduction in its real annual growth rate with respect
to the previous month (Chart 21). In addition,

20


J

2021


A J


-----

the growth rate of commercial bank lending to
households continued decreasing.

As for the cost of financing, interest rates on bank
credit to firms remained at high levels in July 2024,
despite a certain reduction as compared to the
previous month. Credit intermediation margins did
not exhibit significant changes during the same
month. Interest rates on mortgage lending remained
at levels similar to those observed prior to the
pandemic. Finally, regarding commercial bank
consumer credit, in April 2024, interest rates in the
segment remained at relatively high levels, although
they declined slightly in some portfolios.

As for portfolio quality, the delinquency rates of bank
credit to firms and households did not register
significant changes in July and thus remained at low
levels. In the segment of consumption, in recent
months this indicator has decelerated the upward
trend it registered in the second half of 2023.

**Chart 21**

**Performing credit from commercial banks**

**to the private sector**

Annual percentage change

15

10

5

0

-5

-10 Consumption

Mortgage1/

-15

Non-financial private firms2/ July

-20

J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J

2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 2024

1/ Adjusted to account for the withdrawal from and the incorporation of nonbank financial intermediaries to the credit statistics.
2/ Adjusted for valuation effects due to movements in the exchange rate.
Source: Banco de México.


**A.2.3. Development of inflation and inflation**
**outlook**

Annual headline inflation decreased from 5.57% in
July to 4.66% in the first fortnight of September 2024.
This performance was mainly the result of the
decline in non-core inflation due to some reversal of
the supply shocks that had affected it. During this
period, core inflation continued trending downwards
(Chart 22 and Table 1).

**Chart 22**

**Consumer Price Index**

Annual percentage change

14
13 CPI
12 Core
11 Non-core
10

9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0

-1
-2 F1 September
-3

J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S

2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 2024

Source: INEGI.

Annual core inflation shifted from 4.05 to 3.95%
between July and the first fortnight of September
2024. Regarding its components, annual

merchandise inflation decreased from 3.09 to 2.94%
during the same period (Chart 23). This performance
was influenced by a reduction from 4.03 to 3.95% in
annual food inflation and from 1.95 to 1.69% in nonfood inflation (Chart 24). In turn, annual services
inflation remained at high levels, without showing a
clear downward trend. On those dates, it shifted from
5.22 to 5.15%.

Between July and the first fortnight of September
2024, annual non-core inflation fell from 10.36 to
6.73%, as the effects of the shocks that had exerted
pressure on agricultural and livestock products’ and
on energy prices partially faded away (Chart 25 and
Table 1). Between these dates, annual inflation of
agricultural and livestock products decreased from
13.72 to 6.50%.

21


-----

Inflation of fruit and vegetables’ prices declined from
23.55 to 7.15%. In turn, annual inflation of livestock
products shifted from 5.36 to 5.08% during said
period. Annual inflation of energy products

decreased from 9.17 to 7.92% for the same
comparison, mainly due to a decrease from 25.61 to
19.41% in the annual variation of L.P. gas prices.

**Chart 23**

**Merchandise and services**

**core price subindex**

Annual percentage change

12

Merchandise

11

Services

10

9

8

7

6

5

4

3

2

1

F1 September

0

J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S

2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 2024

Source: INEGI.

**Chart 24**

**Merchandise core price subindex**

Annual percentage change

16

Food, beverages and tobacco

14 Non-food merchandise

12

10

8

6

4

2

F1 September

0

J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M

2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 2024

Source: INEGI.


Source: INEGI.

Regarding inflation expectations drawn from the
survey conducted by Banco de México among
private sector specialists, between July and August
2024 the median of headline inflation for the end of
2024 increased from 4.58 to 4.64%, and that of core
inflation decreased from 3.97 to 3.90%. The latter
expectation has been adjusting downwards since
March 2024, when it stood at 4.15%. Inflation
expectations for the end of 2025 exhibited limited
adjustments. The median of headline inflation
expectations adjusted from 3.83 to 3.80%, while that
of core inflation shifted from 3.71 to 3.72%. At the
same time, the median of headline inflation
expectations for the next four years increased from
3.70 to 3.75%, while that of core inflation
expectations decreased from 3.64 to 3.62%. The
medians of headline and core inflation expectations
for the long term (5 to 8 years) remained stable at
around 3.60 and 3.50%, respectively. Lastly,
breakeven inflation has decreased since the
previous monetary policy decision. Regarding its
components, inflation expectations implied in market
instruments and inflation risk premium decreased.

Headline inflation is still expected to converge to the
target in the fourth quarter of 2025. This forecast is
subject to risks. On the upside: i) persistence of core
inflation; ii) greater foreign exchange depreciation;
iii) greater cost-related pressures; iv) climate-related
impacts, and v) the intensification of geopolitical
conflicts. On the downside: i) weaker-than
anticipated economic activity; ii) a lower passthrough effect from some cost-related pressures,
and iii) a lower-than-anticipated effect of the
exchange rate depreciation on inflation. The balance
of risks for the trajectory of inflation within the
forecast horizon remains biased to the upside.
However, the inflationary outlook has been

22


25

20

15

10

5

0

-5

-10

J

2019


M S J

2020


**Chart 25**

**Non-core price sub-index**

Annual percentage change

Non-core
Agricultural and livestock products
Energy and government-authorized prices


M S J

2021


M S J

2022


M S J

2023


M S J

2024


M S


-----

improving, following the major shocks caused by the
pandemic and the war in Ukraine. The current levels


of core inflation and the prospect of further declines
reflect this improvement.


**Table 1**

**Consumer Price Index and components**

Annual percentage change

**1st fortnight Sep.**

**Item** **July 2024** **August 2024**
**2024**

**CPI** **5.57** **4.99** **4.66**

**SubyacenteCore** **4.05** **4.00** **3.95**

**Merchandise** **3.09** **3.02** **2.94**

Food, beverages and tobacco 4.03 4.13 3.95

Non-food merchandise 1.95 1.71 1.69

**Services** **5.22** **5.18** **5.15**

Housing 3.96 4.00 4.08

Education (tuitions) 6.36 6.09 5.78

Other services 6.01 6.03 6.16

**No SubyacenteNon-core** **10.36** **8.03** **6.73**

**Agricultural and livestock products** **13.72** **9.45** **6.50**

Fruits and vegetablesFruits abd vegetables 23.55 12.61 7.15

Livestock productsLivestock 5.36 6.12 5.08

**Energy and government-authorized prices Energéticos y Tarifas Aut. por Gobierno** **7.31** **6.58** **6.67**

Energy productsEnergy 9.17 7.91 7.92

Government-authorized pricesTarifas Autorizadas por Gobierno **3.42** **3.72** **3.95**

Source: INEGI.

23


-----

-----

