-----

-----

**FOREWARNING**
This document is provided for the reader’s convenience
only. The translation from the official Spanish version was
made by Banco de México’s staff. Discrepancies may
arise between the original document in Spanish and its
English translation. For this reason, the original Spanish
version is the only official document.


**11. PLACE, DATE AND PARTICIPANTS**

**1.1. Place: Meeting held by virtual means.**

**1.2. Date of Governing Board meeting:** May 8,
2024.

**1.3. Participants:**

- Victoria Rodríguez, Governor.

- Galia Borja, Deputy Governor.

- Irene Espinosa, Deputy Governor.

- Jonathan Heath, Deputy Governor.

- Omar Mejía, Deputy Governor.

- Gabriel Yorio, Undersecretary of Finance and

Public Credit.

- María Elena Méndez, Secretary of the Governing

Board.

Prior to this meeting, preliminary work by Banco de
México’s staff analyzing the economic and financial
environment as well as the developments in inflation
and the determinants and outlook for inflation, was
conducted and presented to the Governing Board
(see Annex).

**2. ANALYSIS AND RATIONALE BEHIND THE**
**GOVERNING BOARD’S VOTING**

**_International environment_**

**Most members pointed out that economic**
**performance remains heterogeneous across**
**countries. One member added that, overall, world**
economic activity remains resilient. Some members
noted that the US economy continues showing
strength. Regarding its labor market, **one member**
highlighted that it remains tight. However, **another**
member underlined that preliminary figures indicate
that the expansion of that economy during the first
quarter of 2024 was lower than anticipated and lower
than observed towards the end of 2023. He/she
added that although total consumption continues
growing at a robust pace, driven mainly by services,
consumption of goods contracted due to lower
spending on durables. He/she argued that this
differentiated dynamics between consumption of
goods and that of services is observed in an


environment of a more limited access to credit due to
high interest rates, lower excess savings, and greater
caution by consumers given the recent evolution of
the labor market. He/she noted that the

unemployment gap has continued closing, which has
been accompanied by some moderation in the pace
of growth of nominal wages. He/she stated that signs
of a cooling in labor demand have become stronger.
He/she pointed out that vacancies continue trending
downwards and that the non-farm payroll has
observed growth rates at levels close to its historical
average. Regarding other countries, he/she noted
that the euro area registered a greater dynamism
compared to the previous two quarters, when it had
registered slightly negative rates. He/she pointed out
that economic activity in the United Kingdom has
been driven mainly by the services sector and
industrial production, after having been in technical
recession in the second half of 2023. He/she
mentioned that emerging economies have shown
greater dynamism compared to the end of 2023.
He/she expressed that China's growth has been
driven mainly by consumption.

**Some** members highlighted that, in several

advanced economies, economic activity is expected
to moderate in 2024. **One member underlined that**
growth in the euro area and the United Kingdom is
expected to be relatively low. However, **some**
members highlighted that the expected growth rate
for the United States have been revised upwards.
**One member stated that a greater dynamism is**
foreseen for emerging economies. He/she

underlined that the outlook for global economic
activity is subject to high uncertainty. He/she warned
that among global risks the following stand out: the
intensification of geopolitical turmoil; a further
deceleration of the Chinese economy; a greater
impact of the value chain reconfiguration process;
and the risks of high fiscal deficits, especially in
emerging economies, in an environment of tight
financial conditions.

**Most members pointed out that headline inflation**
**has been decreasing in most economies.**
**However, they expressed that it remains above**
**their respective central banks’ targets.** **One**
member also indicated that the rate of reduction has
been decreasing at a more moderate pace than that
observed in 2023. **Another member noted that in**
some cases in its latest readings headline inflation
even increased. **The majority agreed that the**
**behavior of headline inflation is partly due to**
**increased pressures on energy prices. One**
member highlighted that core inflation continued
decreasing, although some members indicated that

2


-----

it has done so at a more moderate pace. **One**
member pointed out that recent US inflation figures
have turned out to be higher than anticipated. He/she
added that in most emerging economies the latest
readings reflect persistence of inflation at high levels.
**Another member considered that, although the**
disinflation has advanced worldwide, this process
has not concluded and there are still challenges
ahead.

**Most members mentioned services inflation**
**resistance to decline. One member underlined that**
inflation persistence in this component is a global
phenomenon and that, in most cases, it does not
correspond to the phase of the economic cycle
countries and regions are currently in. Most
**members emphasized this persistence in the**
**case of the United States. One member noted that,**
in the first quarter of 2024, monthly changes in
service prices have been, on average, higher than
those observed in the second half of 2023. **Some**
members commented that within services, the
housing component has exhibited more persistence
than others. **One member added that said**
persistence is observed in housing rents, where
market prices tend to adjust more gradually, and
he/she also pointed out the financial services
component, where the auto insurance item stands
out.

**Some members highlighted that inflation is expected**
to continue declining worldwide. However, **some**
members indicated that projections for inflation in
some economies were revised upwards. **One**
member pointed out that most central banks maintain
their expectation that inflation will return to its target
towards the end of 2025 and, in some cases, such as
the Federal Reserve, towards the beginning of 2026.
**Another member stated that in most emerging**
economies prospects of convergence towards the
end of this year and the beginning of 2025 are
maintained.

**The majority mentioned that most central banks**
**in advanced economies left their reference rates**
**unchanged at their latest meetings. One member**
stated that they have maintained a cautious tone.
**Most members noted that the Federal Reserve**
**left the target range for the federal funds rate**
**unchanged in a context of higher-than-expected**
**inflation levels and resilient economic activity.**
**One member stated that it kept its target range**
constant for the sixth consecutive meeting. and that
it also announced a decrease in the rate of reduction
of its balance sheet starting in June. He/she added
that the press release mentioned that the risks to


attaining its employment and inflation goals have
moved to a better balance. **Most members**
**underlined that the chairman of that institution**
**indicated that progress in disinflation has not**
**been sufficient and that they need to observe**
**further progress before lowering the reference**
**rate. One member pointed out that said officer**
highlighted that according to the Committee
monetary policy is sufficiently restrictive and there is
evidence that it is influencing aggregate demand.
Meanwhile, with respect to the European Central
Bank, he/she indicated that it left its reference rate
unchanged for the fifth consecutive time, and
communicated that if confidence increases about
inflation being on a trajectory towards its target, a
reference rate cut would be appropriate. Another
member added that most central banks in South
America and some in Eastern Europe continued with
their normalization cycles.

Regarding expectations about the future behavior of
reference rates, some members noted the decline in
the expected number of federal funds rate cuts this
year. One member indicated that markets went from
anticipating six rate cuts at the beginning of the year,
to expecting between one and two. Another member
pointed out that the date on which the first downward
adjustment is expected to take place has been
postponed. One member stated that the expectation
is that the first reference rate cut will take place at the
end of the third quarter of 2024, with two rate cuts of
25 basis points accumulating by the end of that year.
As for the European Central Bank, **some members**
expressed that it could implement the first rate cut
during the summer. **One member argued that this**
has been supported by the sustained decline of
inflation in the euro area.

**Most members pointed out that, given the change**
**in the outlook for monetary policy in the United**
**States, government bond yields increased**
**worldwide.** However, **some members noted that**
such increases partially reversed in recent days
following the release of US labor market figures
suggesting a lower-than-expected dynamism. **The**
**majority highlighted that since Mexico's last**
**monetary policy decision, international financial**
**markets exhibited volatility. One member argued**
that this partly resulted from the increase in the
expected level of the Federal Reserve's reference
rate, given the systemic importance of the US
economy. Some members added that said volatility
was exacerbated by the intensification of geopolitical
tensions. **In this regard, most members pointed**
**out that since the last monetary policy decision,**
**markets were also affected by greater risk**

3


-----

**aversion. The majority mentioned that, in this**
**episode, the US dollar appreciated against a**
**large number of currencies. One member**
considered that the increase in US government bond
yields, the resilience of economic activity in that
country, and the role played by financial instruments
issued in the United States as safe haven assets
during episodes of risk aversion all contributed to the
appreciation of the dollar. **Some** members

underlined that, since Mexico´s last monetary policy
decision, several stock market indexes declined.
However, **one member noted that stock markets**
exhibited a heterogeneous behavior.

**_Economic activity in Mexico_**

**Most members pointed out that the GDP flash**
**estimate for the first quarter of the year showed**
**that** **the** **weakness** **of** **economic** **activity**

**registered in the last quarter of 2023 extended**
**into the first quarter of 2024. One member stated**
that the flash estimate registered a low quarterly
growth of 0.2%, although higher than for the previous
quarter. **Some members pointed out that these**
figures were lower than anticipated. **One member**
highlighted that the heterogeneity in the signals of
indicators and the uncertain environment have
impeded an adequate assessment of the economic
activity's performance during the first quarter of 2024.
**Another member stated that since September 2023**
the economy seems to have entered into a trajectory
of slower growth than what was being observed
before.

Regarding the behavior of the productive sectors,
**some members noted that secondary activities**
contracted during the quarter. **Some members**
mentioned that, nevertheless, a reactivation is
expected in March. **One member warned that,**
looking ahead, their performance appears uncertain.
He/she pointed out that, within its components,
manufacturing exhibited sluggishness, which seems
to be in line with the stagnation of US manufacturing.
**Another member stated that although some**
components, such as transportation equipment,
have rebounded at the margin, the trends have not
reversed. One member underlined that construction
registered high levels due to the performance of civil
engineering public projects. However, he/she

indicated that this sector has not shown a clear trend
since mid-2023. He/she highlighted that in its most
recent readings private construction has lost
momentum. **Some members pointed out that after**
the weakness exhibited at the beginning of 2024,
services showed some reactivation in February and
March. **Some members commented that services**


components continued exhibiting heterogeneity. One
member highlighted that in some subsectors, such as
mass media information, transportation and health
care, an upward trend was observed. He/she stated
that the remaining subsectors exhibited a greater
weakness, in particular, accommodation and food
preparation services, which have still not regained
their pre-pandemic levels. **Some** members

expressed that the behavior of economic activity at
the beginning of the year was also influenced by a
decline in primary activities. However, one member
considered that these seem to have recovered after
having fallen sharply in January.

Regarding domestic demand, some members stated
that investment registered a low dynamism. **One**
member noted that such behavior has prevailed for
some months, although it remains at high levels. In
this regard, **another member indicated that gross**
fixed investment grew at an annual rate of 10.7% in
February, driven by construction and machinery and
equipment. Some members pointed out that private
consumption has maintained a positive trend. **One**
member particularly noted the high growth in the
consumption of imported goods. However, **some**
members indicated that private consumption

moderated somewhat. One member highlighted that
leading indicators show mixed signals about this
component, with credit card spending growing at
elevated levels, while sales of light vehicles and of
the Mexican Association of Supermarkets and
Department Stores (ANTAD, for its acronym in
Spanish) exhibiting a loss of dynamism. **Another**
member argued that forward-looking indicators of
services consumption suggest that it could expand at
a slower pace.

**Regarding external demand, most members**
**pointed out that manufacturing exports remained**
**at high levels, although they continued showing**
**a low dynamism. Some members underlined that**
after having remained stagnant for several months,
the value of non-automotive exports improved in
March. One member indicated that external demand
is expected to remain sluggish in light of the
prevailing weakness in the US manufacturing sector,
which could extend the low dynamism of domestic
manufacturing production.

**Most members noted that a reactivation of**
**economic activity is expected for the second and**
**third** **quarters** **of** **the** **year.** **One** member

commented that the economic boost that is typically
observed in election years seems to be materializing
with a certain lag, and thus the spillover effects of
increased public spending during these episodes

4


-----

could possibly be observed in the coming months.
**Another member added that the reactivation of**
economic activity observed in February and March
points toward the possibility of a greater dynamism in
the second quarter of 2024, supported by the
expansion of private consumption and investment.
He/she stated that for the third and fourth quarters of
the year, growth would moderate as some of the
factors that would provide greater momentum to
economic activity in the second quarter would
dissipate. One member stated that there is a risk that
the boost in public spending this year and the
following one is greater than expected. He/she added
that, given the strong rebound anticipated in US
industrial production, greater levels of external
demand can be expected to stimulate economic
activity in Mexico.

**Most members mentioned that the output gap**
**remained in positive territory during the fourth**
**quarter of 2023, although it declined. One member**
pointed out that it has narrowed for two consecutive
quarters. Some members considered that it
continues without being statistically different from
zero. **One member indicated that it is expected to**
gradually approach zero over the forecast horizon.
**Another member commented that the slack indicator**
obtained through principal components was also less
positive. He/she noted that while the indicator
associated with the labor market remains at high
levels, the one related to consumption is close to
zero. He/she stated that, given the mixed signals of
economic activity figures, attention must continue to
be paid to the cyclical conditions of the economy due
to their relevance for inflation dynamics.

**Most members highlighted that the labor market**
**remained** **strong.** **They** **emphasized** **that**

**unemployment rates remain at historically low**
**levels. One member underlined that even after**
correcting for the population that is available to work,
the unemployment rate is considerably below the
Non-accelerating Inflation Rate of Unemployment
(NAIRU). **Another member noted that participation**
levels are similar to those observed prior to the
pandemic. One member added the increase in newly
created IMSS-insured jobs. However, **another**
member expressed that this year formal job creation
has grown at lower rates than those observed in
2022 and 2023. **The majority agreed that wage**
**increases remained high. One member stated that,**
with figures up to March, the annual increase in the
daily wage associated with IMSS-insured workers
was around 10%, while contractual wage revisions
for private firms were at 9.4%, and for public ones at
4.2%. **Another member pointed out that real wage**


increases are of a magnitude unseen in many years.
He/she added that, as a result of low unemployment
and wage increases, the wage bill continues
advancing at much higher rates than those prior to
the pandemic. However, some members noted that
wage increases in formal employment seem to be
moderating at the margin. One member commented
that this was observed in particular for the upper
quartiles of the wage distribution.

**_Inflation in Mexico_**

**Most members pointed out that annual headline**
**inflation rose from 4.40 to 4.65% between**
**February and April.** **One member highlighted that**
despite the fluctuations registered in 2024, headline
inflation has remained clearly below the peak of
8.70% reached in August 2022. **Another member**
noted that since last October, there was an
interruption of the downward trajectory that headline
inflation had been exhibiting since September 2022.
He/she stated that therefore, the progress in
disinflation observed during that period becomes less
relevant.

**Most members underlined that the recent**
**increases in headline inflation have been driven**
**by an increase in the non-core component. One**
member indicated that, without minimizing the
increase in headline inflation, which the inflation
target is based on, it is important to acknowledge that
its upward adjustment is due to the non-core
component. He/she argued that the latter is subject
to shocks that can cause abrupt and sudden
adjustments in several of its items, both to the upside
and to the downside, and therefore its behavior does
not indicate the direction in which headline inflation
could shift in the medium term. **Another member**
recalled that the non-core component is usually
affected by supply-related shocks, the effect of which
tends to dissipate relatively quickly. He/she specified
that, as anticipated, disinflation is taking place in a
non-linear and heterogeneous way. **One member**
stated that relative price adjustments are being faced
rather than a generalized increase in the price level.
He/she pointed out that the ten CPI items with the
highest variation in the first fortnight of April,
corresponding to the fruits and vegetables

subcomponent, contributed with nearly 60 basis
points to headline inflation. Finally, another member
stated that the recent increase in headline inflation
should not be interpreted as a sign that disinflation
has come to a halt.

**Most** **members** **noted** **that** **core** **inflation**

**continued decreasing at the margin, having**
**declined from 4.64 to 4.37% between February**

5


-----

**and April.** **Some members highlighted that this**
component has therefore decreased for 15

consecutive months. They underlined that core
inflation better reflects the medium-term inflation
trend. They considered that its downward trajectory
reflects the progress in disinflation. **One member**
argued that by analyzing this component it is possible
to assess the process by which the shocks stemming
from the pandemic and the military conflict on
inflation fade away. Another member underlined that
the contribution of core inflation to disinflation has
been evident, as it accounts for 276 of the 405 basis
points of the decline that headline inflation has
registered since its peak of this inflationary episode.
**One member highlighted that it has reached levels**
even lower than those observed in June 2021, when
the tightening cycle began. Another member added
that in the last four fortnights its variations have been
smaller than one standard deviation from its average
behavior between 2005 and 2019. However, **some**
members noted that the pace of decline of core
inflation has slowed down. One member pointed out
that the atypical origin of shocks resulted in a very
different dynamic of its components from that
observed in other episodes.

**As part of the analysis of core inflation’s**
**components, the majority underlined the decline**
**in merchandise inflation. One member highlighted**
that it has declined for seventeen consecutive
months. He/she considered that both the central
bank's monetary policy stance and the mitigation of
shocks have contributed to this reduction. He/she
pointed out that both food and non-food merchandise
inflation have decreased significantly, and that the
latter is even below 3%. Another member stated that
food merchandise inflation, however, remains at high
levels. One member recalled that food merchandise
inflation was at double-digit levels at the beginning of
2023 and that it showed a high resistance to decline.
He/she pointed out that, since then, it has fallen
significantly and it is now practically at its historical
average. He/she specified that non-food

merchandise inflation is already below its respective
historical average. In this regard, he/she indicated
that the persistence of food and non-food

merchandise increased significantly and that, in the
disinflation phase, it has been decreasing,

approaching its historical norm.

**Most members highlighted that services inflation**
**has remained at high levels without showing a**
**downward inflection point. Some members**
expressed concern about this behavior. **One**
member noted that, although data points to a
moderation at the margin, its trajectory has been


above expectations. Some members mentioned that
it has remained above 5% despite the monetary
tightening. Some members argued that the atypical
shocks of the pandemic and the military conflict
continue affecting inflation, especially services
prices. One member stated that after the pandemic,
the increased mobility of the population and the
recovery of demand for services have allowed costs
to be passed on to prices, which has taken longer
than anticipated to materialize. In this regard,
**another member noted that the shocks have broadly**
affected both services and merchandise, although
with a greater lag on services. He/she mentioned that
as consumption patterns have normalized, the
persistence of services, which are typically the most
persistent component within core inflation, has been
increasing towards its usual levels, after having
declined due to the weak demand faced by services,
particularly housing services. He/she added that the
subindex of other services shows a persistence
greater than historically observed, and that unlike
other subindices that have registered a clear
reversal, it still does not show a clear reversal to its
typical levels. He/she commented that since a
normalization of merchandise persistence has been
observed, he/she expects that the persistence
corresponding to the other services subindex will
also moderate, given the relationship between these
two components strengthened. **One** member

asserted that the prices of housing services, which
constitute the item with the highest weight in the CPI,
have shown unusually high seasonally adjusted and
annualized variations, and the presence of new
shocks has more than offset the favorable base
effects, resulting in cumulative inflation remaining
above its pre-pandemic average. He/she expressed
that the prices of other services such as car
insurance, personal care or food-related ones show
pressures that could be attributed to a cost passthrough. **Another member stated that demand-**
related pressures, the current wage policy, and the
continued decline in labor productivity have

contributed to the resistance of services inflation to
decline.

**Regarding the increase in non-core inflation,**
**most members noted that it reached 5.54% in**
**April. Some members indicated that this reading is**
close to its historical average. One member pointed
out that this component has increased since last year
after having registered historically low figures.
**Another member noted that the observed variations**
of the prices within the non-core component have
reached more than three standard deviations from
their average behavior between 2005 and 2019.
**Most members highlighted the upward pressures**

6


-----

**on agricultural and livestock product prices and**
**on energy prices. Some members noted that fruit**
and vegetable prices have been affected by climaterelated factors.

**Most** **members** **mentioned** **that** **long-term**

**inflation expectations remained stable. Similarly,**
**some** members pointed out that medium-term
expectations have also remained stable. Some
members pointed out that they continued at levels
above target. **One member underlined that a**
significant challenge is that these expectations show
resistance to decline. Regarding short-term

expectations, **another member considered their**
evolution as relatively stable. Some members stated
that those corresponding to the end of 2024 and
2025 increased at the margin. **One member**
highlighted that they are above the central bank's
forecasts. Regarding expectations drawn from
market instruments, **another member pointed out**
that short-term breakeven inflation remained below
the upper limit of the variability interval, while for
longer terms it remained around 450 basis points
above its historical average. He/she argued that the
above suggests a certain resistance to decrease in
both implied inflation expectations and the inflation
risk premium. One member noted that expectations
drawn from market instruments corresponding to the
1-5 year average increased slightly and those of 610 years remained at 3.3%.

**All members highlighted that, considering that**
**inflationary shocks are foreseen to take longer to**
**dissipate, the forecasts for headline and core**
**inflation have been revised upwards. Most**
**members stated that services inflation is**
**foreseen to show more persistence, as compared**
**to what had been previously anticipated. One**
member mentioned that it is expected to exhibit a
downward trend as of the fourth quarter of 2024.
**Some members indicated that the revision of**
forecasts reflects the materialization of certain risks.
**One member acknowledged that the prevision of the**
atypical shocks of the pandemic and the military
conflict on services prices has been complex. He/she
noted that there is no quantitative information
available on similar past episodes that could have
been used as a reference in this period to assess the
magnitude and duration of such impacts. **Another**
member added that the difficulty in predicting the
speed at which the persistence of services will return
to its historical norm is what has made forecasting its
evolution more challenging. He/she considered that,
for this reason, the latest adjustments to the inflation
forecast are mainly due to upward revisions in the
forecasts for this component. **Some members**


pointed out that the adjustment in headline inflation
forecasts also reflects an increase in price variations
of energy, as well as of agricultural and livestock
products. **All members mentioned that headline**
**inflation is now expected to converge to the**
**target in the fourth quarter of 2025.** **Some**
members stated that this means that the disinflation
process will continue, but at a more gradual pace.
**One** member highlighted that reductions in core
inflation are still foreseen.

**Most members considered that the balance of**
**risks for the foreseen inflation trajectory in the**
**forecast horizon remains biased to the upside.**
However, **one member estimated that, in view of**
forecast revisions, the balance of risks takes on a
less negative tone. He/she added that certain factors
of the external environment of this balance have not
shown relevant changes compared to what was
observed in previous monetary policy decisions.
He/she indicated that domestically, the expectation
of an economic growth lower than previously
anticipated has gained relevance, which has
implications for slack conditions. He/she added that,
due to the significant reduction of inflation from its
peaks during this episode, a risk that has clearly
been mitigated is that inflation could have settled at
the referred high levels. **Another member warned**
that the balance of risks has deteriorated due to
domestic-related pressures associated with the
dynamism of the economy, a tight labor market,
significant wage increases, and uncertainty

regarding the effects of the expansionary fiscal
policy. He/she considered that the inflationary
environment is much more complex than that faced
at the beginning of last year.

**Among upward risks, the majority mentioned the**
**persistence of core inflation, specifically its**
**services component.** **One member highlighted the**
risk of economic activity showing greater-thanexpected resilience. **Some members expressed**
uncertainty as to the potential effect of fiscal policy.
**Some members added the possibility of greater cost-**
related pressures of various nature. In particular, one
member pointed out the potential effects of the
tightening of the labor market and wage increases.
**Another member underlined the risk of an exchange**
rate depreciation.

**Some members added as upward risks for inflation**
the possibility that non-core inflation tends to settle at
its long-term average. **One member stated that**
climate-related shocks have been increasingly

7


-----

severe and frequent and could exert significant
pressure on said component. He/she noted that the
forecasts estimate that non-core inflation returns to
3% in 2025, a level below its historical average, and
that for this reason future forecasts could be adjusted
upwards. Another member indicated that variations
in relative prices of certain agricultural and livestock
products are more likely to affect consumer inflation
expectations and that monetary policy should avoid
these second-round effects.

As for risks to the downside, one member pointed out
the possibility of an economic slowdown. **Another**
member underlined the possibility that lower
exchange rate levels compared to those observed in
the early months of last year may contribute more
than anticipated to mitigate certain pressures on
inflation.

**_Macrofinancial environment_**

**The majority mentioned that domestic financial**
**markets experienced bouts of volatility, as was**
**the case for international ones. The majority**
**stated** **that** **the** **foreign** **exchange** **market**

**exhibited volatility and that the Mexican peso**
**registered a depreciation. Some members noted a**
temporary deterioration in trading conditions. One
member added that these conditions have been
gradually improving. Some members pointed out that
part of the volatility resulted from the liquidation of
long positions. One member added that it was also
due to the unwinding of carry trade strategies and
other technical factors. **Some members highlighted**
the high sensitivity of the Mexican peso to the global
environment of risk aversion. One member pointed
out that this caused the Mexican peso to be among
the currencies with the highest depreciation in some
trading sessions. **Some members noted that**
prospective information anticipates possible

exchange rate depreciations in the coming months.
**One member highlighted that, despite all of the**
above, the Mexican peso has remained below the
levels observed in 2023. He/she recalled that in the
first months of the year, the Mexican peso
appreciated visibly, reaching in late March and early
April levels unseen since 2015.

**Some members expressed that the Mexican peso**
continues standing out among emerging economies’
currencies that have exhibited greater resilience.
**One member stated that this has contributed to the**
restriction of monetary conditions. Another member


expressed that the resilience of the Mexican peso
has been aided by the monetary policy actions
implemented by the central bank, which have
contributed to maintaining a volatility-adjusted
interest rate spread between Mexico and the United
States that remains attractive. He/she added that
other factors have also influenced the evolution of the
exchange rate, such as the favorable outlook
associated with the nearshoring phenomenon and
the country's sound macroeconomic fundamentals.
**One member mentioned that the liquidation of long**
positions on the Mexican peso, sound

macroeconomic fundamentals and the high volatilityadjusted interest rate spread can contribute to
reduce the possibility of a sudden adjustment in the
exchange rate.

**The majority noted that, since the last monetary**
**policy meeting, government bond yields have**
**increased along the entire yield curve. One**
member mentioned that this was due to the high
correlation with US markets and to a greater risk
aversion. Another member stated that interest rates
exhibited greater volatility after the March meeting.
He/she added that in May, however, these registered
a certain downward adjustment, in line with
international markets. One member pointed out that
the dynamics of short-term interest rates have also
responded to revisions in expectations regarding
Mexico’s monetary policy. He/she specified that
neither markets nor analysts anticipate a change in
the reference rate in May, while the former expects it
to reach 10.2 and the latter 10.0%, by the end of the
year. Another member argued that short-term
interest rates in domestic markets have also been
subject to pressures stemming from the increasing
cost that Pemex has faced to issue debt. Regarding
capital flows, **one member pointed out that there**
were outflows of foreign investors in M-bonos, which
were partially offset by inflows in Udibonos. Another
member noted that stock markets performed
favorably.

**Some members highlighted that total financing**
continued expanding. **The majority indicated that**
**credit granted by commercial banks maintained**
**its dynamism.** **One member expressed that**
commercial bank financing to businesses, mortgage
lending, and consumer credit grew during the first
quarter of 2024. However, some members observed
that lending to businesses and consumer credit
continued moderating. **One member added that,**
according to the survey of banks, lending standards

8


-----

remained tight. **Another member mentioned that,**
regarding credit risk, delinquency levels remain low
and stable.

**_Monetary policy_**

**The Governing Board evaluated the easing of the**
**effects of the shocks on inflation and its**
**determinants, the behavior of medium- and long-**
**term** **inflation** **expectations,** **and** **the**

**disinflationary process. It stated that challenges**
**and risks prevail, which requires monetary policy**
**to continue being managed prudently. It took into**
**account the expectation that the effects of the**
**shocks will affect inflation longer than had been**
**anticipated. Concurrently, it estimated that said**
**shocks will continue easing. Based on the above,**
**with the presence of all its members, the Board**
**decided unanimously to leave the target for the**
**overnight interbank interest rate unchanged at**
**11.00%. With this decision, the monetary policy**
**stance remains restrictive and will continue**
**being conducive to the convergence of inflation**
**to the 3% target in the forecast horizon.**

**The Board will thoroughly monitor inflationary**
**pressures as well as all factors that have an**
**incidence on the foreseen path for inflation and**
**its expectations. Looking ahead, it will assess the**
**inflationary environment in order to discuss**
**reference rate adjustments. It will also consider**
**the incidence of both the restrictive policy stance**
**that has been maintained and that prevailing in**
**the future on inflation throughout the horizon in**
**which monetary policy operates. Actions will be**
**implemented in such a way that the reference**
**rate remains consistent at all times with the**
**trajectory needed to enable an orderly and**
**sustained convergence of headline inflation to**
**the 3% target during the forecast period. The**
**central bank reaffirms its commitment with its**
**primary mandate and the need to continue its**
**efforts to consolidate an environment of low and**
**stable inflation.**

**One** **member pointed out that during this inflationary**
episode, there have been different stages, each of
them entailing alternative implications for monetary
policy conduction. He/she highlighted how, given its
commitment to its primary mandate, Banco de
México raised the reference rate by 725 basis points
to a level of 11.25%. He/she recalled that when the
reference rate was last increased in March 2023,


headline inflation was at 6.85% and core inflation
was at 8.09%. He/she commented that at that time it
was evident that before considering reference rate
cuts, it was necessary to observe a significant
advance of the ongoing disinflation process. He/she
argued that, in contrast, in 2024 both headline and
core inflation have remained at levels noticeably
lower than their peak levels during this inflationary
episode, and the disinflationary process has
advanced. He/she considered that the current
environment, while still challenging, is less adverse
than in 2022 and early 2023. He/she deemed that,
consequently, we are now entering a new stage
where it is possible to assess the possibility of
reference rate cuts on a meeting-by-meeting basis,
depending on the evolution of the inflation outlook.
He/she explained that for this reason the last
monetary policy meeting the reference rate was
reduced by 25 basis points, given the progress in
disinflation. However, he/she considered that

subsequent reductions should be gradual given the
higher-than-anticipated persistence in services

inflation, and that the effects of inflationary shocks
are now expected to dissipate more gradually than
previously anticipated. He/she stated that, given this
outlook it is appropriate to make a pause at this
monetary policy meeting. He/she indicated that the
inflationary environment is such that it allows to
consider potential reference rate cuts going forward,
with decisions contingent on the inflation outlook.
He/she stated that a continued assessment of all
inflation determinants will be necessary. He/she
underlined that it is essential to continue weighing the
undeniable progress achieved in Mexico’s

disinflationary process against the challenges that
still prevail. He/she highlighted that it will be
important to consider that the restrictive policy stance
that has been maintained and the one prevailing in
the future will impact the evolution of inflation within
the planning horizon. He/she emphasized that
monetary policy decisions will continue to be such
that the monetary policy stance leads annual
headline inflation to converge to the 3% target in the
forecast period.

**Another** **member expressed that it is valid to**
acknowledge the progress made in the disinflationary
process, attributable to a sound, timely, and effective
monetary policy. However, he/she pointed out that
looking into the past does not guarantee the
convergence of inflation within the planning horizon.
He/she argued that the inflation forecast targeting

9


-----

regime requires looking into the future and ensure
that monetary conditions remain at the levels
required to achieve such convergence. He/she
warned that, in view of the risks faced and the
slowdown in the disinflationary process, the achieved
monetary restriction should be firmly maintained. In
particular, he/she reiterated his/her concern about
the potential effects on the inflation trajectory of a
divergence of public finances from what is expected
or being affected by the situation of Pemex. He/she
also reiterated the challenges that will be faced in
2025 regarding the synchronization of fiscal and
monetary policies, given that the expectation of a
decline in inflation is subject to the Public Sector
Borrowing Requirements (PSBR) being reduced by
2.9 points of GDP in a single year, which, if it does
not materialize, would exert greater-than-expected
pressures on aggregate demand and debt markets.
He/she also indicated that the inflation forecast was
revised upwards, as he/she had warned could occur
during the previous meeting. He/she argued that the
reduction in the reference rate in the March decision,
which he/she considered premature, incurred a
social cost, as it required extending the monetary
restriction for a longer period. He/she mentioned that.
looking ahead, commitment to the primary goal must
be strengthened and that a forward-looking and datadependent approach should be prioritized, avoiding
any premature adjustments. In this regard, he/she
deemed that communication with the markets should
prioritize institutional messages and avoid

generating volatility. Finally, he/she argued that it is
important for the central bank to intensify its efforts in
reviewing exhaustively its forecasting tools that allow
the inclusion of the changes observed in recent years
in both global and Mexican economies and that might
have generated structural changes, in addition to
other factors, such as climate change, which have
become increasingly relevant in understanding price
formation and that have implied less precision. This
will contribute to a more efficient attainment of the
price stability objective for the benefit of the
population, especially its lowest-income segment.

**One** **member** emphasized that the current

disinflationary process is complex and not devoid of
difficulties. He/she underlined that despite the
progress in core inflation, non-core inflation has
reversed considerably, while the central bank’s
forecasts now consider a greater persistence of the
services component. He/she mentioned that the
main upward risk to inflation indicated in the balance


for inflation has materialized and, consequently,
timely convergence to the target has been delayed
by two quarters. He/she added that, although most
recent data indicate that the economic cycle has lost
momentum, demand is expected to recover
significantly during the second quarter of the year.
He/she considered that synchronization between a
higher expected persistence in inflation and the
temporary dynamism of economic activity suggests
that it is prudent to make a pause to the adjustments
in the reference rate, in order to have more
information on inflation determinants and on the
performance of the monetary policy transmission
channels. He/she commented that, although the exante real interest rate decreased in the last monetary
policy decision, the real exchange rate continued
appreciating, reaching levels unseen since 2008,
while interest rates implied by market instruments
increased considerably. In this regard, he/she stated
that monetary conditions remain notably restrictive.
He/she highlighted that the difference between the
ex-ante real interest rate and the central estimate of
the neutral rate is approximately three times the
difference between observed inflation and its target.
He/she pointed out that this proportion is

unprecedented in Mexico and has facilitated the
effective operation of all the monetary policy
transmission channels throughout the cycle.

However, he/she warned that the effects of such
transmission are not symmetrical across inflation
components, resulting in differentiated lags in price
adjustments between goods and services. He/she
explained that this suggests that the pace and scale
of possible adjustments in the monetary policy
stance should continue to be gradual to ensure the
transmission to less sensitive components without
causing disorderly deviations in those that are more
reactive to different transmission channels. Looking
ahead, he/she judged that if the evolution of
macroeconomic conditions is consistent with

updated inflation forecasts, it may be appropriate to
reassess any space for recalibrating the level of
monetary restriction once again. He/she argued that
the data-dependent approach relying on forecasts
and on a decision-by-decision basis, is the best way
to ensure a prudent implementation of monetary
policy based on the complexity of the disinflationary
process, and fully complying with the constitutional
mandate and seeking to achieve an orderly
adjustment of the economy and financial markets.

10


-----

**Another member expressed that, given the**
stagnation of inflation, a deteriorated balance of risks
and the expectation of inflation above target for a
longer period, no additional fine-tuning of the target
rate can be made, either now or in the following
months, and a restrictive stance should be
maintained for an extended period. He/she

considered that the moderate reductions in core
inflation and the risks that non-core inflation reaches
its historical average, demand a restrictive stance
that avoids indirect effects of the non-core
component on core inflation. He/she argued that a
monetary easing cycle appears distant, and thus the
fine-tuning of the previous decision needs to be
interpreted correctly, considering that changes to the
nominal rate seek to maintain the monetary policy
stance relatively constant in a range of restriction for
the ex-ante real rate between 7 and 7.5%. He/she
mentioned that the weakness and low efficiency of
most transmission channels in Mexico supports the
case for maintaining the level of restriction for a
longer period, and therefore adjustments to the
reference rate should be more spaced out and more
gradual than as anticipated by analysts. He/she
pointed out that the vigorous growth of bank lending
reflects the weakness of the credit channel, and that
the high liquidity of the Mexican peso results in
exchange rate fluctuations that are beyond monetary
policy and limit the extent of the exchange rate
transmission channel. He/she argued that the
expectations channel is the one that operates with
greater effectiveness. He/she judged that analyzing
the output gap, delinquency rates, or the economic
slowdown becomes relevant only to the extent that
they contribute to understanding how monetary
policy can anchor inflation expectations. He/she
stated that inflation expectations above 3% should
not be tolerated for any term, and therefore
intermediate targets focused on returning these
expectations to their historical averages should be
discarded. Instead, advantage should be taken of the
high monetary restriction to continuously, forcefully
and unrestrictedly converge to 3%. He/she indicated
that in subsequent decisions, the signals sent and
their effects on inflation expectations should be
carefully assessed. In this regard, he/she added that
the direction of adjustments of the target rate is an
even stronger signal than the level of the reference
rate per se. For example, he/she underlined that, on
this occasion, lowering the rate from 11 to 10.75%
would send a premature signal of complacency with
the observed trajectory of inflation. On the contrary


he/she noted that maintaining the target rate
unchanged signals that the central bank is not
satisfied with inflation levels, that inflationary risks
are acknowledged, and that there is a commitment to
the 3% target. For this reason, he/she added that the
central bank communication must assure that the
bank is determined to attain the target at all costs.
He/she suggested that for the upcoming decisions,
not only should the current level of monetary
restriction be maintained as long as core inflation,
especially its services component, does not show a
clear downward trend, but this intention should be
explicitly stated in the forward guidance. He/she
commented that in the second half of the year there
would be greater clarity to make fine adjustments,
even more gradual than anticipated, and only if
conditions warrant it. He/she affirmed that monetary
policy decisions should remain independent of the
decisions made by the Federal Reserve and that it is
not possible to compare Mexico’s interest rate
spreads with those of other countries since the target
rates respond to contexts and needs that are not
entirely comparable. He/she cautioned that if inflation
and its expectations remain persistently outside the
variability range, the possibility of assessing the
degree of monetary restriction required to achieve
the 3% target should be considered.

**One member considered that, in light of the revision**
of the inflation forecast resulting from a greater
persistence of the services component, it is
appropriate to leave the reference rate unchanged on
this occasion. He/she stated that this allows to
reinforce a stance conducive to preventing inflation
expectations from becoming contaminated. In this
context, he/she deemed it relevant for the conduction
of monetary policy to assess the dynamics within
services inflation. He/she mentioned that the
subindex of other services shows greater persistence
compared to its historical norm. He/she added that,
as its relationship with the merchandise component
strengthened, it continues to reflect in a lagged
manner the multiple shocks that gave rise to the
atypical inflationary episode. He/she highlighted that
other components of services inflation, such as
housing, and which initially exhibited less

persistence, have been reverting to their typical
behavior. He/she added that monetary policy is
transmitted heterogeneously to different components
of inflation, with a more lagged effect on services, as
this sector is less capital-intensive and more laborintensive. He/she pointed out that these elements
should be taken into account in monetary policy
implementation since they do not indicate new

11


-----

pressures, but rather that disturbances observed
over the previous years continue to dissipate, albeit
at a slower pace. He/she argued that the described
phenomenon requires maintaining an adequate
monetary restriction given a less adverse risk outlook
than that faced in 2023, and thus it does not require
keeping the monetary policy stance at historically
restrictive levels. He/she stated that a gradual
approach will allow adjusting the monetary

restriction, ensuring it continues to be transmitted to
other sectors where its impact has been less
pronounced. He/she commented that the monetary
policy stance should consider the trends in the
inflation outlook overall and avoid adopting an overly
data-dependent approach or focusing on a single
variable. He/she stated that progress in the
inflationary outlook is undeniable given the significant
reductions in inflation, the gradual mitigation of the
risk of inflation settling at high levels, and that,
looking ahead, there is the expectation that it will
continue decreasing, albeit at a slower pace.
Considering all of the above, he/she sustained that
an adjustment to the policy rate at the next meeting
could be considered if the intermediate inflation
targets, such as the inflation forecast, are met.
He/she expressed that the current policy stance is
highly restrictive and that, even with additional
adjustments, it will remain robust despite changes in
the relative stance compared to other economies.
He/she emphasized that continuing with rate
adjustments does not imply abandoning a restrictive
stance. He/she warned that such stance will remain
necessary throughout the forecast horizon, given the
challenges that still prevail.

**3. MONETARY POLICY DECISION**

The Governing Board evaluated the easing of the
effects of the shocks on inflation and its

determinants, the behavior of medium- and long-term
inflation expectations, and the disinflationary


process. It stated that challenges and risks prevail,
which requires monetary policy to continue being
managed prudently. It took into account the
expectation that the effects of the shocks will affect
inflation longer than had been anticipated.

Concurrently, it estimated that said shocks will
continue easing. Based on the above, with the
presence of all its members, the Board decided
unanimously to leave the target for the overnight
interbank interest rate unchanged at 11.00%. With
this decision, the monetary policy stance remains
restrictive and will continue being conducive to the
convergence of inflation to the 3% target in the
forecast horizon.

The Board will thoroughly monitor inflationary
pressures as well as all factors that have an
incidence on the foreseen path for inflation and its
expectations. Looking ahead, it will assess the
inflationary environment in order to discuss reference
rate adjustments. It will also consider the incidence
of both the restrictive policy stance that has been
maintained and that prevailing in the future on
inflation throughout the horizon in which monetary
policy operates. Actions will be implemented in such
a way that the reference rate remains consistent at
all times with the trajectory needed to enable an
orderly and sustained convergence of headline
inflation to the 3% target during the forecast period.
The central bank reaffirms its commitment with its
primary mandate and the need to continue its efforts
to consolidate an environment of low and stable
inflation.

**4. VOTING**

Victoria Rodríguez, Galia Borja, Irene Espinosa,
Jonathan Heath, and Omar Mejía voted in favor of
leaving the overnight interbank interest rate

unchanged at 11.00%.

12


-----

**ANNEX[]**

The information in this Annex was prepared for this
meeting by the staff of Banco de México’s Directorate
General of Economic Research and Directorate
General of Central Bank Operations. It does not
necessarily reflect the considerations of the

members of the Governing Board as to the monetary
policy decision.

**A.1. External conditions**

**A.1.1. World economic activity**

During the first quarter of 2024, world economic
activity would have expanded at a faster pace than
that observed in the previous quarter and

heterogeneity in the pace of growth among countries
would have persisted. Overall, there would have
been greater dynamism in the main emerging
economies. In contrast, most advanced economies
continued showing sluggishness, with the United
States being an exception. Purchasing Managers'
Indices point to a modest growth in the services
sector and manufacturing activity at the global level
in the beginning of the second quarter (Chart 1).
However, manufacturing production, on the contrary,
would have remained weak in a large number of
advanced economies. In February, world trade
indicators continued reflecting the stagnation that
has been observed since the third quarter of 2023.
Among global risks, the following stand out: the
intensification of geopolitical turmoil, the prolongation
of inflationary pressures, tight financial conditions,
and, to a lesser extent, challenges to financial
stability.

In the United States, the pace of expansion of
economic activity moderated during the first quarter
of 2024, after the robust growth observed in the
previous two quarters. GDP grew at a seasonally
adjusted quarterly rate of 0.4%, after having done so
1.2 and 0.8% in the third and fourth quarters of 2023,
respectively.[1] Such moderation reflected the

negative contributions of net exports and the
accumulation of inventories. The components of
domestic demand, nevertheless, continued showing
resilience, with the dynamism of private consumption
standing out (Chart 2).

 Note: In the electronic version of this document, you can obtain
the data to generate all the graphs and tables included in it by
clicking on them, except for those that are not produced or
elaborated by Banco de México.


**Chart 1**

**Purchasing Managers’ Index:**

**production component for advanced,**

**emerging and global economies**

Diffusion index, s. a.[1/]

60

April

58

56

54

52

50

48

46 26.5 Manufacturing advanced

20.8 Services advanced

44 37.8 Manufacturing emerging

31.6 Services emerging

42 32.5 Manufacturing global

23.5 Services global

40

J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A

2020 2021 2022 2023 2024

s. a. / Seasonally adjusted figures.
1/ The index varies between 0 and 100 points. A reading above 50 points
indicates an expansion and below 50 indicates a contraction. A reading
equal to 50 points indicates no change.
Note: Figures in the chart correspond to respective minimum levels of each
indicator, in the same order as the labels.
Source: IHS Markit.

**Chart 2**

**US: real GDP and components**

Quarterly percentage rate and contribution

in percentage points, s. a.

3.0

Private consumption expenditures
Residential investment

2.5 Nonresidential investment

Change in private inventories

2.0 Net exports

Government consumption expenditures

1.5 Total

1.0

0.5

0.0

-0.5

-1.0

I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV I

2021 2022 2023 2024

s. a. / Seasonally adjusted figures.
Source: Bureau of Economic Analysis.

In March, US industrial production grew at a
seasonally adjusted monthly rate of 0.4%, the same
rate of expansion as that registered in February. This
result is attributed to the progress in manufacturing
and in electricity and gas generation. The 0.5%
growth in manufacturing production was driven, in

1 Expressed as a seasonally adjusted quarterly rate, the change in
US GDP was 1.6% in the first quarter of 2024, and 3.4 and 4.9%
in the fourth and third quarters of 2023, respectively.


-----

part, by an increase in vehicle production.
Purchasing Managers' Indices point to a slight
increase in manufacturing activity in April.

The US labor market remained tight, despite the
moderation shown by various indicators. After having
expanded by 303 thousand new jobs in March, the
non-farm payroll moderated its growth rate, by
increasing by 175 thousand positions in April. The
latter was the lowest monthly increase since October
2023. Initial claims for unemployment insurance
remained at low levels, registering 208 thousand new
claims in the week that ended on April 27. The
unemployment rate increased from 3.8% in March to
3.9% in April. New vacancies decreased from 8.8
million in February to 8.5 million in March, although
they remain above pre-pandemic levels. Most wage
growth indicators moderated. In April, average hourly
wages grew at an annual rate of 4.0%, after having
increased 4.2% in March.[2]

In the euro area, economic activity registered slight
growth in the first quarter of 2024, after having
contracted in the previous two quarters.[3] This, in an
environment of financial conditions that remain tight.
The labor market in this region remained robust. The
unemployment rate stood at 6.5% between January
and March, remaining at a historically low level. The
above in a context in which the labor participation
rate has been increasing.

For the rest of the major advanced economies,
overall, moderate growth is expected during the first
quarter of 2024. In particular, economic activity in the
United Kingdom is expected to have recovered, after
having contracted in each of the previous two
quarters. Labor markets in this group of economies
would have remained tight, despite the moderation
shown by some indicators.

Most of the major emerging economies are expected
to show greater dynamism in the first quarter of the
year compared to the previous quarter, mainly in
Latin America and Eastern Europe. Meanwhile,
Emerging Asia would have registered a more marked
heterogeneity in the pace of growth among countries.
In the particular case of China, economic activity
grew at a faster pace compared to the previous
quarter. In this context, its GDP grew at a seasonally
adjusted quarterly rate of 1.6%, after having
increased 1.2% in the fourth quarter of 2023.[4]

2 Average hourly earnings of production and nonsupervisory
employees.
3 Expressed as a seasonally adjusted quarterly rate, the change in
euro area GDP was 0.3% in the first quarter of 2024 and -0.1% in
the fourth and third quarters of 2023.


However, in March, retail sales and industrial
production slowed their pace of growth. Said
economy continues facing difficulties due to the
weakness of its real estate sector and low confidence
by economic agents. This, despite the diverse stimuli
implemented by its authorities to boost growth.

Since Mexico's last monetary policy decision,
international commodity prices registered a mixed
behavior. Oil prices exhibited volatility. During most
of the period, prices rose due to geopolitical tensions
in the Middle East and Russia, as well as the
agreement reached in March between the members
of the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting
Countries and allied countries (OPEC+) to extend
production cuts until the second quarter of 2024.
However, in early May, crude oil prices declined due
to lower demand for fuels in several countries, which
was reflected in higher-than-expected inventory
levels in the United States. Likewise, natural gas
reference prices exhibited a volatile and upwardbiased behavior for most of the period. Prices in
Europe and Asia were subject to upward pressures
in April due to the possibility of gas supply disruptions
caused by the attacks on storage infrastructure in
Ukraine and the conflict in Middle East. Likewise, in
early May, reference gas prices increased due, in
part, to lower US gas production. Grain prices
showed an overall upward behavior. In particular,
wheat and soybean prices increased in late April due
to uncertainty regarding adverse weather conditions
in the United States, Russia and Brazil. Additional
upward pressures were registered on wheat prices
due to attacks on grain storage infrastructure in
Ukraine. Metal prices, in general, trended upwards.
Industrial metal prices increased due to expectations
of a greater demand from China and, in mid-April, by
restrictions imposed on Russian metals by the US
and British stock exchanges. Precious metal prices
rose due to the diversification of central banks'
reserves and diverse geopolitical tensions. Gold
prices reached historical highs in April. However, this
trend partially reversed in the fourth week of April due
to a moderation in the perception of geopolitical risk
in the Middle East.

**A.1.2. Monetary policy and international financial**
**markets**

4 Expressed as an annual rate, China's GDP growth was 5.3% in
the first quarter of 2024 and 5.2% in the fourth quarter of 2023.


-----

Since Mexico's last monetary policy decision, annual
headline inflation declined in most advanced
economies (
Chart **3). However, in some cases, its most recent**
reading rebounded due to, in general, higher
pressures on energy prices. Core inflation continued
registering gradual reductions, although in some
cases it registered slight increases due to greater
pressures on services prices. In the United States,
annual headline inflation measured by the Personal
Consumption Expenditures Price Index (PCEPI) rose
from 2.5% in February to 2.7% in March. This
increase mainly reflected a rise in energy and food
inflation, as annual core inflation remained practically
unchanged, by registering 2.84 to 2.82% between
such months. The monthly variation of the core index
remained at high levels of around 0.3% in the last two
months in light of continued pressures on services
prices. Annual headline inflation measured by the
Consumer Price Index (CPI) increased from 3.2% in
February to 3.5% in March. Its core component went
from 3.75 to 3.80% during the same period.

Analysts' inflation forecasts for main advanced
economies foresee a moderation in headline inflation
throughout 2024 from its current levels. However,
they estimate that it will remain at levels above their
central banks' inflation targets in 2024. Longer-term
inflation expectations for these economies drawn
from financial instruments for these economies
increased slightly as compared to those registered in
the third week of March.

**Chart 3**

**Selected advanced economies:**

**headline inflation**

Annual percentage change

12

United States PCE 1/

10 United States CPI

Japan
Euro area 2/

8

United Kingdom
Canada

6

4

2

March

0

April

-2

J J J J J J J J J J

2019 2020 2021 2022 2023

1/ The personal consumption expenditures price index is used.
2/ Preliminary figures as of April.
Source: Bureau of Economic Analysis, Bureau of Labor Statistics, Eurostat,
Bank of Japan, the UK Office for National Statistics, and Statistics Canada.

Annual headline inflation declined in a large number
of emerging economies. However, in some cases it


rebounded, partly as a result of higher pressures on
energy and, in certain cases, food prices. Although in
most of these economies headline inflation remained
above their respective central banks' targets, in
various inflation was within each central bank's
variability interval. In China, annual inflation
decreased from 0.7% in February to 0.1% in March,
after the February figure reflected both a comparison
base effect and changes in demand associated with
the Lunar New Year holiday, which for the first time
since the onset of the pandemic was not affected by
factors related to activity and mobility restrictions.
Core inflation declined in most main emerging
economies.

In this context, since Mexico's last monetary policy
decision, the central banks of the major advanced
and emerging economies made decisions regarding
their reference rates in a heterogeneous manner,
depending on the evolution of inflation and other
economic indicators in each country. Regarding
future actions, overall, central banks indicated that
their decisions will remain dependent on the
evolution of inflation and other economic data. Some
of these institutions anticipate that reference rates
will remain at restrictive levels for some time and
communicated that they are prepared to make
additional adjustments, if necessary, in order to bring
inflation back to target. Others highlighted the need
to be more confident that inflation is returning to
target before relaxing their monetary policy stances.
In the main advanced economies, most central banks
left their reference rates unchanged and continued
reducing their securities' holdings gradually (Chart
4).


-----

**Chart 4**

**Reference rates and trajectories**

**implied in OIS curves[1/]**

Percent

7 **― US Federal Reserve 2/** End of End of End of

**― Bank of England** 2022 2023 2024

6 **― Bank of Japan**

**― European Central Bank deposit rate**
**― OIS implicit trajectory May 8, 2024**

5 **--- OIS implicit trajectory Mar 21, 2024**

4

3

2

1 Forecasts

0

-1

2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 2024

1/ OIS: Fixed floating interest rate swap where the fixed interest rate is
associated with the effective overnight reference rate.
2/ For the observed reference rate of the U.S., the average interest rate of
the target range of the federal funds rate (5.00%- 5.25%) is used.
Source: Bloomberg.

At its May meeting, the US Federal Reserve left the
target range for the federal funds rate unchanged for
the sixth consecutive decision. Thus, it remains
between 5.25 and 5.50%. It reiterated that, when
considering any adjustment to the target range for
the federal funds rate, the Federal Open Market
Committee (FOMC) will carefully assess incoming
data, the evolution of the economic outlook and the
balance of risks. It indicated that the Committee
judges that risks associated with achieving its
employment and inflation goals have been showing
a better balance. It reiterated that the Committee
does not expect it to be appropriate to reduce the
target range for the federal funds rate before it has
greater confidence that inflation is moving

sustainably toward 2%. It underlined that the
Committee would be prepared to adjust the monetary
policy stance if risks emerge that could impede the
attainment of its goals. The Federal Reserve
continued reducing the size of its balance sheet. In
this regard, in its press release it mentioned that
starting in June, the Committee will begin to slow the
pace of reduction.[5]

During the press conference for the May decision,
the Federal Reserve chairman noted that so far this
year, inflation data have not generated greater
confidence among FOMC members that inflation is
converging toward 2%, pointing out that inflation
readings have exceeded expectations. He added

5 The Federal Reserve will reduce the monthly redemption limit on
Treasury securities from 60 to 25 billion dollars starting in June.
Likewise, the Committee will maintain the monthly redemption limit


that it is likely that it will take longer than expected to
achieve this increased confidence and that they are
prepared to maintain the current interest rate target
range for as long as appropriate. He indicated that
they are also prepared to respond to an unexpected
weakening of the labor market. Most recent
expectations drawn from financial instruments
suggest that the federal funds rate would stand at
4.9% at the end of 2024 and 4.2% by the end of 2025.

Similarly, the European Central Bank (ECB) left its
reference rates unchanged in April for the fifth
consecutive decision. Thus, its refinancing, key
lending and key deposit rates remained at 4.50, 4.75
and 4.00%, respectively. The Governing Council
pointed out that it considers interest rates to be at
levels that are making a substantial contribution to
the disinflationary process, and reiterated that its
future decisions will ensure that its reference rates
will remain at sufficiently restrictive levels for as long
as necessary. It added that if the inflation outlook
core inflation dynamics, and the strength of monetary
policy transmission reinforce its confidence that
inflation is converging to its target on a sustained
basis it would be appropriate to reduce the current
level of its monetary policy tightening. In this regard,
it again indicated that it will maintain a datadependent approach to determine the appropriate
duration and degree of such tightening and added
that it is not committing to a particular monetary
policy path.

At the press conference, the president of said
institution pointed out that inflation declines will not
be linear and will fluctuate around the current level in
the coming months to subsequently decline to the
inflation target during 2025. Regarding its Pandemic
Emergency Purchase Program (PEPP), the

Governing Council continued with the normalization
of its balance sheet and reiterated that it expects to
conclude the reinvestments of maturing securities
purchased under said program by the end of 2024.

Regarding market expectations for monetary policy
rates, based on the latest available information,
interest rates implicit in interest rate swap curves
(OIS) registered a moderation in expectations of rate
cuts. These anticipate a decrease of at least 25 basis
points for the third quarter for the euro area, Canada
and the United Kingdom, and for the fourth quarter of
2024 for the United States.

on agency debt and agency mortgage-backed securities at 35 billion
dollars, and will reinvest in Treasury securities any principal payments
above this limit.


-----

Since Mexico's last monetary policy decision, the
central banks of the main emerging economies made
decisions on their monetary policy rates in a
differentiated manner, considering the specific
economic circumstances of their countries. Some
central banks, mainly in Latin America and Eastern
Europe, cut their reference rates in their most recent
decisions. In some cases, such as Chile, Hungary
and Brazil, they moderated the pace of rate cuts.
Others, in turn, decided not to adjust their reference
rate, after having done so in previous decisions. In
China, the central bank left its interest rates
unchanged in April, including the 1- and 5-year Loan
Prime Rates (LPRs). Meanwhile, the Central Bank of
Indonesia raised its reference rate by 25 basis points
at its April meeting, after having kept it unchanged for
five consecutive meetings since October 2023.

Financial conditions deteriorated since the beginning
of April 2024. This was associated with the threat of
an escalation of the geopolitical conflict in the Middle
East and with new data suggesting that the US labor
market remains tight and inflation has some
persistence, leading to expectations of a more
prolonged restrictive monetary policy stance in that
country than previously anticipated (Chart 5). More
recently, starting in May, given labor data suggesting
a moderation in the dynamism of employment in the
United States, there was an improvement in financial
conditions that partially reversed the tightening
registered in April.

In line with the evolution of financial conditions,
medium and long-term rates in the main advanced
and emerging economies increased with respect to
the level registered in the last monetary policy
decision. (Chart 6 and Chart 7). Stock markets in
advanced and emerging economies registered
mixed results. In the foreign exchange markets, the
US dollar appreciated against the currencies of
emerging and advanced countries. Lastly, since the
last monetary policy decision, capital outflows to
emerging economies have been registered.

However, these flows exhibited a differentiated
behavior among asset classes, with net outflows of
equity assets and slight inflows from fixed-income
assets during most of the reporting period.


1/ MSCI Emerging Markets Index, which includes 24 countries.
2/ DXY: a weighted average estimated by the Intercontinental Exchange
(ICE) of the nominal exchange rate of the main six currencies operated
globally with the following weights: EUR: 57.6%, JPY: 13.6%, GBP: 11.9%,
CAD: 9.1%, SEK: 4.2%, and CHF: 3.6%.
Source: Bloomberg.


**Chart 5**

**Financial conditions index[1/]**

Units


103

102

101

100


Financial Conditions Index - global
Financial Conditions Index - United States
Financial Conditions Index - Euro area 2/

1/ The financial conditions index is constructed considering the effect of five
variables on economic activity: the reference interest rate, the 10-year
government bond, the spread of investment grade bonds over the
government debt bond with equivalent maturity, the ratio of a stock index
with 10-year average earnings per share, and the trade weighted exchange
rate.
2/ In the case of the euro area, the spread between the sovereign bonds of
France, Italy, Spain, the Netherlands, Belgium, Austria, Portugal and
Finland over the German 10-year bond is also considered. The vertical
black line indicates the last calendarized monetary policy meeting of Banco
de México.
Source: Bloomberg and Goldman Sachs.


**Chart 6**

**Change in selected financial indicators from**

**March 21 to May 8,2024**

Percent; basis points Percentage, basis points


10%

5%


50

25


0%

-5%


0

-25


-10%


-50


-----

**Chart 7**

**Selected emerging economies: financial assets**

**performance as of March 14, 2024**

Percent, basis points Percent, basis points

**2-year** **10-year**

**Equity**
**Region** **Country** **Currencies** **interest** **interest** **CDS**

**markets**

**rates** **rates**

**Mexico** **-1.30%** **1.92%** **42** **29** **11**

**Brazil** **-1.89%** **0.64%** **57** **54** **16**

**Latin**

**Chile** **1.07%** **1.52%** **7** **27** **9**

**America**

**Colombia** **-0.50%** **7.98%** **64** **44** **27**

**Peru** **-1.03%** **-0.71%** **7** **10** **17**

**Russia** **0.48%** **4.39%** **15** **8** **N.A.**

**Poland** **-1.39%** **3.19%** **18** **21** **4**

**Emerging**

**Turkey** **-0.39%** **15.68%** **-3** **166** **-15**

**Europe**

**Czechia** **-0.05%** **2.26%** **41** **32** **3**

**Hungary** **0.76%** **4.64%** **56** **36** **-5**

**China** **-0.13%** **2.19%** **-18** **-4** **-3**

**Malaysia** **-1.14%** **2.97%** **11** **10** **6**

**India** **-0.81%** **1.07%** **8** **11** **3**

**Asia**

**Philippines** **-3.29%** **-5.06%** **50** **73** **6**

**Thailand** **-3.28%** **-1.79%** **25** **26** **2**

**Indonesia** **-2.84%** **-4.02%** **58** **52** **4**

**Africa** **South Africa** **1.84%** **4.21%** **21** **16** **9**

Note: An upward adjustment indicates currency appreciation. Interest rates
correspond to swap rates at the specified terms, except for Hungary, where
government securities with 3-year maturities were used as a reference. For
the Philippines, a 2-year swap rate was used, and for Russia, 2-year and 3year swap rates were used. The latest CDS data for Russia is as of June 1,
2022.
Source: Bloomberg.

**A.2. Current situation of the Mexican economy**

**A.2.1. Mexican markets**

In the international context described, since Mexico’s
last monetary policy decision, the exchange rate of
the Mexican peso against the US dollar exhibited
episodes of volatility and slightly depreciated.
Meanwhile, interest rates on government securities
exhibited generalized increases (Chart 8).

The Mexican peso traded in an intraday range
between 16.26 and 18.25 pesos per US dollar since
the last monetary policy decision. During this period,
it depreciated by 1.30%, mainly due to the global
decrease in risk appetite, escalating geopolitical
tensions in the Middle East, and the liquidation of
long Mexican peso positions (Chart 9). In general,
trading conditions deteriorated during the period.


Range in 2024 Range since previous monetary policy decision Mar 14, 2024 May 3, 2024


Source: Banco de México.

Interest rates on government securities increased up
to 44 basis points in the medium-term segment, while
in the long term they rose up to 32 basis points (Chart
10). The yields on real rate instruments exhibited a
negative behavior with increases across all terms.
They reached their highest levels since 2001 for the
3-year term and since 2008 for the 10- and 30-year
terms. Breakeven inflation implicit in spreads
between nominal and real rates of market

instruments decreased in the short term and
registered limited variations in longer-term nodes
(Chart 11). These movements occurred in an
environment in which trading conditions deteriorated.


**Chart 8**

**Mexican markets’ performance**

Percent, MXN/USD and index


10.8

10.4


59,000

58,500

58,000

57,500

57,000

56,500

56,000

55,500

55,000

54,500


10.0

9.6


9.2

8.8


17.4

17.2

17.0

16.8

16.6

16.4

16.2


M-bonds


7.0

6.7

6.4

6.1

5.8

5.5

5.2

4.9

4.6

4.3

4.0

Inflation-indexed bonds


May 3, 2024


Source: Bloomberg and PIP.

**Chart 9**

**Mexican peso exchange rate**

MXN/USD


26

Mexican peso

25 100-day moving average

24 50-day moving average

23

22

21

20

19

18

17

16

J M  M  J  S  N  J  M M  J  S  N  J M  M  J  S  N  J  M  M  J  S  N  J M  M

2020 2021 2022 2023 2024


-----

**Chart 10**

**Nominal yield curve of government securities**

Percent, basis points

#REF!

0

9.5

9.0

8.5

8.0

March 14, 2024 May 3, 2024 Change (March 14, 2024 to May 3, 2024)

Trading range over the period


**Chart 12**

**Interbank funding rate**

**implied in TIIE swaps**

PercentPercent


12.50

11.50

10.50

|Col1|Col2|
|---|---|
|10.50 9.50 8.50 7.50 6.50 5.50 4.50|Banxico overnight rate (reference rate) Implied interest rate in TIIE swaps for 05/03/24 Implied interest rate in TIIE swaps for 03/14/24|
|||


Source: PIP.

**Chart 11**

**Breakeven inflation and inflation risk implied in**

**interest rates of government securities**

Basis points


3.50

J  A  J  O  J  A  J  O  J  A  J  O  J  A  J  O  J  A  J  O

2021       2022       2023        2024       2025

Note: Shaded areas represent the daily trajectories since the last monetary
policy decision.
Source: PIP.

**A.2.2. Economic activity in Mexico**

According to Mexico's GDP flash estimate published
by INEGI, the low dynamism that economic activity
exhibited in the last quarter of 2023 extended into the
first quarter of 2024. GDP registered a seasonally
adjusted quarterly variation of 0.21% (Chart 13).


600

550

500

450

400

350

300

250

J

2021


A J O J

2022


**Chart 13**

**Gross Domestic Product**

Quarterly percentage change, s. a.


A J O J

2023


A J O J

2024


A


1/ Horizontal dashed lines refer to the respective averages observed from
September 2008 to date.
Source: PIP.

Regarding expectations for the path of the monetary
policy reference rate, information implicit in the
interest rate swap curve does not incorporate any
movement in May 2024. It shows an expectation of
10.21% and 8.83% for the target rate at the end of
2024 and 2025, respectively (Chart 12). On the other
hand, a small segment of analysts surveyed by
Citibanamex anticipates a reduction in the reference
rate in May, although the consensus projects a rate
cut of 25 basis points in June to reach a level of
10.75%. They estimate the rate to close the year at
10.00%.


s. a. / Seasonally adjusted figures. The chart’s range was adjusted to
facilitate its reading.
1/ The figure for the first quarter of 2024 refers to the timely estimation of
quarterly GDP published by INEGI.
Source: Mexico’s System of National Accounts (SCNM, for its Spanish
acronym), INEGI.

Regarding the evolution of domestic demand, private
consumption reactivated in February 2024, reversing
the fall observed in the previous month and trending
upwards. The category of imported goods continued


-----

exhibiting dynamism, while consumption of services
continued reactivating with respect to the stagnation
registered in the fourth quarter of 2023. In contrast,
consumption of domestic goods remained weak. In
February, gross fixed investment remained at high
levels, despite showing sluggishness at the margin.
Spending on construction was weak, although it
remained at high levels. In contrast, investment in
machinery and equipment rebounded, supported by
the component of transportation equipment.

Regarding external demand, in the first quarter of
2024, the average value of manufacturing exports in
US dollars improved somewhat compared to the
fourth quarter of 2023, reflecting a reactivation in the
non-automotive component (Chart 14).

**Chart 14**

**Manufacturing exports**

Indices 2019 = 100, s. a.

160

Total

Automotive

140

Non-automotive

120

100

80

60


40

J

2017


10.4 March

A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J M

2021 2022 2023 2024

|Total Automotive Non-automotive 10.4 March|Col2|
|---|---|
|JA J O JA J O JA J O JA J O 17 2018 2019 2020 20|JA J O JA J O JA J O J M 21 2022 2023 2024|


s. a. / Seasonally adjusted series and trend series based on data in nominal
US dollars. The former is represented by a solid line and the latter by a
dotted line. The chart’s range was adjusted to facilitate its reading.
Source: Prepared by Banco de México with data from the Tax

Administration Service (SAT, for its Spanish acronym), the Ministry of the
Economy (SE, for its Spanish acronym), Banco de México, the National
Institute of Statistics and Geography (INEGI, for its Spanish acronym).
Mexico’s Merchandise Trade Balance. The National System of Statistical
and Geographical Information (SNIEG, for its Spanish acronym).
Information of national interest.

On the production side, in a context of persistent
drought conditions reported across a number of
agricultural production regions, primary activities fell
markedly in January, and then reactivated in
February. Similarly, after the contraction in January,
services reactivated in February (Chart 15).

According to preliminary information, these sectors
are expected to have continued expanding in March.
During the period of January-February 2024,
industrial activity remained weak. Within its

components, the weakness of manufacturing activity
intensified (Chart 16). However, despite remaining at
high levels, construction decreased compared to the
fourth quarter of 2023. Preliminary information


suggests that industrial activity may have performed
better in March.

**Chart 15**

**Global Indicator of Economic Activity**

### Indices 2019 = 100, s. a.

115

Total
Secondary activities

110 Tertiary activities

Primary activities

105

100

95

90

78.3

76.3 January
70.5 February

85

J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J F

2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 2024

s. a. / Seasonally adjusted series and trend series. The former is
represented by a solid line and the latter by a dotted line. The chart’s range
was adjusted to facilitate its reading.
Source: Mexico’s System of National Accounts (SCNM, for its Spanish
acronym), INEGI.

**Chart 16**

**Industrial activity** **[1/]**

### Indices 2019 = 100, s. a.

125

115

105

95

85 Total

Mining (12%)

75

Manufacturing (63%)

Construction (19%)

65

Utilities (6%)

February

55

J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J F

2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 2024

s. a. / Seasonally adjusted series and trend series. The former is
represented by a solid line and the latter by a dotted line.
1/ Figures in parenthesis correspond to their share in the total in 2018.
Source: Mexico’s System of National Accounts (SCNM, for its Spanish
acronym), INEGI.

Regarding the cyclical position of the economy,
based on preliminary information, during the first
quarter of 2024, the point estimate of the output gap
decreased for the second consecutive quarter due to
the economic slowdown observed in the last quarter
of 2023 and the first quarter of 2024. The estimate
remained in positive territory, although not

statistically different from zero (Chart 17).


-----

In March 2024, the labor market continued to show
strength. The national and urban unemployment
rates remained at historically low levels (Chart 18).
With information up to April and with seasonally
adjusted data, the number of newly created formal
IMSS-insured jobs continued trending upwards.
Lastly, in February 2024, unit labor costs in the
manufacturing sector partially reversed the decrease
exhibited during the previous month and remained at
relatively high levels (Chart 19).

**Chart 17**

**Output gap estimates** **[1/]**

Percent of potential output, s. a

12

8

4

0

-4

-8

-12

Global Economic Activity

-16 Index (IGAE) 2/


**Chart 19**


**Productivity and unit labor cost in the**

**manufacturing sector [1/]**

Indices 2019 = 100, s. a.

115

Unit labor costs 140.6

110 Productivity

105

100

95

90

85


-20

-24


95% confidence interval 3/ Q-I
March


J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J M

2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 2024

s. a. / Calculations based on seasonally adjusted figures.
1/ Output gap estimated with a tail-corrected Hodrick-Prescott filter; see
Banco de México (2009), “Inflation Report, April-June 2009”, p.69.
2/ Figures for the timely GDP for the first quarter of 2024 and IGAE for March
2024 are consistent with this timely GDP figure.
3/ Output gap confidence interval calculated with a method of unobserved
components.
Source: Prepared by Banco de México with INEGI data.

**Chart 18**

**National and urban unemployment** **rates**

Percent, s. a.

6.5

6.0

5.5

5.0

4.5

4.0

3.5

3.0

Urban unemployment rate

2.5

National unemployment rate
March

2.0

J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J M

2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 2024

s. a. / Seasonally adjusted series and trend series. The former is
represented by a solid line and the latter by a dotted line.
Source: INEGI.


J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J F

2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 2024

s. a. / Seasonally adjusted series and trend series. The former is
represented by a solid line and the latter by a dotted line. The chart’s range
was adjusted to facilitate its reading.
1/ Productivity based on hours worked.
Source: Prepared by Banco de México with seasonally adjusted data of the
Monthly Manufacturing Industry Survey and industrial activity indicators of
Mexico’s System of National Accounts (Sistema de Cuentas Nacionales de
_México, SCNM), INEGI._

Domestic financing to the private sector continued
growing in March 2024, albeit with some moderation
compared to the dynamism observed in the second
half of 2023. Regarding its components, bank lending
to firms and households registered a slightly slower
pace of expansion than that observed at the end of
the previous year (Chart 20). Nevertheless, growth
rates in some segments remained high, especially in
credit for consumption.

As for the cost of financing, interest rates on bank
credit to firms did not change significantly compared
to the previous month, remaining at high levels.
Meanwhile, credit intermediation margins in this
segment increased slightly and reached levels
similar to those observed prior to the pandemic.
Interest rates on mortgages remained at levels
similar to those observed prior to the health
emergency. Lastly, within consumer credit, credit
card interest rates remained high and increased
slightly in December 2023, while interest rates on
payroll loans have remained relatively stable since
August 2021.

As for portfolio quality, in March 2024, delinquency
rates of bank credit to the private sector remained at
low levels. In the case of consumer portfolio, these
indicators remained stable, thus stopping the upward
trend observed since the first half of 2023.


-----

**Chart 20**

**Performing credit from commercial banks**

**to the private sector**

Annual percentage change

15

10

5

0

-5

-10 Consumption

Mortgage 1/

-15

2/

Non-financial private firms March

-20

J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J

2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 2024

1/ Adjusted to account for the withdrawal from and the incorporation of nonbank financial intermediaries to the credit statistics.
2/ Adjusted for valuation effects due to movements in the exchange rate.
Source: Banco de México.

**A.2.3. Development of inflation and inflation**
**outlook**

Annual headline inflation rose from 4.40 to 4.65%
between February and April 2024. This result
stemmed from the increase in non-core inflation. At
the same time, core inflation continued to decline
(Chart 21 and Table 1).

**Chart 21**

**Consumer Price Index**

Annual percentage change

14 CPI
13 Core
12 Non-core
11
10

9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0

-1
-2 April
-3

J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J

2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 2024

Source: INEGI.

Annual core inflation decreased from 4.64% in
February to 4.37% in April 2024. Regarding its
components, annual merchandise inflation continued
declining (Chart 22). Between the same months, it
decreased from 4.11 to 3.67%. This performance
was associated with the easing of pressures
associated with the pandemic and the war in Ukraine,
as well as the lower levels of the exchange rate
compared to those observed at the beginning of


2023. Specifically, annual food merchandise inflation
decreased from 5.54 to 4.79% and non-food
merchandise inflation from 2.75 to 2.34% during the
referred period (Chart 23). Annual services inflation
shifted from 5.30 to 5.21% during the same period.
Thus, it remained at high levels and continued
without showing a clear downward trend, still affected
by pressures related to operating costs, their passthrough to consumer prices, and the recovery in
demand for services.

Annual non-core inflation increased from 3.67 to
5.54% between February and April 2024 (Chart 24
and Table 1). This was the result of an increase in
the annual inflation of agricultural and livestock
products and energy products. The former rose from
4.77 to 7.35%, driven by the increase in the annual
variation of fruit and vegetable prices from 15.00 to
18.57%, and in livestock products’ prices from
-3.23% to -1.13%. During the same period, annual
inflation of energy products increased from 2.28 to
4.38%, driven mainly by the increase from -2.18 to
4.73% in the annual variation of L.P. gas prices and
from 3.86 to 4.86% in gasoline prices.

**Chart 22**

**Merchandise and services**

**core price subindex**

Annual percentage change

12

Merchandise

11 Services

10

9

8

7

6

5

4

3

2

1

April

0

J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J

2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 2024

Source: INEGI.

|Chart 22 Merchandise and services  core price subindex Annual percentage change|Col2|Col3|Col4|
|---|---|---|---|
|Merchandise||||
|Services||||
|||||
|||||
|||||
|||||
|||||
|||||
|||||
|||||
|||||
|Apri||||


-----

**Chart 23**

**Merchandise core price subindex**

Annual percentage change


16

Food, beverages and tobacco

14 Non-food merchandise

12

10

8

6

4

2

April

0

J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J

2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 2024


Source: INEGI.

**Chart 24**

**Non-core price subindex**

Annual percentage change

25

20

15

10

5

0

-5

Non-core

-10 Agricultural and livestock products

Energy and government-authorized prices April

-15

J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J

2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 2024

Source: INEGI.

Regarding inflation expectations drawn from the
survey conducted by Banco de México among
private sector specialists, between February and
April 2024, the medians for expected headline and
core inflation for the end of 2024 increased from 4.10
to 4.20% and from 4.06 to 4.10%, respectively.


Expectations for headline inflation for the end of 2025
increased marginally. The median of headline
inflation expectations adjusted from 3.70 to 3.71%,
while that of core inflation shifted from 3.69 to 3.72%.
At the same time, the median of headline inflation
expectations over the next four years remained at
3.68%, while expectations for core inflation for the
same horizon decreased from 3.68 to 3.63%. The
medians of headline and core inflation expectations
for the long term (5 to 8 years) remained stable. Both
medians lied at 3.50%. Lastly, breakeven inflation
showed a tendency to increase as compared to the
level observed in Mexico’s previous monetary policy
decision. Within its components, inflation

expectations implicit in market instruments

registered limited adjustments while the inflation risk
premium was revised upwards.

The disinflationary process in Mexico is expected to
continue. However, inflationary shocks have taken
longer to dissipate. In particular, services inflation is
foreseen to show more persistence, as compared to
what had been previously anticipated. Consequently,
the forecasts for both headline and core inflation
indicate a more gradual decline than previously
expected. Thus, headline inflation is currently
estimated to converge to the target in the fourth
quarter of 2025. In turn, core inflation is expected to
reach 3% in that same quarter. These projections are
subject to risks. On the upside: i) persistence of core
inflation; ii) foreign exchange depreciation; iii) greater
cost-related pressures; iv) a greater-than-expected
resilience of the economy; v) climate-related impacts,
and vi) the intensification of geopolitical conflicts. On
the downside: i) a lower-than-anticipated global
economic activity; ii) a lower pass-through from some
cost-related pressures, and iii) that Mexico’s
exchange rate levels mitigate certain pressures on
inflation. The balance of risks for the trajectory of
inflation within the forecast horizon remains biased to
the upside.


-----

**Table 1**

**Consumer Price Index and components**

Annual percentage change

**Item** **February 2024** **March 2024** **April 2024**

**CPI** **4.40** **4.42** **4.65**

**SubyacenteCore** **4.64** **4.55** **4.37**

**Merchandise** **4.11** **3.88** **3.67**

Food, beverages and tobacco 5.25 5.01 4.79

Non-food merchandise 2.75 2.53 2.34

**Services** **5.30** **5.37** **5.21**

Housing 3.73 3.78 3.73

Education (tuitions) 6.39 6.36 6.36

Other services 6.36 6.46 6.19

**Non-coreNo Subyacente** **3.67** **4.03** **5.54**

**Agricultural and livestock products** **4.77** **4.92** **7.35**

Fruits and vegetablesFruits abd vegetables 15.00 12.25 18.57

Livestock productsLivestock -3.23 -0.78 -1.13

**Energy and government-authorized prices Energéticos y Tarifas Aut. por Gobierno** **2.75** **3.29** **3.98**

Energy productsEnergy 2.28 3.25 4.38

Government-authorized pricesTarifas Autorizadas por Gobierno 3.87 3.38 3.08

Source: INEGI.


-----

-----

