-----

-----

**FOREWARNING**
This document is provided for the reader’s convenience
only. The translation from the official Spanish version
was made by Banco de México’s staff. Discrepancies
may arise between the original document in Spanish
and its English translation. For this reason, the original
Spanish version is the only official document.


**1. PLACE, DATE AND PARTICIPANTS**

**1.1. Place: Meeting held by virtual means.**

**1.2. Date of Governing Board meeting: December**
13, 2023.

**1.3. Participants:**

- Victoria Rodríguez, Governor.

- Galia Borja, Deputy Governor.

- Irene Espinosa, Deputy Governor.

- Jonathan Heath, Deputy Governor.

- Omar Mejía, Deputy Governor.

- Gabriel Yorio, Undersecretary of Finance and

Public Credit.

- Eduardo Magallón, Alternate Secretary of the

Governing Board.

Prior to this meeting, preliminary work by Banco de
México’s staff analyzing the economic and financial
environment as well as the developments in inflation
and the determinants and outlook for inflation, was
conducted and presented to the Governing Board
(see Annex).

**2. ANALYSIS AND RATIONALE BEHIND THE**
**GOVERNING BOARD’S VOTING**

**_International environment_**

**Most members stated that world economic**
**activity continued expanding during the third**
**quarter of 2023. Some members highlighted that it**
surprised to the upside. **One member noted that**
growth was higher than that registered in the second
quarter. **Some members underlined that economic**
dynamism continued despite the tightening of global
financial conditions. However, **one** member

indicated that economic activity in the euro area
remained weak, while in China, industrial production
stagnated and fixed investment continued declining.

**The** **majority** **highlighted** **that** **available**

**information suggests that the pace of expansion**
**of world economic activity would have slowed**
**down during the fourth quarter of 2023. One**
member added that a deceleration is foreseen for


2024. **Some members underlined the anticipated**
economic moderation in the euro area for that year.
Furthermore, one member mentioned that in China
economic growth is expected to remain below the
average observed from 2013 to 2019 and that,
therefore, authorities have announced new stimulus
measures, while greater heterogeneity prevails in the
rest of the emerging economies. Meanwhile, another
member argued that in the United States

manufacturing continues showing a lack of

dynamism. He/she added that some important
companies revised their sales projections for 2024
downwards in their corporate reports, given the
recent trend in consumption. Some members noted
that, despite the expected slowdown, growth
prospects for the United States have been
continuously revised upwards. Regarding the
balance of risks to global economic activity, **one**
member considered that it remains biased to the
downside. He/she noted that some factors have
become more relevant, such as the uncertainty about
the impact of tighter credit conditions, the reduction
in households' excess savings in the United States,
and the effect of higher interest rates on businesses
and households when they face the need to
refinance. He/she also noted the problems in China’s
real estate sector.

**Most members highlighted that labor markets in**
**several countries remain tight. One member**
considered that the US labor market continues being
strong despite the tightening of monetary conditions.
**However, most members mentioned that these**
**markets have shown signs of some easing. One**
member described that, in the United States, during
the second half of 2023, the non-farm payroll
registered monthly increases close to their prepandemic average, vacancies continued trending
downwards, and labor force participation rates
moderated somewhat. Another member stated that
job creation figures in that country had been
surprising to the downside, although the most recent
non-farm payroll report did so to the upside.

**Most** **members** **pointed** **out** **that** **the**

**disinflationary process continued advancing at**
**the global level. They mentioned that headline**
**inflation kept declining in most economies,**
**although it remains above their central banks'**
**targets.** **One member highlighted that in the United**
States inflation even surprised to the downside in
more recent readings. Another member argued that
the decline in global inflation has been due to the
fading of supply shocks associated with the
pandemic, to the lower pressures on energy, food
and goods prices, as well as to central banks’
restrictive policy stances.

2


-----

**Most** **members** **noted** **that** **core** **inflation**

**decreased globally, although more gradually**
**than headline inflation. They attributed the latter**
**to the persistence of services inflation. One**
member stated that, looking ahead, uncertainty
prevails about the pace of convergence of inflation to
the central banks’ targets, which is expected to occur
between the end of 2024 and the first half of 2025.
**Another member pointed out that there were slight**
reductions in inflation expectations implicit in shortand long-term financial instruments, as well as in
consumer expectations, although they remain above
the monetary authorities' targets.

As for commodity prices, some members stated that,
in general, they decreased significantly in 2023.
However, they highlighted the increase in the
international prices of sugar. The majority pointed
**out that, since the last monetary policy decision,**
**international** **crude** **oil** **reference** **prices**

**continued trending downwards.** However, **one**
member warned that, given the global demand and
production cuts, this trend could reverse.

**Most members mentioned that the central banks**
**of the major advanced economies left their**
**reference rates unchanged. They added that**
**these are expected to have reached the end of**
**their upward cycles or be nearing them. One**
member noted that analysts and market participants
no longer anticipate additional increases in the
Federal Reserve's federal funds rate. **Another**
member stated that the European Central Bank and
the Bank of England are expected to keep their
interest rates unchanged in their December
decisions and to begin their cutting cycles in June
2024. Some members added that the expectation of
the first policy rate cut was brought forward in these
economies. **Some members pointed out that lower**
reference rates are now expected for 2024 and 2025,
as compared to those previously anticipated. **One**
member highlighted that fewer concerns about the
geopolitical conflict in the Middle East, the downward
trend in inflation in most economies, the moderation
in the labor market, and lower fiscal pressures in the
United States, have contributed to the perception in
financial markets that the message of high interest
rates lasting longer in the major advanced
economies is less likely to hold. **Some members**
indicated that, looking forward, the central banks will
maintain a data-dependent approach.

**Most members mentioned that in its last meeting**
**the US Federal Reserve left the target range for**
**the federal funds rate unchanged.** **They indicated**
**that such institution reiterated that it will proceed**
**in a careful manner and maintain a data-**


**dependent approach.** **One member highlighted**
that, both in the monetary policy statement and at the
press conference, it was stated that the monetary
restriction will remain at its current level for some
time. He/she added that the Fed's most recent
forecasts show that there could be between two and
four 25 basis-point cuts next year. Another member
pointed out that these forecasts consider that at the
end of 2024 and 2025 the federal funds rate will be
50 and 30 basis points below what was suggested in
previous projections. He/she added that inflation
forecasts were also revised slightly downwards.
He/she highlighted that these modifications take
place in a context in which Federal Open Market
Committee (FOMC) members have placed greater
emphasis on the effects of high interest rates on
households and firms, which have started to
postpone their investment plans due to high financing
costs. Most members stated that markets expect
**the first cut in the second quarter of 2024. Some**
members indicated that expectations implied by
market instruments for the end of 2024 point to a
greater decline in the federal funds rate than the
Federal Reserve's projections.

**Most members agreed that several factors**
**contributed to the recent developments in**
**international financial markets. In particular, they**
**mentioned the expectation that the central banks**
**of the major economies will begin lowering the**
**reference** **rate** **sooner** **than** **previously**

**anticipated. In this regard, one member considered**
that this was influenced by the moderation in the
dynamics of the US labor market. Another member
added the slowdown in the rate of expansion of
economies worldwide. **Most members stated that**
**this was also due to decreased concerns about**
**the possibility of an escalation of geopolitical**
**conflicts, and less uncertainty regarding the US**
**fiscal environment. Most members argued that**
**markets have recently exhibited greater risk**
**appetite. In this context, they highlighted that**
**interest rates on government securities declined**
**globally, the US dollar registered a generalized**
**depreciation, and valuations of major stock**
**markets rebounded. One member considered that**
all of the above was reflected in an easing of global
financial conditions. Another member underlined the
positive performance of financial markets in Latin
America and Emerging Europe. However, he/she
pointed out that capital outflows were registered in
both fixed-income and equity markets. In this
**regard, the majority highlighted the volatile**
**behavior of international financial markets.** **One**
member noted that this has been due to the fact that,
in an uncertain environment, they have been highly

3


-----

sensitive to economic data. Another member stated
that, looking ahead, bouts of volatility cannot be ruled
out given the data-dependent approach of some
central banks.

**_Economic activity in Mexico_**

**All members mentioned that Mexico's economic**
**activity has continued showing dynamism. Most**
**members stated that GDP growth in the third**
**quarter of 2023 was driven by the three sectors**
**of economic activity. One member highlighted that**
it registered a seasonally adjusted quarterly growth
rate of 1.1%, expanding for eight consecutive
quarters. **Another member added that this implied**
an acceleration with respect to the first two quarters.
**One member highlighted that growth was higher than**
anticipated. Another member noted that, during the
year, the observed pace of expansion of economic
activity has surpassed on several occasions the
forecasts by different organizations. He/she

mentioned that Banco de México's growth forecasts
for 2023 have been continuously revised upwards.
He/she stated that, looking ahead, more recent
projections suggest that economic growth will remain
robust in 2024, thus consolidating one of the longest
expansions in recent years. One member pointed out
that it cannot be ruled out that, looking forward,
Mexico's economy turns out to be more resilient than
expected. In this regard, another member noted that
it is becoming increasingly feasible that the
nearshoring process will continue. He/she added
that, furthermore, the slowdown in the US economy
could be less profound than expected. However, one
member stated that such slowdown could be greater
than anticipated. Therefore, he/she considered that
risks to economic activity are perceived as balanced.

**On the production side, most members noted**
**that** **industrial** **activity** **continued** **trending**

**upwards, driven by the dynamism of the**
**construction sector. Some members mentioned**
that manufacturing continues showing sluggishness.
**One member pointed out that this mirrors the**
weakness exhibited by the same sector in the United
States. **Another** member indicated that

manufacturing, excluding transportation equipment,
has contributed only to a small extent to growth due
to weakness in most of its subsectors. **Most**
**members highlighted the dynamism of services**
**and their contribution to the expansion of**
**economic activity.** However, **some members**
considered that its subsectors performed

heterogeneously.

**As for domestic demand, all members pointed**
**out that investment has exhibited significant**


**dynamism. Most members mentioned the high**
**levels of non-residential construction, although**
**one member added that it declined marginally in**
September. **Some members explained that these**
high levels are largely attributed to the performance
of public investment. One member stated that private
investment has also contributed to the above, given
the positive expectations on nearshoring. **Most**
**members** **highlighted** **that** **growth** **of** **the**

**machinery and equipment component has also**
**contributed to the strength of investment. As for**
**private consumption, all members argued that it**
**continued expanding.** **Some members underlined**
its sound performance. Some members pointed out
the positive behavior of consumption of imported
goods. **One member noted the performance of**
consumption of services. **Some** members

emphasized that the strong dynamism of the labor
market has supported consumption. As for external
**demand, most members pointed out that it has**
**been resilient, mainly supported by the rebound**
**in automotive exports.** However, **some members**
highlighted that non-automotive exports remain
weak.

**Most members indicated that the point estimate**
**for the output gap widened in positive territory.**
**One member stated that it remains on an upward**
trend. **Another member pointed out that the**
economy is projected to continue growing above its
potential rate. However, one member underlined that
the output gap estimate is not statistically different
from zero. He/she added that it is expected to
approach zero during the forecast horizon.

**All members considered that the labor market**
**remains strong. Most members highlighted that**
**unemployment rates remain at historically low**
**levels. Some members stated that employment**
registers high levels of growth. **One member**
mentioned that the unemployment gap is in negative
territory. Another member expressed that the labor
participation rate is at levels similar to those
observed prior to the pandemic. Nevertheless, some
members stated that certain timely indicators drawn
from surveys conducted by Banco de México
suggest a possible moderation in the labor market's
dynamism. In this regard, they described that these
indicators point to shorter time-to-hire periods, less
difficulty in hiring workers, and a decline in the
number of vacancies. **One member added that the**
growth of formal employment has slowed.

**Most members highlighted that wages continue**
**increasing** **at** **high** **rates.** **Some** members

underlined that the average base salary of IMSSinsured workers has increased by more than 6% in

4


-----

real terms in the last three months. **One member**
added that the real wage bill of this group of workers
is growing at a rate close to 10%. Another member
stated that the annual variation of workers’ average
nominal wage calculated by the National Occupation
and Employment Survey (ENOE, for its acronym in
Spanish) shows a clear upward trend for both formal
and informal wages. He/she added that the minimum
wage will increase by 20% in 2024. **One member**
indicated that wage dynamism has remained high
throughout the year and that the increased fraction
bound by the minimum wage has led to an
increasingly large pass-through on to the average
wage. He/she added that, although these increases
are not yet proportional, and for a long period there
was enough space to make these adjustments, it will
be important to monitor that wage increases are
consistent with price stability.

**_Inflation in Mexico_**

**Most members considered that inflation has**
**decreased significantly throughout the year.**
**Some members pointed out that progress in**
disinflation is illustrated by comparing current
inflation levels with those registered in 2022 and
early 2023. **One member indicated that annual**
headline inflation has declined by approximately 250
basis points since March 2023 and currently stands
significantly below its peak of 8.70% observed in
August 2022. **Another member stated that in**
September 2022 headline inflation was 570 basis
points above target, whereas now it is 132 basis
points above it. He/she asserted that during this
episode headline inflation has declined faster than in
other periods. He/she noted that in 2009 and 2017
headline inflation decreased at an average monthly
rate of 25 and 16 basis points, respectively, while in
the current episode it has done so at a rate of 35
basis points per month. Some members underlined
the improvement in various metrics such as the
decrease in the proportion of CPI items with high
variations, the increase in the proportion of those with
variations under 3%, and the decline in the trimmed
mean indicator. **One member added the trend of**
seasonally adjusted monthly inflation and the
evolution of the inflation rates observed across
different Mexican cities. Another member added the
reduction in the frequency of price revisions. Most
**members estimated that inflation pressures have**
**eased considerably during the year.**

**Most members pointed out that after reaching**
**4.26% in October, headline inflation increased**
**slightly to 4.32% in November. They mentioned**
**that this upward adjustment was due to the rise**
**in the non-core component, as core inflation**


**continued decreasing. One member asserted that**
in recent months core inflation has had a larger
contribution to the disinflation process. **Some**
members recalled that disinflation processes are
complex. **One member stated that the recent**
rebound does not imply that the disinflationary
process has come to a halt. He/she argued that the
non-linear behavior of the disinflationary process is a
result of a heterogeneous timing in the decline of the
different components of inflation.

**Most members pointed out that core inflation**
**registered 5.30% in November.** **One member**
underlined that this reading is the lowest since
October 2021. **Another member noted that annual**
core inflation has declined in every month of the year.
**Some members highlighted that this component has**
dropped 321 basis points since November of last
year when it reached 8.51%. **Some members**
indicated that most of this decrease occurred since
March 2023, when the reference rate reached its
current level. **One member pointed out that core**
inflation has fallen by 299 basis points since that
month. He/she added that it has fallen at a rate of 27
basis points per month during this inflationary
episode, compared to 16 and 15 basis points during
the episodes of 2009 and 2017, respectively.
**Another member stated that the annualized**
seasonally adjusted monthly inflation of the core
component, which had been declining, registered an
inflection point during the second half of 2023.

**Regarding the components of core inflation,**
**most members noted that merchandise inflation**
**continued decreasing, registering 5.33% in**
**November.** **One member highlighted that the**
favorable performance of this indicator has been due
to both the appreciation of the exchange rate, which
has eased pressures on the prices of imported
goods, and the moderation of international prices of
several intermediate goods. However, **some**

members pointed out some deterioration in the
dynamics of food merchandise prices at the margin,
highlighting the increase in sugar prices. **One**
member indicated that the seasonally adjusted
monthly variations of food merchandise prices have
been increasing so far in the fourth quarter, after
having fallen to levels below 4%. Another member
added that annual food merchandise inflation
remained at high levels, registering 6.78% in
November.

**Most members agreed that annual services**
**inflation still does not show a clear downward**
**inflection point and indicated that in November it**
**registered 5.28%. One member noted that trend**
indicators of this component, which accounts for one
5


-----

third of headline inflation, continue showing no signs
of improvement. He/she stated that monthly
variations of services prices have remained at high
levels. Some members asserted that the higher
relative demand for services after the lockdown
appears to be enabling this sector’s businesses to
pass onto consumers the accumulated costs as a
result of the shocks associated with the pandemic
and the military conflict. One member stated that the
above resulted in an important distortion of the
relative price of merchandise relative to services,
which lies well above its long-term equilibrium, and
therefore it is natural to continue observing
adjustments in relative prices, which does not
necessarily imply the emergence of new sources of
inflationary pressures.

**Most members pointed out that non-core**
**inflation registered 1.43% in November. One**
member expressed that this component declined
during the first seven months of the year, although it
has exhibited an upward trend in the last four
months. **Some members considered that this**
component has started to revert towards its historical
average. However, **one member noted that the**
November reading still remains at low levels.

Regarding inflation expectations, **one member**
considered that their distribution continues showing
improvement for all terms. He/she stated that
expectations for the next 12 months kept decreasing
and accumulated a 107 basis-point drop since
headline inflation reached its peak. However,
**another** member mentioned that longer-term

inflation expectations remain at levels above target.
He/she pointed out that they are above their historical
average registered prior to 2020. He/she added that
expectations drawn from surveys and those implicit
in market instruments remain above the central
bank’s projections. He/she warned that they are not
decreasing at a pace required to reach the target by
the second quarter of 2025. One member noted that,
even though the monetary policy stance has allowed
analysts' expectations to remain anchored, their
distribution still lies to the right of that prevailing prior
to the pandemic. He/she indicated that expectations
drawn from market instruments continue exhibiting
few signs of improvement. He/she also pointed out
that business sector expectations are still at high
levels. He/she underlined that breakeven inflation for
different terms remains elevated.

**Most members highlighted that the central**
**bank’s forecasts for headline inflation were**
**revised upwards for some quarters. Some**
members mentioned that forecasts for core inflation
were also adjusted upwards. **Most members**


**indicated that current forecasts consider a more**
**gradual decline in food merchandise inflation**
**and in services inflation. One member stated that,**
in the revised forecasts for headline inflation, the
higher pressures on services and food merchandise
prices are partially offset by the lower variations
foreseen in energy prices.

**The majority mentioned that the new forecasts do**
**not imply a change in the inflation trend and that**
**the outlook of a continuing disinflationary**
**process is maintained. They added that inflation**
**is still expected to converge to the target in the**
**second quarter of 2025. One member asserted that**
this forecast considers the monetary policy actions
implemented and the fading of shocks’ effects.
**Another member estimated that the easing of the**
shocks will be reflected in a more noticeable decline
in services inflation. One member expressed that the
disinflationary process is undergoing a phase in
which progress will be slower. He/she added that
non-core inflation is expected to continue trending
upwards during the first six months of 2024.

**Most members stated that the inflation outlook**
**continues posing challenges. They considered**
**that the balance of risks for the trajectory of**
**inflation within the forecast horizon remains**
**biased to the upside. One member warned that it**
cannot be ruled out that inflation may take longer to
converge to the target. However, **some members**
pointed out that, despite the risks, the current
inflationary outlook has improved as compared to
that prevailing in late 2022 and in early 2023.

**Among upward risks to inflation, most members**
**highlighted the persistence of core inflation at**
**high levels. Some members warned about the**
possibility of a greater-than-expected resilience of
the Mexican economy. One member mentioned that
the output and unemployment gaps, along with other
slack indicators, suggest the presence of demandrelated inflationary pressures. He/she considered
that said pressures are reflected in the high levels of
services inflation. In addition, he/she underlined the
risk of annual merchandise inflation halting its
downward adjustment. He/she added that the
exhaustion of the comparison base effect poses a
challenge for the process of convergence to the
inflation target. He/she expressed that core inflation’s
downward trend may be interrupted in December and
January. Another member warned that a prolonged
deviation of inflation from its historical average could
affect the formation of prices, wages, and

expectations, making price dynamics more

vulnerable to emerging shocks, even if they were
moderate. He/she indicated that this would represent

6


-----

a challenge to the pace of convergence, especially if
such shocks altered the dynamics of the non-core
component beyond what was anticipated. He/she
pointed out that the foreseen trajectory will depend
on the favorable evolution of the non-core
component, the duration of the shocks’ effects, and
on the absence of new pressures on inflation.

**Most members warned about the possibility of**
**greater cost-related pressures.** **Some members**
noted that such pressures could arise from the
evolution of the exchange rate. One member added
that they could result from changes in the
international references of various inputs. **Another**
member mentioned that there is high uncertainty
regarding commodity prices. **Some members**
indicated the possibility of pressures arising from
wage adjustments. One member added to the above
some idiosyncratic factors, such as those associated
with insecurity, water scarcity, and climate-related
phenomena.

**Some members identified the procyclical fiscal policy**
as a risk to the inflation outlook. In this regard, some
members expressed the possibility that the fiscal
stance may entail a higher aggregate demand. One
member mentioned that, although the outlook for
sovereign credit ratings remains stable, the trajectory
of the public debt-to-GDP ratio, which is relevant for
credit ratings, is sensitive to macroeconomic
assumptions. He/she argued that a lower-thanexpected growth or an exchange rate depreciation
could negatively impact the public debt-to-GDP ratio
and, consequently, credit ratings. He/she added that
the greater dependency on federal government
support without a plan to ensure Pemex’s feasibility
poses a risk to the sustainability of public finances.
He/she underlined that the electoral process in the
United States could lead to episodes of foreign
exchange rate volatility similar to those observed
between 2016 and 2017. He/she added that, in
addition to the above, this time said event will occur
simultaneously with Mexico’s general elections.
Regarding risks to the downside, **another member**
mentioned the possibility of a greater-than
anticipated slowdown of the world economy,
particularly in the United States.

**_Macrofinancial environment_**

**The majority indicated that, in line with the**
**developments in international financial markets,**
**domestic financial assets performed favorably.**
**They mentioned that trading conditions in the**
**foreign exchange market improved. They added**
**that the Mexican peso appreciated slightly.** **One**
member highlighted that in recent weeks it traded


again at levels below 17.50 pesos per dollar. Some
members underlined that so far in 2023 the Mexican
peso has accumulated an appreciation of almost
11%. **One member stated that said appreciation**
stands out among emerging economies’ currencies.
**Some** members specified that sound

macroeconomic fundamentals are among the factors
that have contributed to support the national
currency. **One member added to the above the**
higher risk appetite among investors and the solid
monetary policy stance. **Another** member

underlined the wide volatility-adjusted spread
between external and domestic interest rates, the
optimism regarding nearshoring, and the generalized
depreciation of the US dollar. **One member**
mentioned that the Mexican peso is highly sensitive
to external factors that could increase its volatility.
However, he/she stated that throughout the year the
national currency has exhibited flexibility and
resilience.

**Most members noted that, since the last**
**monetary policy decision, government bond**
**yields decreased, mainly those for medium and**
**long terms.** **One member highlighted inflows from**
non-resident investors to various government
securities. **Another** member underlined that

sovereign risk premia decreased, behaving similarly
to other emerging economies. **One member noted**
that, during the same period, the stock market
performed favorably, exhibiting gains of over 6%.
**Another member mentioned that it has accumulated**
a 12% increase in 2023. He/she added that TIIE
swaps decreased in all of their nodes. **Some**
members argued that, in this regard, both markets
and analysts incorporate a cut in the reference rate
in the first quarter of 2024, as well as a 200 basispoint reduction for the entire 2024.

Regarding total financing in the economy, **one**
member noted that it continued growing in real terms.
**Some members highlighted the expansion of the**
domestic component. **One member underlined the**
growth of credit to firms and consumer credit. He/she
pointed out that, in contrast, external financing
weakened. He/she stated that, based on October
figures, the financial conditions index for Mexico has
slightly tightened and remains in restrictive territory.
He/she added that delinquency rates are at low and
stable levels, although those corresponding to
consumption and corporate loans have recently
registered a marginal increase.

**_Monetary policy_**

**The Governing Board evaluated the magnitude**
**and diversity of the inflationary shocks and their**

7


-----

**determinants, along with the evolution of**
**medium- and long-term inflation expectations**
**and the price formation process. It acknowledged**
**the progress of the disinflationary process in**
**Mexico. Nevertheless, it estimated that the**
**outlook is still challenging. Based on the above,**
**and taking into consideration the monetary**
**policy** **stance** **already** **attained** **and** **the**

**persistence of the shocks that the Mexican**
**economy is facing, with the presence of all its**
**members, the Board decided unanimously to**
**maintain the target for the overnight interbank**
**interest rate at 11.25%. With this decision, the**
**monetary policy stance remains in the trajectory**
**required for inflation to converge to its 3% target**
**within the forecast horizon.**

**The Board will thoroughly monitor inflationary**
**pressures as well as all factors that have an**
**incidence on the foreseen path for inflation and**
**its expectations. It considers that, in order to**
**achieve an orderly and sustained convergence of**
**headline inflation to the 3% target, the reference**
**rate must be maintained at its current level for**
**some time. The latter, taking into account that**
**although the outlook remains complicated,**
**progress on disinflation has been made. The**
**central bank reaffirms its commitment with its**
**primary mandate and the need to continue its**
**efforts to consolidate an environment of low and**
**stable inflation.**

**One** **member argued that, in light of ongoing**
pressures on the core component, especially on food
merchandise and services’ prices, and considering
the revised inflation forecasts, the reference rate
should be maintained at 11.25% in this monetary
policy meeting. He/she deemed it prudent to
emphasize in the monetary policy statement the
need for the reference rate to remain at its current
level for some time in order for inflation to converge
to the target. He/she underlined that, while the
nominal rate has remained unchanged since March
2023, in view of the decline in one-year inflation
expectations, the ex-ante real interest rate continued
increasing as required by the complex inflationary
environment, and its whole distribution lies clearly in
restrictive territory. He/she added that, during the
same period, the disinflation process continued
making significant progress. He/she pointed out that
since march headline inflation declined by about 250
basis points, and core inflation by 280 points. He/she
specified that the latest inflation readings illustrate
considerable progress in disinflation, and that the
current situation is less adverse than that faced in
2022 and in the early months of 2023. However,
he/she acknowledged that the inflationary


environment continues posing challenges. He/she
pointed out that headline inflation is still above the
3% target, and that the balance of risks for its
foreseen trajectory remains biased to the upside. In
this context, he/she mentioned that, during the
meetings of the first quarter of 2024, caution must be
exercised when evaluating the possibility of lowering
the reference rate. He/she indicated that a cautious
approach implies that, when macroeconomic

conditions allow, downward adjustments should be
gradual, and decisions be such that the monetary
policy stance remains solid to achieve the
convergence of inflation to the target. He/she stated
that the prevailing level of monetary restriction will be
weighed against further decreases in inflation, its
levels at that time, its outlook, as well as that of its
determinants. He/she explained that all of this will
imply monitoring a wide range of variables, and that
decisions made at the time will be data-dependent.
He/she reiterated that, in compliance with the primary
mandate of Banco de México, monetary policy’s
priority is to reduce inflation levels and consolidate
an environment of low and stable inflation to the
benefit of Mexico’s population.

**Another** **member expressed that there are still risk**
factors that could hinder the foreseen trajectory of
inflation towards the 3% target, which could
complicate the conduction of monetary policy next
year. He/she highlighted the possibility that the
resilience of economic activity continues through the
horizon of monetary policy planning, the cyclical
position of the economy in positive and increasing
territory, that the labor market remains tight and does
not show signs of easing, the persistence of core
inflation, inflation expectations that are not declining
to the required levels, and the procyclical fiscal
policy. He/she added that new episodes of peso
depreciation could occur and affect inflation, in case
of adjustments in expectations regarding the Federal
Reserve’s actions. He/she also mentioned the high
uncertainty regarding commodity prices, especially
energy-related ones, as a result of a potential
escalation or continuation of geopolitical conflicts. In
view of the environment of high uncertainty and the
risks mentioned above, he/she considered it
essential to maintain the level of monetary restriction
attained. Thus, he/she indicated that in this meeting
the reference rate should be maintained at 11.25%.
He/she argued that, in his/her opinion, monetary
policy communication should maintain a cautious
tone and emphasize that the balance of risks for the
trajectory foreseen for inflation remains biased to the
upside. Likewise, he/she considered that, given this

8


-----

environment, the reference rate will likely need to
remain at its current level longer than expected by
markets. As a result of the above, he/she
emphasized that a data-dependent approach should
continue to be followed, allowing flexibility in future
decisions and avoiding any sign of complacency, as
the outlook can change rapidly due to both external
and domestic factors. He/she concluded that the
Mexican economy has a high exposure to both
external and domestic risks, and the materialization
of these risks would further deteriorate the already
complex inflation outlook and affect monetary policy
implementation. Under these conditions, he/she
expressed that now more than ever a message of
prudence and caution must be conveyed.

**One** **member argued that, despite the strong**
monetary restriction implemented for over a year,
economic activity remains robust, bank lending is
growing in real terms, and risks to inflation remain
biased to the upside. Thus, the inflationary problem
continues. He/she mentioned that the economy’s
cyclical position requires a restrictive policy stance.
He/she argued that certain idiosyncratic factors
hinder the transmission of the restrictive policy
stance, such as the lack of synchronization between
fiscal and monetary policies. He/she also mentioned
structural factors such as low levels of financial
depth, low credit penetration, high levels of
informality, and lack of competition in both the
financial system and other sectors. He/she stated
that the latter allows an environment of high margins
by firms. Given the above, he/she considered that the
reference rate should be maintained at 11.25% in this
monetary policy meeting. He/she deemed it
necessary to maintain the forward guidance
unchanged in this occasion in order to communicate
that the reference rate will be left at that level for
some time. He/she added that monetary policy must
still remain restrictive for an extended period. He/she
highlighted that caution and prudence should be
maintained in 2024 so as to avoid a premature
easing. He/she pointed out that the real ex-ante
interest rate has had a tightening cycle like no other
since the adoption of the inflation targeting regime.
He/she stated that, since November 2021, it has
increased by 671 basis points, 84 of which have
occurred since March 2023 when the reference rate
was set at its current level. He/she warned that such
rate should not exceed the range of 7-7.5%, which
he/she deemed appropriate to ensure inflation
convergence. Given the risk of an excessively
restrictive policy stance that could impact economic
activity or financial stability, he/she noted that a finetuning adjustment to the reference rate should be


considered for the end of the first quarter or during
the second quarter of 2024. He/she stated that, in
order to evaluate monetary policy adjustments at the
margin, it is imperative that upward risks do not
materialize, that the pressures onto core inflation
abate, that inflation adheres to the projected
trajectory through the ongoing disinflation process,
and that twelve-month inflation expectations

continue declining, getting close to the target range.
He/she mentioned that it should be clarified that a
fine-tuning adjustment does not imply the beginning
of a cycle of consecutive reference rate cuts, as the
absorption of inflationary shocks, the decline in
inflation, and the improvement of expectations are
not continuous, constant, and homogeneous

processes. He/she added that these fine-tuning
adjustments would need to be implemented in a
spaced, gradual, and cautious manner, which will
represent the main communication challenge.

**Another** **member argued that the disinflation**
process advanced significantly in 2023, associated
with the fading of the shocks. He/she underlined the
normalization of global supply chains and the decline
in commodity prices. He/she explained that this,
along with the monetary policy stance adopted, led
to a better balance between supply and demand in
various sectors. He/she indicated that, based on the
international experience, when an economy is
subject to shocks of great magnitude, inflation tends
to decline significantly once the impact of such
disturbances dissipates. However, he/she warned
that inflation moderates its pace of deceleration once
the original effects of the shocks that caused the
price increases fade away. In this regard, he/she
stated that disinflation will be characterized by being
slower, just as the latest forecasts show, and that
convergence to the target still requires a tight and
cautious monetary policy stance given the upward
biased distribution of risks. He/she highlighted that
during 2023 it was necessary to consolidate a
markedly restrictive policy stance in order to anchor
inflation expectations and prevent disruptions in price
formation in the economy. He/she noted that the
expectations channel and the exchange rate channel
played a key role in allowing inflation to decline
rapidly and efficiently. Nevertheless, he/she

underlined that during 2024 the channels most
associated with demand will likely need to play a
more relevant role. He/she pointed out that the
experience suggests that these channels are
particularly sensitive to the duration of tight monetary
conditions, since the lags with which they operate are
considerably long. He/she considered that, looking
ahead, the challenge will be to calibrate both the
magnitude of the restriction and its duration. He/she

9


-----

added that the communication strategy should allow
for sufficient flexibility in each policy meeting, as the
materialization of risks under a rigid forward
guidance approach could lead to a time

inconsistency. He/she reiterated that, in view of a
complex inflationary outlook, and considering the
uncertainty associated with inflection points, a datadependent approach should be maintained,

incorporating all available information and keeping
various options on the table. He/she underlined that
the monetary policy stance should be assessed
according to the circumstances and prudently, in
order to comply with the constitutional mandate and
to ensure an orderly adjustment of the economy and
of financial markets.

**One member considered that there are conditions to**
begin discussing the possibility of reference rate cuts
in the next policy meetings. He/she highlighted the
need to take into account the progress in the
disinflationary process. He/she reiterated the

significant reduction in both headline and core
inflation from their peak levels. He/she added that,
since March, when the reference rate reached its
current level, the decline of the core component has
been more evident, and remarked that during this
period a passive tightening of 84 basis points has
been accumulated. He/she underlined that, given the
current policy stance, inflation is expected to
continue trending downwards. Second, he/she
pointed out that, even with reference rate cuts, the
monetary policy stance will remain sufficiently solid
to continue supporting the convergence of inflation.
He/she noted that, although the recent inflationary
episode has been atypical, the current level of the
reference rate is above any historical reference,
taking into account the current level of inflation.
He/she specified that the current level of the
reference rate is higher than the average observed
during periods in which headline inflation has been
between 4 and 4.5%, of 5.95% for the nominal rate,
and of 2.06% for the real one. He/she pointed out that
when core inflation was between 5 and 5.5%, the
nominal and real rates averaged 7.28 and 2.93%,
respectively. Third, he/she added that the recent
dynamics of services prices responds to a necessary
adjustment, after merchandise prices deviated from
their long-term equilibrium relative to services prices
due to the shocks faced. He/she mentioned that the
absolute monetary policy stance attained is

sufficiently robust to address possible changes in the
relative stance. He/she also considered that some
inflation determinants have improved compared to
what was observed at the end of last year. He/she
highlighted that the challenge ahead is to adjust the


degree of monetary restriction in a non-linear
disinflationary context. He/she argued that future
policy meetings should assign greater weight to the
already observed and expected behavior of the
inflationary outlook in its entirety, including the
evolution of its determinants and its balance of risks,
and not rely exclusively on specific data. He/she
added that it will be necessary to take into account
that inflation, while remaining above target, has
declined considerably. Finally, he/she estimated it
pertinent to communicate that the reference rate will
remain at its current level for some time and that,
given the expected evolution of the overall outlook
and the prevailing uncertainty, adjustments would be
gradual and not necessarily continuous.

**3. MONETARY POLICY DECISION**

The Governing Board evaluated the magnitude and
diversity of the inflationary shocks and their
determinants, along with the evolution of mediumand long-term inflation expectations and the price
formation process. It acknowledged the progress of
the disinflationary process in Mexico. Nevertheless,
it estimated that the outlook is still challenging. Based
on the above, and taking into consideration the
monetary policy stance already attained and the
persistence of the shocks that the Mexican economy
is facing, with the presence of all its members, the
Board decided unanimously to maintain the target for
the overnight interbank interest rate at 11.25%. With
this decision, the monetary policy stance remains in
the trajectory required for inflation to converge to its
3% target within the forecast horizon.

The Board will thoroughly monitor inflationary
pressures as well as all factors that have an
incidence on the foreseen path for inflation and its
expectations. It considers that, in order to achieve an
orderly and sustained convergence of headline
inflation to the 3% target, the reference rate must be
maintained at its current level for some time. The
latter, taking into account that although the outlook
remains complicated, progress on disinflation has
been made. The central bank reaffirms its
commitment with its primary mandate and the need
to continue its efforts to consolidate an environment
of low and stable inflation.

**4. VOTING**

Victoria Rodríguez, Galia Borja, Irene Espinosa,
Jonathan Heath, and Omar Mejía voted in favor of
maintaining the target for the overnight interbank
interest rate at 11.25%.

10


-----

**ANNEX**

The information in this Annex was prepared for this
meeting by the staff of Banco de México’s
Directorate General of Economic Research and
Directorate General of Central Bank Operations. It
does not necessarily reflect the considerations of the
members of the Governing Board as to the monetary
policy decision.

**A.1. External conditions**

**A.1.1. World economic activity**

During the third quarter of 2023, global economic
activity expanded at a greater rate than in the
previous quarter. However, available information
suggests a slowdown during the fourth quarter of the
year. Although in general both advanced and
emerging economies are expected to exhibit less
dynamism than in the third quarter, performance is
foreseen to be heterogeneous among countries.
Purchasing Managers' Indices continued pointing to
a deceleration in services, mainly in advanced
economies, as well as to a persistent sluggishness
in manufacturing activity at the global level (Chart 1).
Among global risks, the following stand out:
persistence of inflationary pressures, intensification
of geopolitical tensions, tighter financial conditions,
and, to a lesser extent, challenges to financial
stability.

In the United States, available indicators for the
fourth quarter suggest that Gross Domestic Product
(GDP) would moderate its rate of expansion (Chart
2), after having grown at a seasonally adjusted
quarterly rate of 1.3% in the third quarter of the year.[1]
During the fourth quarter of 2023, economic activity
would be mainly driven by private consumption, nonresidential investment, and government spending.
This would be partially offset by negative

contributions from residential investment, net
exports, and the accumulation of inventories.

1 Expressed as a seasonally adjusted annualized quarterly rate,
the change in US GDP was 5.2% in the third quarter of 2023.


**Chart 1**

**Global: Purchasing Managers’ Index:**

**production component**

Diffusion index, s. a.[1/ ]

60

58

56

54

52

50

Manufacturing

48 Manufacturing (excl. China)

46 Services

Services (excl. China)

44 32.5

24.8

42 23.7 November

20.7

40

J J J J J J J J J J J J J J

2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023

s. a. / Seasonally adjusted figures.
1/ The index varies between 0 and 100 points. A reading above 50 points
is considered an overall increase compared to the previous month and
below 50 points, an overall decrease.
Note: Figures in the chart correspond to respective minimum levels of each
indicator, in the same order as the labels.
Source: IHS Markit.

**Chart 2**

**US: real GDP and components**

Quarterly percentage rate and contribution

in percentage points, s. a.

3.0 Private consumption expenditures

Residential investment

2.5 Nonresidential investment

Change in private inventories

2.0 Net exportsGovernment consumption expenditures

Total

1.5

1.0

0.5

0.0

-0.5

-1.0

I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV

2021 2022 2023

s. a. / Seasonally adjusted figures.
Note: The shaded area refers to Atlanta Federal Reserve's GDPNow
forecasts as of December 7.
Source: Bureau of Economic Activity (BEA).

In October, US industrial production decreased at a
seasonally adjusted monthly rate of 0.6%, after
having remained stagnant in the previous two
months. Manufacturing activity also declined 0.7%.
This drop was largely due to a 10% contraction in
vehicle production that was associated with strikes in
the automotive sector, which ended in late October.

11


-----

Looking ahead, Purchasing Managers' Indices
suggest that activity in the services sector will be
moderate and manufacturing production will remain
somewhat sluggish.

The US labor market remained tight. However, some
indicators have shown signs of easing. The non-farm
payroll expanded at a more moderate pace, going
from a monthly average creation of 221 thousand
new jobs during the third quarter to an average of
175 thousand new jobs in October and November.
The number of new vacancies fell from 9.3 million in
September to 8.7 million in October. Initial claims for
unemployment insurance remained at low levels,
with 202 thousand new claims in the week that
ended on December 9. Wage indicators showed a
moderation. In particular, average hourly wages
registered an annual variation rate of 4.4% in
October, lower than the average rate of 4.6%
observed in the third quarter. The unemployment
rate decreased from 3.9% in October to 3.7% in
November.

In the euro area, economic activity is expected to
have remained weak in the fourth quarter of 2023,
after GDP contracted at a seasonally adjusted
quarterly rate of 0.1% in the previous quarter.[2] The
weak expected performance would be attributed to
the tightening of financial conditions, which is
increasingly affecting investment and consumer
spending. Additionally, industrial and manufacturing
activities remain weak, while the services sector has
lost dynamism. In October, the unemployment rate
remained unchanged at 6.5%.

Most major emerging economies are expected to
expand in the fourth quarter of 2023. However,
growth rates are anticipated to vary among
countries. The Chinese economy is foreseen to
continue expanding during said period, although at a
slower pace than in the previous quarter. In October,
retail sales and industrial production in that country
surprised to the upside, while fixed investment
remained weak. This economy continues facing
significant risks associated with problems in its real
estate sector. The Chinese authorities have recently
implemented new fiscal and monetary measures to
boost its economy.

International prices of most commodities have
declined since Mexico's last monetary policy
decision. First, oil reference prices decreased in light

2 Expressed as a seasonally adjusted annualized quarterly rate,
the change in euro area GDP was -0.5% in the third quarter of
2023.


of the mitigation of the initial impact of the IsraeliPalestinian conflict, production increases in the
United States, plans for increased oil extraction in
Angola and Nigeria, and a lower-than-expected
growth in global oil demand in the fourth quarter of
2023. The latter was observed despite the fact that
some members of the Organization of the Petroleum
Exporting Countries and allied countries (OPEC+)
agreed to voluntary cut production levels for the first
quarter of 2024, which led to transitory upward
pressures at the end of November. Similarly, natural
gas prices decreased due to increases in production
and exports in the United States, as well as forecasts
of a lower demand due to the expectation of warm
temperatures in that country, as well as to the end of
the gas sector strike in Australia. Additionally, wheat
and corn prices fell during the second half of
November due to higher-than-expected production
levels in the United States. However, wheat prices
rose significantly at the beginning of December due
to large purchases by China. Soybean prices
increased in mid-November due to adverse weather
conditions in Brazil’s productive regions, and then
declined due to forecasts of better weather
conditions for this crop. Finally, in the second half of
November, metal prices rose due to the Chinese
government's announcements of its intention to
stimulate the construction sector, as well as to
miners' strikes in Peru, and environmental protests
against the mining sector in Panama that limited the
supply of some metals.

**A.1.2. Monetary policy and international financial**
**markets**

Annual headline inflation declined in a large number
of major advanced and emerging economies.
However, it remains above central banks' targets in
most countries. Meanwhile, core inflation continued
decreasing.

In most advanced economies, headline and core
inflation declined in their most recent readings (Chart
3). However, the latter component has declined
gradually, reflecting, to a large extent, a certain
persistence in pressures on services prices. In the
United States, annual headline inflation measured by
the consumer price index fell from 3.2% in October
to 3.1% in November. This was due to lower
pressures on energy and food prices. The annual

12


-----

variation of the core component remained practically
unchanged at 4.0% during the same period. The
country's headline inflation measured by the
consumer expenditure deflator also decreased in
annual terms, from 3.4% in September to 3.0% in
October. Annual core inflation declined from 3.7 to
3.5% during the same period.

**Chart 3**

**Selected advanced economies:**

**headline inflation**

Annual percentage change

12

United States PCE 1/

10 United States CPI

Japan

8

Euro area 2/

6 United Kingdom

Canada

4

2 October

November
November

0

-2

J J J J J J J J J J

2019 2020 2021 2022 2023

1/ The personal consumption expenditures price index is used.
2/ Preliminary figures as of November.
Source: Bureau of Economic Analysis, Bureau of Labor Statistics, Eurostat,
Bank of Japan, the UK Office for National Statistics, and Statistics Canada.

Analysts' short-term inflation forecasts for most
major advanced economies remained relatively
stable and continued anticipating a moderation in
headline inflation in 2024. However, it would remain
above the targets set by their central banks. Longerterm inflation expectations drawn from financial
instruments decreased slightly with respect to the
levels registered at the beginning of November.

In a large number of emerging economies, annual
headline inflation declined as a result of lower
pressures on energy and food prices and on the core
component. However, it remains above the targets
of their respective central banks. In some cases,
such as Brazil, South Africa, India and Indonesia,
headline inflation was within each central bank's
variability interval, while in China and Thailand,
annual headline inflation registered negative levels.
In most major emerging economies, core inflation
declined.

In this environment, since Mexico's last monetary
policy decision, most central banks of the main
advanced and emerging economies have left their
reference rates unchanged. Regarding future
adjustments, several central banks indicated that
their actions will depend on the evolution of relevant

|― US Federal Reserve 2/ End ― Bank of England 202 ― Bank of Japan ― European Central Bank deposit rate ― OIS implicit trajectory Dec 13, 2023 --- OIS implicit trajectory Nov 09, 2023|Col2|of End of 2 2023|End of 2024 Forecasts|Col5|
|---|---|---|---|---|
||||||
||||||


1/ OIS: Fixed floating interest rate swap where the fixed interest rate is
associated with the effective overnight reference rate.
2/ For the observed reference rate of the U.S., the average interest rate of
the target range of the federal funds rate (5.00%- 5.25%) is used.
Source: Banco de México with data from Bloomberg.

Regarding recent monetary policy decisions in the
United States and the euro area, the following stand
out:

### i) At its December meeting, the US Federal Reserve left the target range for the federal funds rate unchanged at 5.25-5.50% for the third consecutive decision. Additionally, it continued reducing the size of its balance sheet. It reiterated that it will continue evaluating incoming information and that, in order to determine the degree of additional tightening that might be appropriate, it will take into account the cumulative tightening of monetary policy, the lags with which it affects economic activity and inflation, as well as economic and financial developments.
 During the press conference, the chairman of that institution mentioned that the Federal

13


data and the inflation outlook. In some countries,
central banks reported that they are prepared to
make additional adjustments, if necessary, with the
aim of bringing inflation back to their targets. In line
with the above, most central banks of the major
advanced economies maintained the gradual
reduction of their securities’ holdings. As for market
expectations for the reference rate in the main
advanced economies, based on the latest available
information, interest rates implicit in interest rate
swap curves (OIS) are expected to remain at their
current levels for the remainder of 2023 and the
beginning of 2024, and then start decreasing in the
second quarter of next year (Chart 4).

**Chart 4**

**Reference rates and trajectories**

**implied in OIS curves[1/]**

Percent


76 **――― Bank of Japan US Federal Reserve 2/ Bank of England** End of 2022 End of 2023 End of 2024

**― European Central Bank deposit rate**
**― OIS implicit trajectory Dec 13, 2023**

5 **--- OIS implicit trajectory Nov 09, 2023**

4

3

2

1

Forecasts

0

-1

2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 2024


-----

### Open Market Committee (FOMC) began to discuss when it would be appropriate to start reducing the restrictive stance of monetary policy. However, he also stated that the Committee does not rule out the possibility of an additional increase in the reference rate. Regarding adjustments to the Committee's forecasts, between September and
 December, the median of the annual growth rate was revised upwards from 2.1 to 2.6% for the fourth quarter of 2023, while it was revised downwards from 1.5 to 1.4% for the fourth quarter of 2024, and was left unchanged at 1.8% for the fourth quarter of 2025. Headline inflation forecasts fell from 3.3 to 2.8% for the end of 2023, from 2.5 to 2.4% for the end of 2024, and from 2.2 to 2.1% for the same period of 2025. The Committee lowered its expectation for the federal funds rate for the end of 2023 from 5.6 to 5.4%. The expected level of the federal funds rate fell from 5.1 to 4.6% for the end of 2024 and from 3.9 to 3.6% for the end of 2025. Expectations drawn from financial instruments anticipate an interest rate of 5.1% for the end of the first quarter of 2024, which would subsequently decrease to levels close to 4.1% by the end of that year and to 3.2% by the end of 2025.

 ii) At its December meeting, the European
 Central Bank (ECB) left its reference rates unchanged for the second consecutive decision. Thus, its refinancing, key lending and key deposit rates remained at 4.50, 4.75 and 4.00%, respectively. In this regard, its Governing Council reiterated that it
 considers that interest rates are at levels that, if maintained for a sufficiently long period, will contribute substantially to the timely return of inflation to its target. It indicated again that it will continue using a data-dependent approach to determine the appropriate duration and level of monetary tightening. Regarding its Pandemic
 Emergency Purchase Program (PEPP), the Governing Council decided to expedite the normalization of its balance sheet, seeking to

3 During the first half of 2024, the Governing Council will reinvest
in full the principal payments from maturing securities purchased
under the PEPP. During the second half of the year, it intends to


### fully suspend reinvestments of maturing securities purchased under the PEPP by the end of 2024.[3]

Since Mexico's last monetary policy decision, most
central banks of the major emerging economies left
their reference rates unchanged. In China, although
its monetary policy reference rates remained
unchanged, the central bank implemented

alternative easing measures, such as injecting
liquidity through its medium-term credit line.
Considering the specific economic circumstances of
each country, some central banks announced cuts to
their reference rates, including those of Brazil, Peru
and Hungary. In contrast, Turkey's central bank
continued increasing its reference rate.

Since Mexico's last monetary policy decision,
international financial markets showed, in general,
more favorable conditions, in both advanced and
emerging economies (Chart 5). This behavior
reflected the expectation of a lesser tightening of
monetary and financial conditions in light of figures
that pointed to some rebalancing of slack conditions
in the US labor market and of favorable inflation data.
Thus, sovereign debt interest rates declined in most
advanced economies (Chart 6). Stock markets in
both advanced and emerging economies registered
gains overall. In foreign exchange markets, the US
dollar depreciated. Meanwhile, the currencies of
most emerging economies appreciated against the
US dollar (Chart 7). Lastly, during the reported
period, emerging economies registered moderate
capital outflows. However, flows showed a

differentiated behavior among asset classes, with
slight net inflows of equity assets and outflows of
fixed-income assets during most of the period.

reduce the PEPP portfolio by 7.5 million euros per month on
average, before interrupting reinvestments at the end of 2024.

14


-----

**Chart 5**

**Financial Conditions Index[1/]**

Units


103

102

101

100


Financial Conditions Index - global
Financial Conditions Index - United States
Financial Conditions Index - euro area 2/

Source: Prepared by Banco de México with data from Bloomberg and
Goldman Sachs. 1/ The financial conditions index is constructed
considering the effect of five variables on economic activity: the reference
interest rate, the 10-year government bond, the spread of investment grade
bonds over the government debt bond with equivalent maturity, the ratio of
a stock index with 10-year average earnings per share, and the trade
weighted exchange rate. 2/ In the case of the euro area, the spread
between the sovereign bonds of France, Italy, Spain, the Netherlands,
Belgium, Austria, Portugal and Finland over the German 10-year bond is
also considered. The vertical black line indicates the last calendarized
monetary policy meeting of Banco de México.


**Chart 7**

**Selected emerging economies: financial assets**

**performance as of November 3, 2023**

Percent, basis points Percent, basis points

**2-year** **10-year**

**Equity**
**Region** **Country** **Currencies** **interest** **interest** **CDS**

**markets**

**rates** **rates**

**Mexico** **0.48%** **6.22%** **-52** **-56** **-6**

**Brazil** **-0.39%** **6.95%** **-59** **-55** **-13**

**Latin**

**Chile** **0.52%** **6.23%** **-94** **-109** **-9**

**America**

**Colombia** **-0.35%** **4.23%** **-54** **-38** **-17**

**Peru** **-0.20%** **2.66%** **-34** **-38** **-7**

**Russia** **1.39%** **-4.20%** **18** **-14** **N.A.**

**Poland** **2.91%** **6.55%** **2** **-14** **-1**

**Emerging**

**Turkey** **-2.02%** **3.63%** **-16** **-220** **-33**

**Europe**

**Czech Rep.** **0.39%** **1.96%** **24** **-34** **-1**

**Hungary** **-0.25%** **1.91%** **-85** **-62** **-13**

**China** **1.54%** **-2.02%** **5** **2** **-11**

**Malaysia** **1.33%** **-0.55%** **-12** **-23** **-13**

**India** **-0.12%** **8.49%** **-6** **-4** **-17**

**Asia**

**Philippines** **1.43%** **4.10%** **-61** **-69** **-10**

**Thailand** **1.06%** **-2.73%** **-15** **-34** **-17**

**Indonesia** **1.39%** **5.46%** **-23** **-27** **-11**

**Africa** **South Africa** **-3.35%** **1.66%** **-14** **-25** **-18**

Note: An upward adjustment indicates currency appreciation. Interest rates
correspond to swap rates at the specified terms, except for Hungary, where
government securities with 3-year maturities were used as a reference. For
the Philippines, a 2-year swap rate was used, and for Russia, 2-year and
3-year swap rates were used. The latest CDS data for Russia is as of June
1, 2022.
Source: Bloomberg.

**A.2. Current situation of the Mexican economy**

**A.2.1. Mexican markets**

In the international context described, the Mexican
peso appreciated slightly against the US dollar since
Mexico’s last monetary policy decision. Interest rates
on government securities decreased, especially
those for medium and long terms, in line with
developments in international financial markets
(Chart 8).

The Mexican peso traded in a range of 91 cents,
between 17.03 and 17.94 pesos per US dollar since
the last monetary policy decision. During the period,
the currency appreciated 0.48% (Chart 9). This
adjustment occurred in an environment where
trading conditions slightly improved.


**Chart 6**

**Change in selected financial indicators from**

**November 9 to December 13, 2023**

Percent, basis pointsPercentage, basis points


15%

10%


75

50


5%


25

0


0%

-5%


-10%

-15%


-25

-50


-75


Source: Bloomberg and ICE. 1/ MSCI Emerging Markets Index, which
includes 24 countries. 2/ DXY: a weighted average estimated by the
Intercontinental Exchange (ICE) of the nominal exchange rate of the main
six currencies operated globally with the following weights: EUR: 57.6%,
JPY: 13.6%, GBP: 11.9%, CAD: 9.1%, SEK: 4.2% and CHF: 3.6%.


15


-----

**Chart 8**

**Mexican markets’ performance**

Percent, MXN/USD and index


11.6

11.2

10.8

10.4

10.0

9.6

9.2

8.8

8.4


16.6


19.6

19.1


18.6

18.1


17.6

17.1


56,000

55,000

54,000

53,000

52,000

51,000

50,000

49,000

48,000


M-bond


6.7

6.4

6.1

5.8

5.5

5.2

4.9

4.6

4.3

4.0

3.7

Inflation-indexed bonds


Range in 2023 Range since previous monetary policy Nov03,2023 Dec08, 2023

decision

Source: Prepared by Banco de México.

**Chart 9**

**Mexican peso exchange rate**

MXN/USD


Source: PIP.

**Chart 11**

**Breakeven inflation and inflation risk implied in**

**government securities’ yields**

Basis points


**Chart 10**

**Nominal yield curve of government securities**

Percent, basis points

12.00

#REF!

11.50

0

11.00

10.50

10.00

9.50

9.00

8.50

November-3rd 2023
December-7th 2023
Change (November-3rd 2023 to December-7th 2023)

Trading range over the period


Range in 2023 Range since previous monetary policy Nov03,2023 Dec08, 2023


26

25

24

23

22

21

20

19

18

17

16


600

550


500

450


400

350


2020 2021 2022 2023

Source: Prepared by Banco de México.

Interest rates on government securities registered
positive dynamics, with decreases of up to 63 basis
points along the entire curve (Chart 10). The yields
of real rate instruments decreased significantly,
primarily in the short term. In this context, breakeven
inflation implicit in spreads between nominal and real
rates of market instruments exhibited mixed
movements (Chart 11) that occurred in an
environment in which trading conditions slightly
deteriorated.


300

250


2021                 2022                 2023

Source: PIP.

Regarding expectations for the path of the monetary
policy reference rate, information implicit in the
interest rate swap curve does not incorporate any
adjustment for the December decision and estimates
the first cut of 25 basis points between February and
March 2024 (Chart 12). Most analysts surveyed by
Citibanamex anticipate that the reference rate will
remain unchanged in the December decision and
that the next adjustment will occur in March 2024.

16


J J       N       A       S       F       J        D


-----

**Interbank funding rate implied in TIIE swaps**


**Chart 13**

**Gross Domestic Product**

Quarterly percentage change, s. a.


5

4

3

2

1

0

-1


3.50

J A  J   O   J   A  J   O   J  A   J   O  J   A   J   O

2021           2022          2023          2024

Note: Shaded areas represent the range since the last monetary policy
decision.
Source: Prepared by Banco de México with Bloomberg data.

**A.2.2. Economic activity in Mexico**

During the third quarter of 2023, economic activity in
Mexico continued experiencing robust growth as it
registered a quarterly growth 1.07% (Chart 13).

Regarding the evolution of domestic demand, private
consumption continued trending upwards at the end
of the third quarter. Regarding its components,
consumption of imported goods kept exhibiting high
dynamism and consumption of domestic goods and
services accelerated at the margin. Gross fixed
investment decreased as a result of a contraction in
non-residential construction, although the latter
remained at high levels. Meanwhile, the machinery
and equipment component rebounded. As for
external demand, during the July-October period, the
value of manufacturing exports increased with
respect to the second quarter, due to the greater
volume of automotive shipments, while the rest of
manufacturing contracted (Chart 14).

On the production side, in September, services grew
at a faster rate, albeit with a differentiated behavior
among sectors. In October, industrial production
continued trending upwards (Chart 15). This was
attributed to the good performance of construction,
which reversed the decline registered in the previous
month (Chart 16). Despite having decreased at the
margin, production of the transportation equipment
sector continued high levels. The rest of

manufacturing remained weak, reflecting the

unfavorable performance of the majority of its
subsectors.


-2 24/10/2023

23/10/2023

-3 20/10/2023

-4 19/10/2023

-19.0318/10/2023 Q-III

-5 17/10/2023

I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV I16/10/2023II III IV I II III IV I II III

2017 2018 2019 2020 13/10/20232021 2022 2023

s. a. / Seasonally adjusted figures. The chart’s range was adjusted to
facilitate its reading.
Source: Mexico’s System of National Accounts (SCNM, for its Spanish
acronym), INEGI.

**Chart 14**

**Manufacturing exports**

|Col1|Chart 12 bank funding rate implied in TIIE swaps Percent|
|---|---|
|||
|10.50 9.50 8.50 7.50 6.50 5.50 4.50|Banxico overnight rate (reference rate) Implied interest rate in TIIE swaps for 12/07/23|
||Implied interest rate in TIIE swaps for 11/03/23|


s. a. / Seasonally adjusted series and trend series based on data in nominal
US dollars. The former is represented by a solid line and the latter by a
dotted line. The chart’s range was adjusted to facilitate its reading.
Source: Prepared by Banco de México with data from the Tax
Administration Service (SAT, for its Spanish acronym), the Ministry of the
Economy (SE, for its Spanish acronym), Banco de México, the National
Institute of Statistics and Geography (INEGI, for its Spanish acronym).
Mexico’s Merchandise Trade Balance. The National System of Statistical
and Geographical Information (SNIEG, for its Spanish acronym).
Information of national interest.

17


Indices 2019 = 100, s. a.


160

140


120

100


80

60


40

J

2017


10.4 October

A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O


-----

115

110

105

100

95

90

85

J

2017


**Chart 15**

**Global Indicator of Economic Activity**

Indices 2019 = 100, s. a.

Total IGAE 1/
Industrial production 2/
Services IGAE 1/
Agriculture IGAE 1/

78.3

76.3 September

70.5 October

A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O


s. a. / Seasonally adjusted series and trend series. The former is
represented by a solid line and the latter by a dotted line. The chart’s range
was adjusted to facilitate its reading.
1/ Figures as of September 2023.
2/ Figures as of October 2023 from the Monthly Indicator of Industrial
Activity.
Source: Mexico’s System of National Accounts (SCNM, for its Spanish
acronym), INEGI.

**Chart 16**

**Industrial activity[1/]**

Indices 2019 = 100, s. a.

125

115

105

95

85 Total

Mining (12%)

75

Manufacturing (63%)

Construction (19%)

65

Utilities (6%)

October

55

J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O

2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023

s. a. / Seasonally adjusted series and trend series. The former is
represented by a solid line and the latter by a dotted line.
1/ Figures in parenthesis correspond to their share in the total in 2018.
Source: Mexico’s System of National Accounts (SCNM, for its Spanish
acronym), INEGI.


Regarding the cyclical position of the economy, the
point estimate of the output gap widened in positive
territory during the third quarter, without being
statistically different from zero (Chart 17). The labor
market continued showing strength. In October, both
national and urban unemployment rates decreased
at the margin and both reached their respective
historic lows with seasonally adjusted figures (Chart
18). In November, the number of newly created
IMSS-insured jobs continued increasing, although
with seasonally adjusted data it has decelerated in
recent months. Finally, in September unit labor costs
in the manufacturing sector decreased at the margin,
although they remained at high levels (Chart 19).

**Chart 17**

**Output gap estimates[1/]**

Percent of potential output, s. a.

12

8

4

0

-4

-8

-12

Global Economic Activity

-16 Index (IGAE) 2/

Gross Domestic Product 2/

-20 Q-III

95% confidence interval 3/ September

-24

J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S

2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023

s. a. / Calculations based on seasonally adjusted figures.
1/ Output gap estimated with a tail-corrected Hodrick-Prescott filter; see
Banco de México (2009), “Inflation Report, April-June 2009”, p.69.
2/ GDP flash estimate up to Q3 2023 and IGAE up to September 2023.
3/ Output gap confidence interval calculated with a method of unobserved
components.
Source: Prepared by Banco de México with INEGI data.

18


-----

In October 2023, domestic financing to the private
sector continued showing dynamism. Within it, bank
lending to firms kept expanding (Chart 20). As for
lending to households, the bank housing portfolio
continued increasing. Meanwhile, commercial bank
consumer credit continued exhibiting high growth
rates, registering the highest rates of change since
the first half of 2013. The dynamism of commercial
bank credit to the private sector continued to be
driven mainly by an increased demand for financing
from firms and households, in line with the
continuous expansion of economic activity and the
strength of the labor market.

As for the cost of financing, interest rates on bank
lending to firms remained stable and at high levels in
October 2023. Corporate credit intermediation
margins continued to be generally lower than those
observed prior to the pandemic. Interest rates on
mortgages did not register significant changes with
respect to previous months. They continued being at
levels similar to pre-pandemic ones. Within

consumer credit, credit card interest rates have been
adjusting with a lag to changes in the reference rate,
after having remained relatively stable until June
2022. Lastly, interest rates on payroll loans have
remained relatively stable since August 2021.

As for portfolio quality, corporate delinquency rates
remained at low levels in October 2023, despite
increasing slightly with respect to September.
Mortgage delinquency rates also remained at low
levels. Finally, consumer portfolio delinquency rates
continued being at levels lower than those registered
prior to the onset of the pandemic, although they
have increased since May 2023.

19


6.5

6.0

5.5

5.0

4.5

4.0

3.5

3.0

2.5

2.0


**Chart 18**

**National and urban unemployment rates**

Percent, s. a.

Urban unemployment rate

National unemployment rate
October

J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O

2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023


s. a. / Seasonally adjusted series and trend series. The former is
represented by a solid line and the latter by a dotted line.
Source: Prepared by Banco de México with data from ENOE, ETOE (from
April to June 2020), and ENOE new edition (ENOE[N]) from July 2020 to
December 2022.

**Chart 19**

**Productivity and unit labor costs**

**in the manufacturing sector[1/]**

Indices 2019 = 100, s. a.

110

Unit labor costs 140.7

Productivity

105

100

95

90

September

85

J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S

2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023

s. a. / Seasonally adjusted series and trend series. The former is
represented by a solid line and the latter by a dotted line. The chart’s range
was adjusted to facilitate its reading.
1/ Productivity based on hours worked.
Source: Prepared by Banco de México with seasonally adjusted data of the
Monthly Manufacturing Industry Survey and industrial activity indicators of
Mexico’s System of National Accounts (Sistema de Cuentas Nacionales de
_México, SCNM), INEGI._


-----

**Chart 20**

**Performing credit from commercial banks**

**to the non-financial private sector**

Annual percentage change[1/]

20

15

10

5

0

-5 Consumption

1/

-10 Mortgage

2/

Non-financial private firms

-15

October

-20

J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O

2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023

1/ Adjusted to account for the withdrawal from and the incorporation of
nonbank financial intermediaries to the credit statistics.
2/ Adjusted for valuation effects due to movements in the exchange rate.
Source: Banco de México.

**A.2.3. Development of inflation and inflation**
**outlook**

In October and November 2023, annual headline
inflation rose from 4.26 to 4.32%, as a result of the
increase in non-core inflation, while core inflation
continued decreasing (Chart 21 and Table 1).

**Chart 21**

**Consumer Price Index**

Annual percentage change


Annual core inflation decreased from 5.50 to 5.30%
between October and November 2023. During that
period, as the pressures that had affected it kept
easing, annual merchandise inflation continued
decreasing, going from 5.64 to 5.33% (Chart 22).
This performance reflected a reduction from 6.95 to
6.78% in the annual inflation of food merchandise
and from 4.09 to 3.62% in that of non-food
merchandise (Chart 23). Annual services inflation
went from 5.34 to 5.28% during said period.
Regarding its components, mixed behaviors were
observed, as the annual inflation of services other
than education and housing, while still elevated,
decreased from 6.48 to 6.28%, whereas inflation of
education services registered 6.60% in both months.
Meanwhile, annual housing inflation increased from
3.67 to 3.74%.

**Chart 22**

**Merchandise and services core price subindex**

Annual percentage change

12

Merchandise

11 Services

10

9

8

7

6

5

4

3

2

1

November

0

J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S

2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023

Source: INEGI.

**Chart 23**

**Merchandise core price subindex**

Annual percentage change

16

Food, beverages and tobacco

14 Non-food merchandise

12

10

8

6

4

2

November

0

J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S

2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023

Source: INEGI.

20


14
13
12
11
10

9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0

-1
-2
-3

J

2017

|CPI Core|Col2|
|---|---|
|Non-core||
|||
|||
||November|
|||


M S J

2018


CPI
Core
Non-core


M S J

2019


M S J

2020


M S J

2021


M S J

2022


M S J

2023


M S


Source: INEGI.


-----

Annual non-core inflation increased from 0.56 to
1.43% between October and November 2023 (Chart
24 and Table 1). This evolution reflected an increase
from 1.62 to 2.85% in the annual inflation of
agricultural and livestock products. Within this
category, the annual variation in the prices of fruit
and vegetables rose from 4.77 to 5.59%, while that
of livestock products increased from -0.97 to 0.62%.
Additionally, during this period, the annual inflation of
energy products rose from -2.59 to -1.64%,
influenced primarily by higher annual variations in
the prices of electricity and L.P. gas, which went from
2.06 to 3.73% and from -16.40 to -15.49%,
respectively.

**Chart 24**

**Non-core price subindex**

Annual percentage change

25

20

15

10

5

0

-5

Non-core

-10 Agricultural and livestock products

Energy and government-authorized prices November

-15

J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S

2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023

Source: INEGI.


Regarding inflation expectations drawn from the
survey conducted by Banco de México among
private sector specialists, between October and
November 2023, the median for headline inflation for
the end of 2023 decreased from 4.60 to 4.54%, while
that for core inflation increased from 5.11 to 5.16%.
Inflation expectations for the end of 2024 remained
practically unchanged. The median of headline
inflation expectations remained at 4.00%, while that
of the core component adjusted from 4.11 to 4.10%.
Inflation expectations for the end of 2025 adjusted
slightly downwards. The median of headline inflation
expectations adjusted from 3.76 to 3.74%, while that
of core inflation went from 3.78 to 3.76%. The
median of headline inflation expectations for the next
four years decreased from 3.80 to 3.76%, while that
of core inflation adjusted from 3.78 to 3.77%. The
medians of headline and core inflation expectations
for the long term (5 to 8 years) adjusted downwards
from 3.60 to 3.50% and from 3.59 to 3.50%,
respectively. Finally, compensation for inflation and
inflationary risk has decreased since the previous
monetary policy decision. Regarding its

components, inflation expectations implied by
market instruments remained relatively stable, while
the inflation risk premium declined.

Inflation is still projected to converge to the target in
the second quarter of 2025. This forecast is subject
to risks. On the upside: i) persistence of core inflation
at high levels; ii) foreign exchange depreciation; iii)
greater cost-related pressures; iv) a greater-thanexpected resilience of the economy, and v)
pressures on energy prices or on agricultural and
livestock product prices. On the downside: i) a
greater-than-anticipated slowdown of the world
economy; ii) a lower pass-through effect from some
cost-related pressures, and iii) that the lower levels
registered by Mexico’s exchange rate in relation to
early 2023 contribute more than expected to ease
certain pressures on inflation. The balance of risks
for the trajectory of inflation within the forecast
horizon remains biased to the upside.

21


-----

**Table 1**

**Consumer Price Index and components**

Annual percentage change

**Item** **September 2023** **October 2023** **November 2023**

**CPI** **4.45** **4.26** **4.32**

**SubyacenteCore** **5.76** **5.50** **5.30**

**Merchandise** **6.20** **5.64** **5.33**

Food, beverages and tobacco 7.57 6.95 6.78

Non-food merchandise 4.59 4.09 3.62

**Services** **5.23** **5.34** **5.28**

Housing 3.58 3.67 3.74

Education (tuitions) 6.59 6.60 6.60

Other services 6.32 6.48 6.28

**No SubyacenteNon-core** **0.60** **0.56** **1.43**

**Agricultural and livestock products** **3.25** **1.62** **2.85**

Fruits and vegetablesFruits abd vegetables 6.75 4.77 5.59

Livestock productsLivestock 0.33 -0.97 0.62

**Energy and government-authorized prices Energéticos y Tarifas Aut. por Gobierno** **-1.71** **-0.35** **0.24**

Energy productsEnergy -4.61 -2.59 -1.64

Government-authorized pricesTarifas Autorizadas por Gobierno 5.14 5.03 4.84

Source:INEGI.


-----

-----

