-----

-----

**FOREWARNING**
This document is provided for the reader’s convenience
only. The translation from the official Spanish version was
made by Banco de México’s staff. Discrepancies may
arise between the original document in Spanish and its
English translation. For this reason, the original Spanish
version is the only official document.


**1. PLACE, DATE AND PARTICIPANTS**

**1.1. Place: Meeting held by virtual means.**

**1.2. Date of Governing Board meeting:** June 26,
2024.

**1.3. Participants:**

- Victoria Rodríguez, Governor.

- Galia Borja, Deputy Governor.

- Irene Espinosa, Deputy Governor.

- Jonathan Heath, Deputy Governor.

- Omar Mejía, Deputy Governor.

- Gabriel Yorio, Undersecretary of Finance and

Public Credit.

- María Elena Méndez, Secretary of the Governing

Board.

Prior to this meeting, preliminary work by Banco de
México’s staff analyzing the economic and financial
environment as well as the developments in inflation
and the determinants and outlook for inflation, was
conducted and presented to the Governing Board
(see Annex).

**2. ANALYSIS AND RATIONALE BEHIND THE**
**GOVERNING BOARD’S VOTING**

**_International environment_**

**Some members expect world economic activity to**
have continued increasing during the second quarter
of 2024, although at a slower pace than in the
previous quarter. **One member argued that the**
sound global economic performance expected for
this year would be driven by a stronger growth in
advanced economies, while a more generalized
weakening is expected in emerging economies.
Among global growth risks, he/she mentioned that
several of them persist, including those stemming
from the expectation of higher interest rates for a
longer period, the high levels of fiscal deficits in a
large number of economies, the political uncertainty
associated with various electoral processes,

particularly in the United States, and geopolitical
tensions. Regarding the US economy, he/she


underlined the soundness of domestic demand as a
result of the boost provided by private consumption.
He/she considered that the US labor market
continues showing resilience. **Another member**
noted some of the factors behind this resilience, the
fading of which could affect economic activity in the
future. He/she argued that fiscal support together
with unconventional monetary stimulus measures to
mitigate the effects of the pandemic contributed, on
the one hand, to generate excess savings and an
improvement in households' financial position,
mainly in the United States, which supported private
consumption. On the other hand, he/she noted that
limited refinancing needs were observed in the
corporate sector, which took place under relatively
favorable credit conditions. However, he/she added
that currently the outlook is different, given the less
sound financial situation of firms and households.
Regarding households, he/she stated that in the
United States, for example, excess savings and
leverage are already at their pre-pandemic trend
levels, while real disposable income has moderated
its growth. Thus, he/she indicated that, although
consumption of services in that economy continues
showing dynamism, consumption of goods has
somewhat declined, which reflects consumers that
are more aware of the signs of moderation in the
labor market. As for firms, he/she pointed out that
greater refinancing needs are expected, which,
according to forecasts, will be at higher rates. Finally,
he/she stated that, in his/her opinion, in light of the
fading of these factors that once supported economic
resilience, a more efficient pass-through of restrictive
monetary policy stances is expected. Some
members expect a moderation of the US economy in
the next quarters. One member expressed that this
could be more evident in that country's industrial
activity.

**Most members highlighted that the disinflation**
**process** **has** **continued** **worldwide.** **Some**

members pointed out that headline inflation has
continued decreasing in most advanced economies.
**The majority indicated that this was due to lower**
**pressures on food prices. Some members added**
that it was also due to a reduction in goods inflation.
Nevertheless, **some members considered that the**
recent progress in disinflation has been moderate.
**Most members highlighted that there is some**
**heterogeneity in the behavior of inflation across**
**economies. Some members indicated that US**
inflation decreased between April and May. **One**
member noted that in the euro area, annual headline
inflation rose during the same period due to an
increase in the core component and a rebound in

### 1


-----

energy inflation. Another member stated that some
emerging economies registered increases in

headline inflation due to higher pressures on energy
prices and, in some cases, due to a rise in food
prices. **One member added that services inflation**
resistance to decline is a global phenomenon with
low correlation to the cyclical phase of different
economies. **Most members agreed that the**
**disinflation process is expected to continue.**
However, some members pointed out that inflation is
still anticipated to remain above central banks'
targets. **One member indicated that there is a**
prevailing expectation that in some economies
convergence to the inflation target will be postponed
again until early 2025.

**The majority noted that some central banks of**
**advanced economies left their reference rates**
**unchanged, while others lowered them.** **Some**
members stated that most of them maintained a
cautious tone. **One member pointed out that these**
institutions emphasized a greater data dependence
in their future decisions. Another member indicated
that, despite the heterogeneity in the monetary
cycles of different economies, the discussion in most
central banks has focused on avoiding the adoption
of an overly restrictive monetary policy stance. **All**
**members mentioned that the Federal Reserve left**
**the federal funds rate unchanged for the seventh**
**consecutive occasion.** **Some members noted that**
its policy statement acknowledged modest progress
towards the inflation target in recent months. **One**
member pointed out that the statement reiterated that
risks to achieving its employment and price stability
goals have moved towards better balance. However,
**some members highlighted its restrictive tone. Most**
**members underlined that the chairman of said**
**institution stated that there is still uncertainty as**
**to whether inflation is steadily moving to the 2%**
**target. One member added that said chairman**
stated that evidence clearly shows that the monetary
policy stance is restrictive and is having the expected
effects. **Most members expressed that the**
**European Central Bank lowered its interest rates**
**at its June meeting after having left them**
**unchanged for nine months.** **Some members**
specified that this rate cut was accompanied by an
upward revision of their inflation forecasts. **One**
member added that said central bank indicated that
it will maintain a restrictive monetary policy stance as
long as necessary to achieve convergence of
inflation to its target. **Most members pointed out**
**that the Bank of Canada also made its first policy**
**rate cut in June. One member noted that this central**
bank argued that it has greater confidence that


inflation is on a trajectory towards its target. Another
member indicated that various monetary authorities
in Latin America and Eastern Europe continued
lowering their reference rates.

**All members noted that the Federal Reserve's**
**economic projections included a lower number**
**of rate cuts anticipated for this year. Most**
**members added that slightly higher rates are also**
**expected for** **2025** **compared to previous**

**projections.** **Some members expressed that the**
median of projections for the long-term interest rate
increased. One member pointed out that this change
was from 2.6 to 2.8%. He/she considered that the
greater dispersion among members' projections for
the long-term interest rate reflects greater uncertainty
as to where the US economy might converge. In this
regard, he/she ruled out implications for monetary
policy in the short term. Regarding emerging
economies, **another member pointed out that in**
most of them the expectation that reference rates will
remain high for a longer period has strengthened.

**Most members noted that international financial**
**markets exhibited some volatility, although end-**
**to-end variations were mixed and moderate.**
**Some** members added that the release of higherthan-anticipated US inflation and employment figures
led to an adjustment in expectations about the path
of the federal funds rate. **One member mentioned**
that in light of better-than-expected figures US
government bond yields declined slightly. **Another**
member highlighted that the evolution of geopolitical
tensions also contributed to said volatility. **One**
member commented that since the previous
decision, fixed-income markets have exhibited mixed
movements. Another member expressed that fixedincome markets performed differently across

regions. Some members noted that stock market
**indices registered gains. One member pointed out**
that developed countries registered increases, while
emerging ones registered losses. Another member
argued that the materialization of adverse events
related to electoral processes, geopolitical conflicts,
and global economic growth could intensify

international financial volatility, with negative effects
particularly for emerging economies.

**_Economic activity in Mexico_**

**The majority pointed out that, at the beginning of**
**the second quarter of 2024, Mexico’s economic**
**activity continued exhibiting the weakness**
**observed since the end of 2023. Some members**
pointed out that the IGAE registered a contraction in
April. One member stated that this result was caused

### 2


-----

by decreases in the three main sectors of economic
activity. **Another member mentioned that annual**
growth rates showed an expansion in the secondary
and tertiary IGAE sectors and a contraction in the
primary one. Most members asserted that recent
**readings** **indicate** **a** **lower-than-expected**

**dynamism.** **One member warned that this, together**
with the timely indicator for May, suggests that the
economic slowdown has extended, contrary to what
had been anticipated. **Another member added that**
this slowdown contrasts with the previous

expectation that economic activity would be at high
levels in the first half of the year. Nevertheless, one
member expressed that INEGI estimates an
expansion in May that could offset the fall in April.
He/she added that various indicators of production,
demand and employment show mixed signals,
which, together with greater uncertainty associated
with the country’s political transition, make it difficult
to anticipate the economy's performance for this year
and the next one.

**Regarding the performance of the productive**
**sectors, the majority noted that IGAE data of**
**April** **indicate** **that** **industrial** **production**

**decreased at a monthly rate due to a greater**
**sluggishness in manufacturing.** **Most members**
**argued that construction has expanded at lower**
**monthly rates than those registered in previous**
**months. One member mentioned that there is some**
weakness in railway, oil and petrochemical

construction works. Some members also mentioned
the weakness in the mining sector. Likewise, **one**
member pointed out the weakness of the electricity
sector. **Some members noted that the services**
sector remains heterogeneous in its different
subsectors. **One member indicated that due to the**
fall in some of these subsectors, the progress made
in previous months has reversed, and thus total
services remain at the same levels as those
observed at the end of 2023. **Another member**
stated that the tertiary sector as a whole seems to be
affected by the weakness of secondary activities,
especially those more related to industrial use, such
as commercial activities. Meanwhile, he/she noted
that timely estimates suggest that the weakness in
the primary sector could extend throughout the
quarter. One member pointed out that, nevertheless,
considering the annual variation of economic activity
data for the first quarter, a 1.9% growth rate is
observed.

**Regarding domestic demand, most members**
**indicated that private consumption has remained**
**strong. One member considered that this has been**
mainly associated with the dynamism of consumption


of imported goods, while that of domestic goods and
services has been lower. **Another member pointed**
out that in its annual variation the consumption of
domestic goods rose 3.3% in March, its highest
growth in eighteen months. Regarding forwardlooking indicators, **some members mentioned that**
those related to consumption of services suggest a
slowdown. However, **one member argued that the**
risks of the recent exchange rate depreciation and its
effects on consumption capacity attributed to
remittances should be considered. **Some members**
expressed that investment reactivated slightly in
March. **One member stated that the growth**
registered in that month was supported by
construction and domestic machinery and

equipment. He/she added that in that same month
gross capital formation maintained a strong

expansion of 10.9% in annual terms, although this
figure is lower than those observed during most of
2023. **Some members commented that private**
investment spending has grown at lower rates. One
member reiterated that its deceleration is noticeable
with respect to the first half of 2023.

**Most members noted that external demand**
**exhibited sluggishness. Some members pointed**
out that automotive manufacturing exports have
shown weakness. **One member noted a similar**
behavior in the non-automotive ones. **Another**
member considered that the latter have changed
marginally. One member mentioned that automotive
exports grew at an annual rate of 19.7%, while nonautomotive exports contracted 2.8%. He/she added
that, therefore, in their annual variation,

manufacturing exports grew 4.2%.

**Some members commented that, looking ahead,**
economic growth is expected to be lower than
previously anticipated. They considered that the
balance of risks to economic activity has become
biased to the downside. **One member stated that**
there is the risk that private investment will continue
losing dynamism, considering the tight financial
conditions and the environment of greater

uncertainty generated by financial volatility in Mexico,
as well as by the upcoming electoral process in the
United States. He/she added that while a low
contribution to economic growth from external
demand is expected over the next quarters, the latter
could decelerate more than anticipated if the
weakness prevailing in the US manufacturing sector
worsens. He/she noted that this could extend the low
dynamism of domestic manufacturing production,
limiting the positive spillover effects that this sector
tends to have on other sectors of the economy.

### 3


-----

Regarding the output gap estimated with GDP data,
**one member pointed out that it decreased in the first**
quarter of 2024, although it remained in positive
territory. **Another member noted that said gap is**
expected to close faster than previously anticipated.
**Some members commented that it is expected to be**
in negative territory as of the last quarter of 2024.
**One member mentioned that the point estimate of**
the output gap calculated with IGAE data up to April
is already in negative territory, although without being
statistically different from zero. He/she added that,
although slack measures are unobservable factors
and their estimation is subject to uncertainty, it
cannot be ignored that timely data indicate that the
economy has had three consecutive quarters of
marked weakness. **Some members indicated that**
the cyclical conditions of the economy will be a
relevant factor in the price formation process.

**All members noted that the labor market**
**continued showing strength, although most**
**members mentioned that it has shown some**
**signs of moderation. Some members highlighted**
the high labor force participation rate and the fact that
the unemployment rate remains at historic lows. One
member indicated that formal employment in the
manufacturing and construction industries has lost
momentum. **Some members noted that, despite its**
relative slowdown, the wage bill continues growing at
levels higher than those prior to the pandemic. One
member expressed that the expectation of significant
wage increases in 2025 persist. **Another member**
highlighted the high level of nominal annual variation
of the daily wage of IMSS-insured workers, as well
as contractual wage revisions in public and private
firms. He/she mentioned that wage increases are
much higher than productivity increases. However,
**one member pointed out that nominal and real wage**
growth rates have declined. Meanwhile, some
members commented that formal job creation has
grown at a slower pace and that, given the prospect
of a slowdown in economic activity, this trend is likely
to become more pronounced.

**_Inflation in Mexico_**

**Most members indicated that annual headline**
**inflation rose from 4.65% in April to 4.78% in the**
**first fortnight of June. They pointed out that this**
**was due to an increase in non-core inflation.**
**Some members highlighted that headline inflation**
has trended upwards since March. **One member**
commented on the scant progress in disinflation
since more than half a year ago. **Another member**
considered that, although headline inflation has
remained on an upward trend in recent readings,


various metrics suggest that this is mainly due to a
change in relative prices rather than to generalized
price increases.

**Most members underlined that core inflation**
**continued decreasing from 4.37 to 4.17%**
**between April and the first fortnight of June.**
**Some members pointed out that it has decreased for**
sixteen consecutive months. **One** member

highlighted that the seasonally adjusted annualized
monthly variations of this component have fallen to
levels close to 3%. Some members emphasized that
this component reflects the medium-term trend of
inflation. Most members agreed that its downward
**trend is mainly explained by the reduction in**
**merchandise inflation, while all members pointed**
**out that services inflation does not yet show a**
**clear downward trend.**

Delving into the behavior of merchandise inflation,
**some members pointed out that it has decreased for**
eighteen consecutive months. **One member noted**
that its most recent reading is below its historical
average. **Another member stated that it decreased**
from 3.67 to 3.33% between April and the first
fortnight of June. Regarding its components, food
merchandise inflation went from 4.79 to 4.28%, while
that of non-food merchandise fell from 2.34 to 2.18%.
**Another member highlighted that the annual inflation**
of non-food merchandise has been below 3% for the
last five months. He/she added that monthly
variations of food merchandise prices have been
below their historical average so far this year.

**Some members stated that services inflation**
continues being affected by cost-related pressures
and a lagged pass-through to consumers. **One**
member expressed that although this is a global
problem it is not possible to anticipate that the easing
pressures on this component abroad will have a
similar outcome in Mexico. He/she mentioned that its
performance is influenced by domestic conditions
such as the resilience of consumption, despite some
mixed signals from its determinants, expectations of
significant wage increases in 2025, a tight labor
market, and the high growth of the wage bill, despite
its relative deceleration. Another member added that
signs of moderation are beginning to be observed in
some items, and various metrics point to a better
performance.

**Some members mentioned that services inflation**
remains above 5%. One member pointed out that it
registered 5.19% in the first fortnight of June.
**Another member noted that it shows generalized**
pressures in all its items and, in some of them, it

### 4


-----

exhibits rates that are twice as high as the inflation
target. One member stated that practically half of the
CPI items that make up this subcomponent register
seasonally adjusted annualized monthly variations
above 5%. However, another member indicated that
the proportion of the basket of services with
annualized monthly variations above 5% has
decreased. He/she highlighted that the annualized
monthly variations show an improvement in inflation
at the margin. He/she pointed out that while the
average of these variations in the last twelve months
is 5.21%, the corresponding for the last six and three
months is 5.05 and 4.42%, respectively. Likewise,
**one member indicated that the annual inflation of**
services other than housing and education was
6.05% in the first fortnight of June, the lowest figure
registered in two and a half years. Another member
stated that it has decreased from the peak levels of
7.5% registered at the beginning of 2023. He/she
pointed out that the monthly inflation rate of this item
has been moderating. He/she specified that the
average of the last twelve months is 6.06%, while the
average of the last six and three months is 5.56 and
4.03%, respectively.

**Most members pointed out that non-core**
**inflation increased from 5.54 to 6.73% between**
**April and the first fortnight of June. All members**
**agreed that this was driven by the higher annual**
**variations in the prices of agricultural and**
**livestock products and energy. One member**
noted that the annual inflation of agricultural and
livestock products increased from 7.35 to 8.99%
during the same period, while that of energy products
rose from 4.38 to 5.52%. **Another member argued**
that non-core inflation continues growing above its
historical average of around 6%. He/she pointed out
that there have been significant increases in the
inflation of agricultural and livestock products since
March and an upward trend in energy prices since
mid-2023. **Some members emphasized that non-**
core inflation is very volatile and tends to face shortlived shocks. One member expressed that monetary
policy has little impact on this component. **Another**
member estimated that it is necessary to remain alert
to the increases that this component has exhibited
since mid-2023.

**Most members mentioned that headline inflation**
**expectations for the end of 2024 were revised**
**upwards. Some members commented that those for**
the next twelve months declined. Most members
**stated that those for the end of 2025, as well as**
**those for the medium and long terms, have**
**remained stable. One member indicated that**
analysts' expectations are above the central bank's


intermediate targets for 2024 and 2025. Regarding
expectations drawn from market instruments,

**another member noted that those for the 1 to 5-year**
average and for the 6 to 10-year average increased
slightly. **One member highlighted that breakeven**
inflation implicit in government securities curves
exhibited mixed changes during the period, although
it remains at levels similar to the previous policy
decision, above 400 basis points.

**Most members noted that the forecasts for**
**headline and core inflation were revised slightly**
**in some quarters.** **One member pointed out that this**
adjustment was due, in part, to the impact of the
exchange rate depreciation on merchandise inflation,
which tends to be more clearly affected by the
Mexican peso exchange rate. **Another member**
highlighted that the impact of the depreciation on
merchandise prices would be reflected with a certain
lag and the degree of the pass-through will depend
on the timing of the exchange rate adjustment and
the behavior of other inflationary determinants. The
**majority** **underlined** **that,** **although** **the**

**depreciation of the Mexican peso impacts**
**inflation forecasts upwards, its effects are partly**
**offset by those associated with the greater**
**weakness exhibited by economic activity. One**
member considered that the lower economic activity
would allow the decline in headline inflation to
resume shortly. He/she pointed out that the
adjustment was also explained by the greater
persistence expected in housing and education
inflation, as well as by the greater variations in
agricultural and livestock products' prices. **Most**
**members mentioned that headline inflation is still**
**expected to converge to the 3% target in the**
**fourth quarter of 2025.**

**Most members considered that the balance of**
**risks for the trajectory of inflation within the**
**forecast horizon remains biased to the upside.**
**One member stated that the upward bias became**
more pronounced and that a more uncertain
inflationary outlook is now currently faced. He/she
indicated that since the balance of risks is
determined with a forward-looking approach, less
weight should be given to the already observed
decline in inflation from its peak, and more weight
should be granted to the fact that progress in
disinflation has paused since October 2023 and is at
risk of reverting. **Another member expressed that**
the shock associated with the slowdown in economic
activity will last longer than the volatility shock
associated with idiosyncratic factors, and thus the
former will play a more relevant role in inflation
dynamics.

### 5


-----

**The majority held that there is the risk of a greater**
**currency** **depreciation,** **which** **could** **exert**

**pressure on inflation. One member pointed out that**
the intensity and duration of adjustments in financial
markets are uncertain and could hinder the
convergence of inflation to the target within the
planning horizon. He/she anticipates that risk
aversion and its consequences on domestic financial
markets will persist. He/she considered that, in
addition to tight international financial conditions, the
electoral process in the United States could generate
bouts of volatility. However, **another member**
deemed it possible that part of the exchange rate
shock may be temporary or may moderate to some
extent, which could imply a lower exchange rate
pass-through. **The majority added that the**
**expected economic slowdown could mitigate the**
**risk of the exchange rate pass-through. One**
member highlighted that studies on the Mexican
economy show that the coefficient of the exchange
rate pass-through to inflation is lower under greater
slack conditions. He/she argued that the anchoring
of inflation expectations has significantly reduced the
pass-through over the last two decades. **Another**
member pointed out that, although the pass-through
of the depreciation to costs has been low in recent
years, the nature and magnitude of the exchange
rate shock, its duration and slack conditions, among
other factors, will be decisive in its inflationary
effects. Meanwhile, **one member argued that a**
recent study shows that in both advanced and
emerging economies the magnitude of the exchange
rate pass-through depends on the nature of the
shock that contributed to the currency depreciation.
He/she pointed out that, according to said study, in
the case of Mexico, the pass-through is greater when
the nature of the shock is idiosyncratic, with demandrelated shocks and risk premium shocks having the
largest effects.

**Most members highlighted as an upward risk the**
**persistence of core inflation, especially of its**
**services component. One member considered that**
the persistence of services inflation could continue
due to the lag in the relative price readjustment and
because cost increases have not yet fully passed on
to consumer prices. He/she warned that

merchandise inflation could decline less, potentially
halting the deceleration of the core component.
He/she added that the decline in food merchandise
inflation could reverse direction once the favorable
shocks to this component dissipate and the
comparison base effect becomes more relevant.
He/she deemed that non-food merchandise inflation
is reaching low levels that are difficult to sustain.


He/she warned about the risk that non-food
merchandise inflation, as it converges to its mean,
may no longer offset the persistence of services
inflation, initiating an upward trend in core inflation.

**Among additional upward risks, the majority**
**warned about the possibility of greater cost-**
**related pressures of various nature. They**
**highlighted pressures associated with climate-**
**related impacts.** **One member mentioned the**
challenges that could arise from the fiscal boost
during 2024. **Another** member indicated that the
2025 Economic Package will be crucial for
understanding the fiscal framework, spendingrelated pressures, and support measures for Pemex.
Meanwhile, he/she recalled that the risk of non-core
inflation remaining above the central bank's

projections, at levels consistent with its historical
averages, prevails. **One member emphasized the**
risks associated with an intensification of the
geopolitical conflicts.

**Some members stated that some of the mentioned**
risks could be offset by a lower-than-anticipated
economic activity. **One member estimated that**
greater slack, in addition to offsetting the potential
effects of currency depreciation, will contribute to a
decline in services inflation. He/she stated that the
easing of slack conditions has increased and is likely
to last longer than the volatility shock.

**_Macrofinancial environment_**

**Some** members noted that during the weeks
following the last monetary policy meeting, domestic
financial markets exhibited a stable behavior.
However, **one member mentioned that markets**
faced an adverse environment in May in light of the
expectation of smaller reference rate cuts in
advanced economies. The majority mentioned that
**idiosyncratic** **factors** **generated** **significant**

**volatility in domestic markets in early June.** **All**
**members underlined that trading conditions**
**experienced** **significant** **disruptions.** **They**

**emphasized that the Mexican peso depreciated**
**considerably. One member specified that after**
having been below 17 pesos per dollar in May, in
June the exchange rate reached levels similar to
those observed in the early months of 2023, although
still below those registered in 2022. Another
member highlighted that the Mexican peso briefly
reached a level of 19 pesos per dollar, making it the
emerging economy currency with the highest
depreciation on certain trading days. Some members
added that the currency exhibited a broad trading
range. One member indicated that, in his/her opinion,

### 6


-----

the Mexican peso returned to levels close to its
fundamentals, thus correcting the overvaluation
observed in the past year. **Some members argued**
that this behavior of the Mexican peso was due to a
lower appetite for local assets and the liquidation of
long Mexican peso positions, mainly in short-term
foreign exchange derivatives. One member specified
that this was partly due to the unwinding of carry
trade positions following the decline in the volatilityadjusted interest rate spread. He/she emphasized
that volatility and the skew implied in the options
market increased significantly, reaching year-high
levels. He/she underlined that, consistent with the
above, there has been an increase in the demand for
hedging in view of possible subsequent depreciation
episodes. **Another member pointed out that, in the**
medium term, expectations continue signaling a bias
towards depreciation. One member considered that,
in light of the deterioration in trading conditions, the
proper functioning of the foreign exchange market
should be monitored, and underlined that this does
not imply that there is a specific target level. The
**majority pointed out that part of the exchange**
**rate adjustment has reversed in recent days. One**
member added that recently the Mexican peso
exchange rate has performed in line with other
similar currencies.

**All members noted that interest rates on medium-**
**and long-term government bonds increased**
**significantly,** **associated** **with** **the** **referred**

**idiosyncratic factors. Some members mentioned a**
deterioration in market conditions and historical highs
in some nodes of the nominal yield curve. **One**
member added that broad trading ranges were
observed. **Another member pointed out that a**
certain reversal in said rates has been observed in
recent days. **One member mentioned that a more**
restrictive stance of the US Federal Reserve and
expectations of less reference rate cuts for the
remainder of the year, along with idiosyncratic
factors, have contributed to the increase in the
interest rate spread of Mexican bonds. He/she added
that, despite the above, this spread appears less
attractive after adjusting for the volatility of the
Mexican peso, although it remains at levels higher
than most comparable emerging currencies.

**Another member stated that in recent weeks there**
was a capital outflow mainly of M-Bonos held by nonresidents. He/she mentioned that the interest rate
derivatives market exhibited a similar behavior to that
of government bonds, with significant increases and
high volatility. He/she argued that part of the
movements is explained by closing positions, as well
as by demand for currency hedging in view of


changes in interest rates. He/she indicated that the
implied expectations for the trajectory of the
reference rate in TIIE swaps discount with a higher
probability that the next reference rate cut will occur
only until the November policy decision, and that the
reference rate will close the year at 10.60%. He/she
emphasized that this contrasts with the median of
expectations of private sector analysts, who
anticipate the next reference rate adjustment in
August and a year-end rate of 10.25%. He/she added
that, in both cases, there has been a correction in
monetary policy expectations.

**The majority highlighted that sovereign risk**
**premia increased. One member stated that the risk**
premium is still at levels higher than those observed
before the election in June. He/she warned that, in
the medium term, expectations of a higher risk
premium prevail. However, **another** member

commented that increases in risk premia have been
limited compared to other stress episodes. Most
**members pointed out that the stock market**
**performed unfavorably due to the lower risk**
**appetite observed domestically.**

**One member considered that, looking ahead,**
incoming information can help mitigate uncertainty
and contribute to the further stabilization of domestic
financial markets. He/she stated that a number of
factors can contribute to the above, such as the
sound macroeconomic fundamentals, particularly
compared to other emerging economies. He/she
highlighted fiscal discipline, sustainable external
accounts, a well-capitalized Mexican banking system
with no currency imbalances, a developed financial
derivatives market that allows economic agents to
hedge the exchange rate risk, and adequate levels of
international reserves. He/she noted that two primary
pillars of the country's macroeconomic policy
framework are an autonomous central bank with a
price stability mandate and a flexible exchange rate
regime. Some members underlined that, under this
regime, the exchange rate acts as a shock absorber,
helping the economy to adjust in an orderly manner.

**Most members highlighted that total financing in**
**the economy continued increasing.** **One member**
attributed said growth to the domestic component.
He/she added that domestic financing to the private
sector exhibited solid growth in April, although it
continued decelerating. **Some** members indicated
that commercial bank credit maintained its

dynamism. They specified that financing to

businesses and for consumption registered high
rates of expansion. However, **one** member

highlighted that these segments have shown some

### 7


-----

moderation. He/she warned that, looking ahead, the
evolution of credit to firms should be monitored, as
the economic slowdown could be reflected in both
demand- and supply-side adverse factors for credit.
**Another member mentioned that delinquency levels**
remain low and stable.

**_Monetary policy_**

**The Governing Board assessed the behavior of**
**inflation and its determinants, as well as of**
**inflation** **expectations.** **It** **stated** **that** **the**

**challenges and risks on both sides of the balance**
**call for continuing conducting monetary policy**
**prudently. With the presence of all its members,**
**the Board decided by majority to maintain the**
**target for the overnight interbank interest rate at**
**11.00%. With this decision, the monetary policy**
**stance remains restrictive and will continue**
**being conducive to the convergence of inflation**
**to the 3% target in the forecast horizon.**

**Looking ahead, the Board foresees that the**
**inflationary** **environment** **may** **allow** **for**

**discussing reference rate adjustments. It will**
**take into account the prospects that global**
**shocks will continue dissipating and the effects**
**of a weaker-than-anticipated economic activity. It**
**will consider the incidence of both the restrictive**
**policy stance that has been maintained and that**
**prevailing in the future on inflation throughout**
**the horizon in which monetary policy operates.**
**Actions will be implemented in such a way that**
**the reference rate remains consistent at all times**
**with the trajectory needed to enable an orderly**
**and sustained convergence of headline inflation**
**to the 3% target during the forecast period. The**
**central bank reaffirms its commitment with its**
**primary mandate and the need to continue its**
**efforts to consolidate an environment of low and**
**stable inflation.**

**One** **member stated that this is one of the most**
complex decisions of the monetary cycle as the
economy experiences two shocks acting in opposite
directions on inflation. He/she pointed out that, on the
one hand, there is a period of volatility associated
with idiosyncratic factors, while, on the other hand,
the risk of a greater-than-expected easing of slack
conditions has gained relevance, the latter factor
lasting longer. He/she expressed that an adjustment
in the monetary restriction is consistent with risks to
the outlook, given the highly restrictive policy stance
and the progress in disinflation. Among these risks,
he/she highlighted the risk of a higher depreciation.
He/she stated that, while volatility should be


monitored, the conduction of monetary policy should
address it to the extent that it affects inflation. He/she
added that, given the expectation of greater slack
conditions, the pass-through to prices could be lower,
as suggested by the evidence of Mexico, and would
also contribute to reduce services inflation.

Therefore, he/she considered that, as a result, the
risk associated with the economic slowdown gains
more importance due to its implications for inflation
dynamics. He/she expressed that a gradual

approach allows to take actions responsibly,
addressing all inflation determinants within monetary
policy’s horizon. He/she argued that failing to
address changes in the inflation outlook in a timely
manner, such as the current intensification of risks to
the downside, could imply larger adjustments in the
future, making the conduction and communication of
monetary policy more challenging. He/she

considered it inappropriate to adopt a highly datadependent stance, as this would be equivalent to
incorporating only part of the information and
conducting monetary policy with lags, which would
imply unnecessary costs. He/she added that an
optimal conduction of monetary policy should de
forward-looking, considering both the observed and
the expected inflation determinants. He/she

underlined that making additional adjustments to the
reference rate does not imply abandoning a
restrictive policy stance, which will remain necessary
throughout the forecast horizon, given the challenges
that prevail. He/she indicated that the challenge lies
in defining the pace of such adjustments, taking into
account the behavior of inflation with respect to
intermediate targets, the performance of its

determinants, the prevailing risks, and assigning
weight to the outlook for the inflation environment.

**Another** **member expressed that, since the last**
monetary policy meeting, the challenges of

persistence and of a slowdown in the disinflation
process have continued. He/she added that currently
there is also an unforeseen shock of financial
volatility generated by idiosyncratic factors, which
represents an additional obstacle to achieving the
convergence of inflation to the target within the
planning horizon. He/she mentioned the risk that the
monetary restriction might be insufficient to achieve
such convergence if the reference rate is reduced or
if inflation expectations increase. He/she considered
that, therefore, the outlook for the conduction of
monetary policy has become more complex. In this
regard, he/she underlined headline inflation’s upward
trend, the mixed changes in inflation expectations
between April and May, the adjustment in inflation
forecasts, and a labor market that remains tight.

### 8


-----

He/she expressed that the strength of consumption
and, to a lesser extent, of investment, as well as the
fiscal policy outlook, would imply a lesser-thananticipated deterioration for economic activity for the
remainder of 2024. He/she considered that all of the
above, coupled with a balance of risks for inflation
biased to the upside, indicates that monetary policy
should continue being conducted cautiously. He/she
estimated that, given the current environment of high
uncertainty and financial volatility, a reference rate
cut would come as a surprise to most market
participants and could increase exchange rate
volatility and raise inflation expectations. For this
reason, he/she considered that a risk management
approach should be prioritized in an environment of
increasing uncertainty, fueled by idiosyncratic and
external shocks. He/she argued that refraining from
modifying the target rate will help maintain inflation
expectations anchored and strengthen Banco de
México's credibility and its commitment to the
primary mandate of price stability. He/she expressed
that the central bank’s communication should place
emphasis on a cautious and data-dependent
approach.

**One** **member mentioned that, since the last**
monetary policy decision, the international outlook
has had few changes, while domestically, two shocks
have been observed of different nature, magnitude,
and duration that, for the moment, have tended to
offset each other. He/she mentioned that one of them
is associated with the increased uncertainty that led
to financial volatility during the period, while the other
one refers to the Mexican economy decelerating at a
faster-than-anticipated pace, in a context in which
high dynamism was anticipated for the first half of the
year. He/she pointed out that the financial volatility
registered this month has led to an environment of
greater uncertainty compared to previous decisions,
although in recent days volatility has moderated, in
line with Mexico’s solid macroeconomic

fundamentals. In this regard, he/she argued that
uncertainty shocks have implications for both the real
and financial sectors. He/she expressed that, in both
sectors, economic agents postpone making

decisions as they await more precise information and
proceed cautiously, being less reactive to changes in
the economic environment, including reference rate
adjustments. He/she added that, in environments of
lesser certainty, the reference rate may have a lesser
effect on long-term bond rates if risk premia adjust in
the opposite direction, thereby complicating

transmission along the yield curve. He/she

emphasized that, while the monetary policy stance is
undoubtedly restrictive, given the uncertainty


surrounding certain inflation determinants, it is
appropriate on this occasion to extend the pause in
order to continue assessing both the disinflation
process and the monetary policy transmission
mechanism. He/she expressed that if their behavior
is as expected and if macroeconomic conditions,
including aggregate demand, contribute to fostering
a more favorable price dynamic, it would be
appropriate to resume the downward adjustments in
order to pursue a more efficient balance in the
conduction of monetary policy. He/she stated that
this decision seeks to manage both upward and
downward risks to inflation and to foster an orderly
adjustment of markets and the overall economy, in
compliance with the constitutional mandate.

**Another** **member** estimated it is not necessary to
lower the reference rate before there is greater
certainty that inflation, specifically core inflation,
including its services subcomponent, show a
downward trend and displays a clear convergence to
the 3% target. Similarly, he/she considered that the
target rate should be consistent with the deterioration
in market trading conditions and with the expectation
of high rates due to greater domestic risk premia.
He/she pointed out that external monetary conditions
and the rate differential are beginning to gain
relevance in determining the monetary policy stance.
He/she deemed that a high and prolonged restrictive
stance is required given its lagged effects on
aggregate demand and the low effectiveness of its
transmission mechanisms. He/she noted that bank
credit, despite certain moderation, and monetary
aggregates in real terms maintain a vigorous
dynamic, indicating that the effects of the monetary
policy stance have not yet fully materialized. He/she
added that, in view of the observed depreciation, the
exchange rate channel may cease to contain certain
pressures, despite the low pass-through of the
foreign exchange depreciation. He/she considered
that a strategy of occasional and gradual datadependent calibrations to the monetary policy stance
is adequate. He/she noted that further fine-tuning
requires a downward trend in services inflation, a
substantial improvement in inflationary expectations,
and that convergence to the projected inflation target
by the end of 2025 materializes. He/she pointed out
that any eventual adjustments would be implemented
in order to maintain the ex-ante real interest rate in a
7-7.5% range. He/she highlighted that, since the
March decision, such rate has increased by 12 basis
points, thus laying towards the middle of said range.
He/she underlined the importance of monitoring the
effects of inflationary and exchange rate pressures
on inflation expectations. He/she asserted that the

### 9


-----

anchoring of inflation expectations at 3% must be
ensured, and that, since they remain above the
central bank forecasts, changes in slack conditions
or the tightening of financial conditions should
continue to be of secondary consideration. He/she
expressed that, in the face of increased uncertainty,
utmost caution must be used regarding the signals
provided to the public. He/she pointed out that
keeping the reference rate unchanged shows caution
and sends the message that the central bank is not
satisfied with the inflation dynamics. He/she stated
that the direction of future adjustments will represent
an even stronger signal than the level of the
reference rate by itself.

**One** **member pointed out that in early June an**
episode of volatility occurred in domestic financial
markets, which implied a notable depreciation of the
Mexican peso. He/she emphasized that,

nevertheless, the impact of said depreciation on the
central bank's inflation forecasts was partly offset by
the effects corresponding to expectations of a
weaker Mexican economic activity than previously
anticipated. He/she added that the forecast of these
pressures takes place in a context where headline
inflation, the measure over which the central bank's
target is set, has been increasing for several months
due to the behavior of the non-core component.
He/she estimated that, taking into account all
elements of the macroeconomic and financial
environment combined, it is prudent to maintain the
reference rate at 11% on this occasion. He/she
emphasized that this decision, which implies
extending the pause in reference rate adjustments,
does not mean that the possibility of lowering the
reference rate in future meetings is no longer
considered. He/she recalled that, despite the
fluctuations exhibited by headline inflation this year,
it remains at levels visibly lower than the highs
registered during this inflationary episode. He/she
also mentioned that, since the last monetary policy
meeting, core inflation, which better reflects the trend
in inflation, has continued decreasing. He/she stated
that the current inflationary environment is

undoubtedly less adverse than that of 2022 and early
2023. He/she added that disinflation is projected to
continue throughout the forecast horizon. In this
context, he/she highlighted that the central bank is at
a stage where progress in disinflation and the
prevailing degree of monetary restriction allow to
discuss possible reference rate cuts and, in his/her
opinion, this will be undertaken in upcoming
monetary policy meetings. He/she stated that
moderation of inflationary pressures will be

considered in light of the expectation that global


shocks will continue to dissipate and in view of
prospects of a weaker-than-anticipated economic
activity. He/she underlined that the incidence of both
the restrictive monetary policy stance that has been
maintained and that prevailing in the future on
inflation throughout the horizon in which monetary
policy operates will be considered.

**3. MONETARY POLICY DECISION**

The Governing Board assessed the behavior of
inflation and its determinants, as well as of inflation
expectations. It stated that the challenges and risks
on both sides of the balance call for continuing
conducting monetary policy prudently. With the
presence of all its members, the Board decided by
majority to maintain the target for the overnight
interbank interest rate at 11.00%. With this decision,
the monetary policy stance remains restrictive and
will continue being conducive to the convergence of
inflation to the 3% target in the forecast horizon.

Looking ahead, the Board foresees that the
inflationary environment may allow for discussing
reference rate adjustments. It will take into account
the prospects that global shocks will continue
dissipating and the effects of a weaker-thananticipated economic activity. It will consider the
incidence of both the restrictive policy stance that has
been maintained and that prevailing in the future on
inflation throughout the horizon in which monetary
policy operates. Actions will be implemented in such
a way that the reference rate remains consistent at
all times with the trajectory needed to enable an
orderly and sustained convergence of headline
inflation to the 3% target during the forecast period.
The central bank reaffirms its commitment with its
primary mandate and the need to continue its efforts
to consolidate an environment of low and stable
inflation.

**4. VOTING**

Voting in favor of the decision were Victoria
Rodríguez, Galia Borja, Irene Espinosa, and
Jonathan Heath. Omar Mejía voted in favor of
lowering the target for the overnight interbank
interest rate by 25 basis points to 10.75%.

**5. DISSIDENT OPINIONS / VOTES**

**Vote. Omar Mejía**

The inflation outlook faces two opposing shocks,
whose effects tend to counter each other: a
depreciation resulting from idiosyncratic events and

### 10


-----

evidence of a greater-than-expected economic
weakness. I anticipate that the easing of slack
conditions will last longer and thus will play a more
relevant role in inflation dynamics throughout the
horizon. In addition, there are specific instruments to
ensure the well-functioning of markets, and monetary
policy must react accordingly to their impact on our
central baseline scenario, which, given the impact of
both shocks combined, does not display relevant
changes and allows to continue adjusting our
monetary policy stance, which should be set to
enable the convergence of inflation, ensuring an


orderly adjustment of the economy and markets. I
deem it responsible to reflect in depth about the
appropriate level of monetary restriction in the
current context, characterized by the evident
progress in the inflation outlook and prospects of
greater slack conditions. For this reason, it is also
appropriate to conduct monetary policy with a
prospective approach and refrain from overweighing
the evolution of non-core inflation, over which
monetary policy has little incidence. In view of the
above, I believe it is appropriate to make an
adjustment to the monetary restriction.

### 11


-----

**ANNEX[]**

The information in this Annex was prepared for this
meeting by the staff of Banco de México’s Directorate
General of Economic Research and Directorate
General of Central Bank Operations. It does not
necessarily reflect the considerations of the

members of the Governing Board as to the monetary
policy decision.

**A.1. External conditions**

**A.1.1. World economic activity**

World economic activity is expected to continue
expanding during the second quarter of 2024, albeit
at a slower pace than in the previous quarter. The
latter is associated with a lower growth in emerging
economies, after having registered a robust
performance during the first quarter. Advanced
economies would have registered a slight recovery in
economic activity, although the pace of growth is
expected to be different across countries. Purchasing
Managers' Indices point to an increase in the
services sector and in manufacturing activity at the
global level during the second quarter of the year
(Chart 1). Some world trade indicators exhibited
modest growth in April relative to the first quarter of
the year. Among global risks the following stand out:
the intensification of geopolitical turmoil, the
protraction of inflationary pressures, tight financial
conditions, and, to a lesser extent, the challenges to
financial stability.

In the United States, although economic activity
moderated in the first quarter of 2024 compared to
the last quarter of 2023, domestic demand was solid.
In particular, GDP grew at a seasonally adjusted
quarterly rate of 0.3%, after having increased 0.8%
in the previous quarter (Chart 2).[1] Recent indicators
suggest that the US economy remained resilient
during the second quarter of 2024. This performance
would reflect positive contributions from private
consumption, nonresidential investment,

government spending, and inventory accumulation.

 Note: In the electronic version of this document the data to
generate all the charts and the table can be obtained by clicking
on them, except for those that are not produced or elaborated by
Banco de México.


**Chart 1**

**Purchasing Managers’ Index:**

**production component for advanced,**

**emerging and global economies**

Diffusion index, s. a.[1/]

60

61.3 May

58

56

54

52

50

48

46 26.5 Manufacturing advanced

20.8 Services advanced

44 37.8 Manufacturing emerging

31.6 Services emerging

42 32.5 Manufacturing global

23.5 Services global

40

J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A

2020 2021 2022 2023 2024

s. a. / Seasonally adjusted figures.
1/ The index varies between 0 and 100 points. A reading above 50 points
indicates an expansion and below 50 indicates a contraction. A reading
equal to 50 points indicates no change.
Note: Figures in the chart correspond to respective minimum levels of each
indicator, in the same order as the labels.
Source: IHS Markit.

**Chart 2**

**US: real GDP and components**

Quarterly percentage rate and contribution

in percentage points, s. a.

3.0

Private consumption expenditures
Residential investment

2.5 Nonresidential investment

Change in private inventories

2.0 Net exports

Government consumption expenditures

1.5 Total

1.0

0.5

0.0

-0.5

-1.0

I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV I II

2021 2022 2023 2024

s. a. / Seasonally adjusted figures.
Note: The shaded area refers to Atlanta Federal Reserve's GDPNow
forecasts as of June 20.
Source: BEA and Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta.

1 Expressed as a seasonally adjusted quarterly rate, the change

in US GDP was 1.3% in the first quarter of 2024 and
3.4% in the fourth quarter of 2023.

12


-----

US industrial production increased at a seasonally
adjusted monthly rate of 0.9% in May, after having
stagnated in April. Manufacturing production

expanded 0.9% in May, mainly as a result of positive
contributions from the chemical industry, the food
merchandise and beverages industry, and from the
manufacturing of metal products. The mining sector
grew 0.3%, while electricity and gas generation rose
1.6%. Purchasing Managers' Indices point to a
slower pace of growth in manufacturing in June.

The US labor market remained tight, despite the
moderation shown by various indicators. The nonfarm payroll expanded more than expected, from 165
thousand new positions in April to 272 thousand in
May. Although they remain at low levels, initial claims
for unemployment insurance have slightly trended
upwards recently, registering 238 thousand new
claims in the week ending June 15. The

unemployment rate increased marginally from 3.9%
in April to 4.0% in May, its highest level since January
2022. Although the number of new vacancies
remains above pre-pandemic levels, it declined from
8.4 million in March to 8.1 million in April. The annual
rate of change in average hourly wages rose slightly
from 4.1% in April to 4.2% in May.[2]

After five quarters of having been practically
stagnant, economic activity in the euro area grew at
a seasonally adjusted quarterly rate of 0.3% in the
first quarter of 2024.[3] Similar growth is expected for
the second quarter of the year. Economic

performance during the first quarter is mainly
attributed to the positive contribution of net exports.
The labor market in this region remained robust. The
unemployment rate decreased from 6.5% in March
to 6.4% in April, reaching new historic lows. The latter
took place in a context in which the labor participation
rate has been increasing.

Regarding the rest of the major advanced
economies, they are expected to register an
expansion in the second quarter of 2024, although
with differences in terms of growth rates. In
particular, Japan's economic activity is expected to
recover, after having contracted in the previous
quarter. Labor markets in this group of economies
remained tight, despite the moderation of some
indicators.

Most of the major emerging economies, mainly in
Latin America and Emerging Asia, are expected to

2 Average hourly earnings of production and nonsupervisory
employees.
3 Expressed as a seasonally adjusted annualized quarterly rate,
the change in euro area GDP was 1.3% in the first quarter of 2024.


show lower dynamism in the second quarter of the
year compared to the previous quarter. In the
particular case of China, some economic activity
indicators point to slower growth between April and
June, after GDP grew at a seasonally adjusted
quarterly rate of 1.6% in the first quarter of the year.[4]
In April and May, retail sales and industrial
production registered a moderation in their growth
rate compared to the performance observed at the
beginning of the year. The Chinese economy
continues facing difficulties due to the weakness of
its real estate sector and the low confidence of
economic agents, despite the various stimuli
implemented by the country’s authorities to boost
growth.

Since Mexico's last monetary policy decision,
international commodity prices registered a mixed
behavior. Oil prices performed differently throughout
the period. During the first four weeks, prices
decreased due to a lower perception of the risk
associated with the geopolitical conflict in the Middle
East, as well as due to the agreement reached on
June 2 between the members of the Organization of
the Petroleum Exporting Countries and allied
countries (OPEC+) to gradually increase their supply
starting in the fourth quarter of 2024. Towards the
second week of June, a reversal of this trend was
observed due to the expectation of a higher global
demand during the summer. As for natural gas
reference prices, they trended upwards. Prices
increased due to higher global demand and lower
production in Norway and Australia associated with
the maintenance of gas processing infrastructure.
There were additional upward pressures caused by
geopolitical tensions in Europe. Grain prices
performed differently during the period. In May, they
rose due to adverse weather conditions, such as
floods in Brazil and frosts in Russia and Ukraine, as
well as supply concerns associated with geopolitical
tensions between the latter two countries.

Nevertheless, at the beginning of June, this trend
reversed, partly due to larger grain harvests in the
United States. Industrial metals prices trended
downwards, although with some volatility. At the
beginning of the period, prices rose due to
expectations of a recovery in global manufacturing
activity. However, this trend reversed by the end of
May due to expectations of a lower demand from

4 Expressed as an annual rate, China's GDP growth was 5.3% in
the first quarter of 2024.

13


-----

China and higher inventory levels worldwide.
Precious metal prices remained at high levels, similar
to those observed around Mexico's last monetary
policy decision, although they registered some
volatility in light of the publication of various global
economic indicators, particularly from the United
States.

**A.1.2. Monetary policy and international financial**
**markets**

In several of the main advanced economies, annual
headline inflation decreased due to lower pressures
on food prices and, to a lesser extent, on the core
component. However, the pace of inflation reduction
has varied across economies, and, in some cases,
inflation has rebounded (Chart 3). In most of these
economies, inflation remains above the targets of
their respective central banks.

In particular, in the United States, annual headline
inflation measured by the consumer price index
decreased from 3.4% in April to 3.3% in May. This
reduction reflected the fall in food inflation and core
inflation. The latter decreased from 3.6 to 3.4%
during the same period. This was partially offset by
higher pressures on energy prices. The monthly
variation of the core component decreased in May
due to lower pressures on services prices. The
Personal Consumption Expenditure Price Index
(PCEPI) decreased slightly from 2.70% in March to
2.65% in April, while its core component went from
2.81 to 2.75% between the same months.

Analysts' inflation forecasts for most main advanced
economies foresee a moderation in headline inflation
throughout 2024 from its current levels. However, it
would remain at levels above the targets of their
respective central banks during this year. Longerterm inflation expectations for these economies
drawn from financial instruments were revised
slightly downwards recently with respect to

expectations registered in the second week of May.

5 At its June meeting, the Bank of Canada announced a cut of 25
basis points to its reference rate, after having left it unchanged for
six consecutive decisions. Its Governing Council stated that recent
data increased its confidence that inflation will continue


**Chart 3**

**Selected advanced economies:**

**headline inflation**

Annual percentage change

12

United States PCE 1/

10 United States CPI

Japan
Euro area

8

United Kingdom
Canada

6

4

2

May

April

0

-2

J J J J J J J J J J J

2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 2024

1/ The personal consumption expenditures price index is used.
Source: Bureau of Economic Analysis, Bureau of Labor Statistics, Eurostat,
Bank of Japan, the UK Office for National Statistics, and Statistics Canada.

In several emerging economies, annual headline
inflation increased in its most recent reading. This
was partly attributed to higher pressures on energy
prices and, in some cases, to a rise in food inflation.
Thus, in most of these economies, headline inflation
remained above the point targets of their respective
central banks, although in several of them inflation
was within the variability range considered by each
central bank. Core inflation decreased in most of the
main emerging economies.

In this context, since Mexico's last monetary policy
decision, the central banks of the major advanced
and emerging economies adjusted their monetary
policy stances in a heterogeneous manner,

depending on the evolution of inflation and of other
economic indicators in each country.

In the major advanced economies, most central
banks continued to gradually reduce their securities'
holdings and a large number of them kept their
reference rates unchanged, including the US Federal
Reserve. Some of them pointed to the need for
greater confidence that inflation is returning to target
before easing their monetary policy stances. Some
central banks in advanced economies, however,
lowered their reference rates. The European Central
Bank and the Bank of Canada announced their first
interest rate cuts, after having kept their reference
rates unchanged in several previous decisions.[5]

converging to its target and considered that its monetary policy did
not need to be so restrictive. However, it noted that risks to the
inflationary outlook prevail.

14


-----

Although it left its monetary policy rate unchanged in
June, the Bank of Japan stated that in its next
decision it will disclose a plan to reduce the amount
of its government bond purchases.[6]

At its June meeting, the US Federal Reserve left the
target range for the federal funds rate unchanged for
the seventh consecutive decision. Thus, it remains
between 5.25 and 5.50%. Said central bank
reiterated that, when considering any adjustment to
the target range for the federal funds rate, the
Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) will
carefully evaluate new information, the evolution of
the economic outlook, and the balance of risks. It
indicated again that the FOMC considers that risks
associated with meeting its employment and inflation
goals have moved toward better balance. It
mentioned again that the Committee does not expect
that it would be appropriate to reduce the target
range for the federal funds rate before it has greater
confidence that inflation is moving sustainably toward
the 2% target. However, it emphasized that it is
prepared to adjust its monetary policy stance in the
event of risks that may prevent it from meeting its
goals. In addition, said central bank continued
reducing the size of its balance sheet, although at a
slower pace.

During the press conference of the June decision, the
chairman of the Federal Reserve reiterated that so
far this year, inflation data have not generated
greater confidence among FOMC members that
inflation is converging toward 2%. However, he noted
that most recent inflation readings have been more
favorable than at the beginning of the year and that
there has been modest progress toward the inflation
target. He indicated that, if the economy remains
strong and inflation persists, the Committee is
prepared to maintain the current target range for as
long as appropriate. In contrast, if the labor market
weakens unexpectedly or inflation falls faster than
anticipated, it is also ready to respond.

Regarding the adjustments to the Committee's
projections, between March and June, the median
headline inflation measured by the personal
consumption expenditure price index was revised
upwards from 2.4 to 2.6% for the end of 2024, from
2.2 to 2.3% for 2025, and was left unchanged at 2.0%
for 2026. The Committee revised upwards its
expectation for the federal funds rate for the end of
2024 from 4.6 to 5.1%, for the end of 2025 from 3.9

6 The Bank of Japan announced that it will reduce the amount of
its government bond purchases (JGBs) to ensure that long-term
interest rates are more freely determined in the financial markets.
It will gather feedback from market participants and, at its next


to 4.1%, and kept it unchanged at 3.1% for the end
of 2026. Most recent expectations drawn from
financial instruments suggest that the federal funds
rate would be around 4.90% at the end of 2024 and
close to 3.99% at the end of 2025.

At its June meeting, the European Central Bank cut
its reference rates by 25 basis points (bps), after
having left them unchanged for five consecutive
decisions. Thus, its refinancing, key lending and key
deposit rates stand at 4.25, 4.5 and 3.75%,
respectively. Its Governing Council noted that, based
on the updated assessment of the inflation outlook,
the core inflation dynamics and the strength of
monetary policy transmission, it was appropriate to
moderate the degree of monetary policy tightening.
However, it reiterated that it will keep the reference
rates at sufficiently restrictive levels for as long as
necessary in order to ensure that inflation returns to
its target in a timely manner. It again indicated that it
will maintain a data-dependent approach to

determine the appropriate duration and degree of
such tightening and that it was not committing to a
particular monetary policy path.

At the press conference, the president of said
institution pointed out that, despite having revised
upwards their inflation forecasts, the decision was
taken because their confidence in the downward
trajectory of inflation has been increasing in the last
few months. However, she stated that additional data
is needed to confirm that they are on a disinflation
path. She also mentioned that it cannot be confirmed
that they are in a rate reduction phase, but that there
is a high probability that this will be the case, although
it will depend on data. She highlighted that there is a
high uncertainty about the speed and time that this
phase will take. Regarding its Pandemic Emergency
Purchase Program (PEPP), the Governing Council
confirmed that it will reduce its securities' holdings
acquired under the program by an average of EUR
7.5 billion per month during the second half of the
year.

Since Mexico's last monetary policy decision, the
central banks of the main emerging economies made
different decisions regarding their reference rates,
according to the specific economic circumstances of
their countries. Some central banks, mainly those of
Latin America and Eastern Europe, continued
lowering their rates in their most recent decisions,
albeit in less magnitude. The central banks of Peru

monetary policy meeting, will decide on a detailed plan for
reducing the amount of its purchase over the next one to two years
approximately.

15


-----

and Brazil left their reference rates unchanged in
their June decision, after having previously lowered
them. Some central banks in Southeast Asia decided
not to adjust their reference rates, including the
central bank of China.

Regarding future actions, the central banks indicated
that, in general, their decisions will continue
depending on the incoming information stemming
from these indicators. Some of these institutions
anticipate that reference rates will remain at
restrictive levels for some time and communicated
that they are prepared to make additional

adjustments, if necessary, to bring inflation back to
target. Regarding market expectations for monetary
policy rates in the main advanced economies, based
on the latest available information, interest rates
implicit in interest rate swap curves (OIS) showed
limited changes (Chart 4). Thus, the implied
trajectories for the major advanced economies
foresee, in general, reference rate cuts of at least 25
bps during the fourth quarter of 2024.


7 **― US Federal Reserve 2/** End of End of End of

**― Bank of England** 2022 2023 2024

6 **― Bank of Japan**

**― European Central Bank deposit rate**
**― OIS implicit trajectory Jun 26, 2024**

5 **--- OIS implicit trajectory May 9, 2024**

4

3

2

1 Forecasts

0

-1

2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 2024 2025

|latest ava|ailable i|information|n, interest rate|es|Chart 5|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|in interest changes ries for t, in genera ing the fou Referen imp ― US Federal Reserve ― Bank of England ― Bank of Japan ― European Central Ba ― OIS implicit trajectory -- OIS implicit trajectory|rate s (Chart he ma l, refere rth quar Ch ce rates lied in Per 2/ nk deposit rate Jun 26, 2024 May 9, 2024|wap curve 4). Thu jor advan nce rate c ter of 202 art 4 and traje OIS curve cent End of E 2022 20|s (OIS) showe s, the implie ced economie uts of at least 2 4. ctories s1/ nd of End of 23 2024 Forecasts|d Financia d 103 s 5 102 101 100 99 Tighten 98 Easing 97 96 J J 2022 Financial Cond Financial Cond Financial Cond 1/ The financial conditions ind variables on economic activ government bond, the spr government debt bond with with 10-year average earning rate.|l Conditions Index1/ Units ing J J J 2023 2024 itions Index - global itions Index - United States itions Index - euro area 2/ ex is constructed considering the effect o ity: the reference interest rate, the 10 ead of investment grade bonds over equivalent maturity, the ratio of a stock i s per share, and the trade weighted exch|
|||||||
|||||||


1/ OIS: Fixed floating interest rate swap where the fixed interest rate is
associated with the effective overnight reference rate.
2/ For the observed reference rate of the U.S., the average interest rate of
the target range of the federal funds rate (5.00%- 5.25%) is used.
Source: Bloomberg.

International financial conditions have shown limited
movements since the beginning of May 2024 (Chart
5). Markets reacted to mixed data on inflation and
economic activity, mainly in the United States, and
thus the financial conditions index did not exhibit a
clear trend during the period. The US dollar showed
a tendency to appreciate as a result of the Federal
Reserve's more cautious tone since the second half
of June, which contrasts with the recent reference
rate cuts by other central banks in advanced
economies.


In line with the evolution of financial conditions,
medium- and long-term rates declined slightly in
most of the main advanced economies (Chart 6). In
emerging economies, increases in longer-term
interest rates were observed in some regions (Chart
7). Most stock markets in advanced economies
registered losses, while those in emerging

economies showed mixed changes, with declines in
Latin America standing out. In the foreign exchange
markets, the US dollar appreciated against the
currencies of emerging and advanced countries.
Lastly, since Mexico's last monetary policy decision,
net capital inflows into emerging economies in both
equity and fixed-income assets have been

registered.

**Chart 5**

**Financial Conditions Index[1/]**

Units

103

102

101

100

99

Tightening

98

Easing

97

96

J J        J         J         J

2022              2023                 2024

Financial Conditions Index - global
Financial Conditions Index - United States
Financial Conditions Index - euro area 2/

1/ The financial conditions index is constructed considering the effect of five
variables on economic activity: the reference interest rate, the 10-year
government bond, the spread of investment grade bonds over the
government debt bond with equivalent maturity, the ratio of a stock index
with 10-year average earnings per share, and the trade weighted exchange
rate.
2/ In the case of the euro area, the spread between the sovereign bonds of
France, Italy, Spain, the Netherlands, Belgium, Austria, Portugal and
Finland over the German 10-year bond is also considered. The vertical
black line indicates the last calendarized monetary policy meeting of Banco
de México.
Source: Bloomberg and Goldman Sachs.

16


-----

**Chart 6**

**Change in selected financial indicators from**

**May 9 to June 26, 2024Percentage, basis points**


15%

10%


75

50


5%


25


0%

-5%


United Kingdom0

Germany

United States
Canada

-25


-10%


-50


1/ DXY: a weighted average estimated by the Intercontinental Exchange
(ICE) of the nominal exchange rate of the main six currencies operated
globally with the following weights: EUR: 57.6%, JPY: 13.6%, GBP: 11.9%,
CAD: 9.1%, SEK: 4.2%, and CHF: 3.6%.
Source: Bloomberg.

**Chart 7**

**Selected emerging economies: financial assets**

**performance as of May 3, 2024**

Percent, basis points Percent, basis points


**A.2. Current situation of the Mexican economy**

**A.2.1. Mexican markets**

Since the previous monetary policy decision in
Mexico, domestic financial markets exhibited

significant volatility due to idiosyncratic factors. The
Mexican peso depreciated notably against the US
dollar, while medium- and long-term interest rates
increased considerably (Chart 8). More recently,
trading conditions in Mexican markets have

somewhat normalized.

The Mexican peso traded in a range of 2.48 pesos,
between 16.52 and 19.00 pesos per US dollar since
the last monetary policy decision (Chart 9). In its
most recent reading, it depreciated 6.40% with
respect to the date of the previous monetary policy
decision. This occurred in an environment

characterized by high volatility, a deterioration in
trading conditions, and a decrease in Mexican peso
positions, although a certain improvement was
observed lately.

**Chart 8**

**Mexican markets’ performance**

Percent, MXN/USD and index


11.2

10.8

10.4

10.0

9.6

9.2

8.8

8.4


19.0

18.5

18.0

17.5

17.0

16.5

16.0


60,000

58,000

56,000

54,000

52,000

50,000

48,000


M-bond


7.5

7.0

6.5

6.0

5.5

5.0

4.5

4.0

Inflation-indexed bonds


Jun 21, 2024


Range in 2024 Range since previous monetary policy decision May 3, 2024 Jun 21, 2024


Note: An upward adjustment indicates currency appreciation. Interest rates
correspond to swap rates at the specified terms, except for Hungary, where
government securities with 3-year maturities were used as a reference. For
the Philippines, a 2-year swap rate was used, and for Russia, 2-year and 3year swap rates were used. The latest CDS data for Russia is as of June 1,
2022.
Source: Bloomberg.


Source: Bloomberg and Proveedor Integral de Precios (PIP).

Interest rates on government securities increased
between 40 and 48 basis points in the long-term
segment of the curve, reaching all-time highs for
some maturities (Chart 10). Real rate instruments
registered increases in the medium and long terms.
In this context, breakeven inflation implicit in spreads
between nominal and real rates of market

instruments exhibited high volatility and differentiated
variations by term (Chart 11). The fixed-income
market also exhibited a deterioration in its trading
conditions, which partially reversed in the days
leading up to Mexico’s monetary policy decision.

17


-----

**Chart 9**

**Mexican peso exchange rate**

MXN/USD

22

Mexican peso
100-day moving average

21 50-day moving average

20

19

18

17

16

J   M  M   J  S  N   J M  M   J  S  N  J   M  M  J   S  N  J  M  M  J

2021 2022 2023 2024

Source: Banco de México.

**Chart 10**

**Nominal yield curve of government securities**

Percent, basis points

12.0 60

#REF!

50

11.5

40

11.0 30

20

10.5

10

10.0 0

-10

9.5

-20

9.0 -30

June 21, 2024 May 3, 2024 Change (June 21, 2024 to May 3, 2024)

Trading range over the period

Source: Proveedor Integral de Precios (PIP).


**Chart 11**

**Breakeven inflation and inflation risk implied in**

**government securities’ yields**

Basis points

600

550

500

450

400

350

3-year

300 10-year

20-year
30-year

250

J F A M J A O N J F A M

2023 2024

1/ Horizontal lines refer to the respective averages observed from
September 2008 to date.
Source: Proveedor Integral de Precios (PIP).

Regarding expectations for the path of the monetary
policy reference rate, information implicit in the
interest rate swap curve does not incorporate any
movement in the decision of June 2024 and shows a
level of 10.66% and of 9.61% for the target rate for
the end of 2024 and 2025, respectively (Chart 12).
The analysts surveyed by Citibanamex are divided
as to the date when a reference rate adjustment will
take place, with a similar number of participants
expecting the next rate cut to occur in the decision of
June, August, or September. They estimate the rate
will end the year at 10.25%.

**Chart 12**

**Interbank funding rate implied in TIIE swaps**

Percent

12.50

11.50

10.50

9.50

8.50

7.50

6.50

5.50 Banxico overnight rate (reference rate)

Implied interest rate in TIIE swaps for 06/21/24

4.50

Implied interest rate in TIIE swaps for 05/03/24

3.50

J  A  J  O  J  A  J  O  J  A  J  O  J  A  J  O  J  A  J  O

2021       2022       2023        2024       2025

Note: Gray lines represent the range since the last monetary policy decision.
Source: Proveedor Integral de Precios (PIP).

18


-----

**A.2.2. Economic activity in Mexico**

At the beginning of the second quarter of 2024,
productive activity continued showing the weakness
it had exhibited since the end of 2023. In particular,
during the first quarter of 2024, GDP registered a
seasonally adjusted quarterly variation of 0.28%
(Chart 13). Subsequently, economic activity slowed
down in April, as a result of widespread contractions
in the three major sectors of productive activity (Chart
14).

**Chart 13**

**Gross Domestic Product**

Quarterly percentage change, s. a.

5

15.58

4

3

2

1

0

-1

-2

-3

-18.99 Q-I

-4

I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV I

2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 2024

s. a. / Seasonally adjusted figures. The chart’s range was adjusted to
facilitate its reading.
Source: Mexico’s System of National Accounts (SCNM, for its Spanish
acronym), INEGI.

**Chart 14**

**Global Indicator of Economic Activity**

Indices 2019 = 100, s. a.

115

Total
Secondary activities

110 Tertiary activities

Primary activities

105

100

95

78.376.5 March

71.0 April

90

J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A

2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 2024

s. a. / Seasonally adjusted series and trend series. The former is
represented by a solid line and the latter by a dotted line.
Source: Mexico’s System of National Accounts (SCNM, for its Spanish
acronym), INEGI.


At the beginning of the second quarter, industrial
activity remained sluggish (Chart 15). Manufacturing
remained weak, while construction exhibited low
dynamism. Services, on the other hand, have been
showing a loss of dynamism. In April, they declined
markedly, although with heterogeneity among its
sectors. In a context of droughts across various
regions of Mexico, agricultural activity declined for
the second consecutive month, after having

reactivated in February.

**Chart 15**

**Industrial activity [1/]**

Indices 2019 = 100, s. a.

125 Total

Mining (12%)

115 Manufacturing (63%)

Construction (19%)
Utilities (6%)

105

95

85

75

65

April

55

J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A

2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 2024

s. a. / Seasonally adjusted series and trend series. The former is
represented by a solid line and the latter by a dotted line.
1/ Figures in parenthesis correspond to their share in the total in 2018.
Source: Mexico’s System of National Accounts (SCNM, for its Spanish
acronym), INEGI.

Regarding external demand, manufacturing exports
remained sluggish at the beginning of the second
quarter of 2024 (Chart 16). Automotive exports
exhibited low dynamism, while non-automotive
exports contracted. As for domestic demand, private
consumption continued trending upwards at the end
of the first quarter. Consumption of imported goods
increased, albeit at a moderate pace compared to the
previous months. Consumption of domestic goods
rebounded, after exhibiting weakness over the
previous months. In contrast, consumption of
services declined at the margin. Meanwhile, gross
fixed investment recovered moderately compared to
the weak performance registered at the end of 2023.
At the end of the first quarter, spending on
investment both in construction and in machinery and
equipment increased, albeit with a loss of dynamism
with respect to the first quarters of 2023.

19


-----

**Chart 16**

**Manufacturing exports**

Indices 2019 = 100, s. a.

150

Total

140 Automotive

Non-automotive

130

120

110

100

90

10.4 April

80

J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A

2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 2024

s. a. / Seasonally adjusted series and trend series based on data in nominal
US dollars. The former is represented by a solid line and the latter by a
dotted line.
Source: Prepared by Banco de México with data from the Tax

Administration Service (SAT, for its Spanish acronym), the Ministry of the
Economy (SE, for its Spanish acronym), Banco de México, the National
Institute of Statistics and Geography (INEGI, for its Spanish acronym).
Mexico’s Merchandise Trade Balance. The National System of Statistical
and Geographical Information (SNIEG, for its Spanish acronym).
Information of national interest.

Regarding the cyclical position of the economy, amid
the economic slowdown observed in the last quarter
of 2023 and the first one of 2024, the point estimate
of the output gap decreased (Chart 17). Said
estimate is not statistically different from zero. In April
2024, the labor market continued showing strength,
albeit with some signs of moderation. The national
unemployment rate registered a level similar to the
previous month, while the urban unemployment rate
decreased at the margin and reached its lowest level
on record since 2005 (Chart 18). With information up
to May and with seasonally adjusted data, the
number of newly created formal IMSS-insured jobs
continued trending upwards, although the growth
rate of this indicator has been moderating. Finally, in
April 2024, unit labor costs in the manufacturing
sector remained at relatively high levels (Chart 19).


s. a. / Calculations based on seasonally adjusted figures.
1/ Output gap estimated with a tail-corrected Hodrick-Prescott filter; see
Banco de México (2009), “Inflation Report, April-June 2009”, p.69.
2/ GDP flash estimate up to Q1-2024 and IGAE up to April 2024.
3/ Output gap confidence interval calculated with a method of unobserved
components.
Source: Prepared by Banco de México with INEGI data.

**Chart 18**

**National and urban unemployment rates**

Percent, s. a.

6.5

6.0

5.5

5.0

4.5

4.0

3.5

3.0

Urban unemployment rate

2.5

National unemployment rate April

2.0

J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A

2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 2024

s. a. / Seasonally adjusted series and trend series. The former is
represented by a solid line and the latter by a dotted line.
Source: INEGI.

20


**Chart 17**

**Output gap estimates [1/]**

Percent of potential output, s. a


12

8

4

0

-4

-8

Global Economic

-12

Activity Index (IGAE) 2/

-16 Gross Domestic

Product 2/

-20 95% confidence interval 3/ Q-I

April

-24

J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A

2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 2024


-----

**Chart 19**

**Productivity and unit labor costs**

**in the manufacturing sector [1/]**

Indices 2019 = 100, s. a.


115

Unit labor costs 139.8

110 Productivity

105

100

95

90

April

85

J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A

2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 2024

s. a. / Seasonally adjusted series and trend series. The former is
represented by a solid line and the latter by a dotted line.
1/ Productivity based on hours worked.
Source: Prepared by Banco de México with seasonally adjusted data of

the Monthly Manufacturing Industry Survey and industrial activity indicators
of Mexico’s System of National Accounts (Sistema de Cuentas Nacionales
_de México, SCNM), INEGI._

Domestic financing to the private sector continued
growing in April 2024, albeit with some moderation
compared to the dynamism observed in the second
half of 2023. Regarding its components, bank lending
portfolio to firms and households grew at rates lower
than those at the end of the previous year (Chart 20).

As for the cost of financing, interest rates on bank
credit to firms decreased in April 2024, despite
remaining at high levels. Meanwhile, credit

intermediation margins in this segment decreased
slightly and remained at levels similar to those
observed prior to the pandemic. Interest rates on
mortgages remained at levels similar to those
observed prior to the health emergency. Lastly,
regarding commercial bank consumer credit, credit
card interest rates decreased in February 2024.
However, these interest rates continued being at
relatively high levels, while interest rates associated
with payroll loans have remained relatively stable
since August 2021.


As for portfolio quality, in April 2024, delinquency
rates of bank credit to the private sector remained at
low levels. In the segment of consumption, this
indicator decreased slightly, partially reversing the
increases observed during the second half of 2023.

**Chart 20**

**Performing credit from commercial banks**

**to the non-financial private sector**

Annual percentage change

15

10

5

0

-5

Consumption

-10

Mortgage 1/

-15 Non-financial 2/

private firms April

-20

J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A

2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 2024

1/ Adjusted to account for the withdrawal from and the incorporation of nonbank financial intermediaries to the credit statistics.
2/ Adjusted for valuation effects due to movements in the exchange rate.
Source: Banco de México.

**A.2.3. Development of inflation and inflation**
**outlook**

Annual headline inflation shifted from 4.65% in April
to 4.78% in the first fortnight of June 2024. This result
reflected the increase in non-core inflation, which
was partially offset by the decrease in core inflation
(Chart 21 and Table 1).

**Chart 21**

**Consumer Price Index**

Annual percentage change

14 CPI
13 Core
12 Non-core
11
10

9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0

-1
-2 F1 June
-3

J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M

2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 2024

Source: INEGI.

21


-----

Annual core inflation decreased from 4.37 to 4.17%
between April and the first fortnight of June 2024.
Regarding its components, during the same period,
annual merchandise inflation decreased from 3.67 to
3.33% (Chart 22), affected by the decrease from 4.79
to 4.28% in annual food inflation and from 2.34 to
2.18% in non-food inflation (Chart 23). Between the
mentioned periods, annual services inflation

remained relatively stable, registering 5.21 and
5.19%, respectively. Thus, services inflation

remained at high levels and continued without
showing a clear downward trend, affected by
pressures related to operating costs, their passthrough to consumer prices, and the recovery in its
demand.

**Chart 22**

**Merchandise and services**

**core price subindex**

Annual percentage change

12

Merchandise

11 Services

10

9

8

7

6

5

4

3

2

1

F1 June

0

J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M

2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 2024

Source: INEGI.


Between April and the first fortnight of June 2024,
annual non-core inflation increased from 5.54 to
6.73%, driven by the higher annual variations in
agricultural and livestock products and energy prices
(Chart 24 and Table 1). During that period, annual
inflation of agricultural and livestock products
increased from 7.35 to 8.99%, influenced by the rise
in the annual variation of livestock products from
-1.13 to 2.46%. Annual inflation of fruit and
vegetables remained at high levels of 18.57 and
17.28% during the referred periods. Meanwhile,
annual inflation of energy products increased from
4.38 to 5.52%, largely reflecting the rise in the annual
variation of gasoline prices from 4.86 to 5.34%.

**Chart 24**

**Non-core price subindex**

Annual percentage change

25 Non-core

Agricultural and livestock products

20 Energy and government-authorized prices

15

10

5

0

-5

F1 June

-10

J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M

2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 2024

Source: INEGI.

Regarding inflation expectations drawn from the
survey conducted by Banco de México among
private sector specialists, between April and May
2024, the median of headline inflation for the end of
2024 increased from 4.20 to 4.27%. Regarding its
components, the median of the core component
decreased slightly from 4.10 to 4.07%. Expectations
for headline and core inflation for the end of 2025
remained relatively stable. The median of headline
inflation expectations remained at 3.71%, while that
of core inflation shifted from 3.72 to 3.70%. At the
same time, the median of headline inflation
expectations over the next four years adjusted from
3.68 to 3.70%, while that of core inflation
expectations decreased from 3.63 to 3.60%. The
medians of headline and core inflation expectations
for the long term (5 to 8 years) remained stable at
around 3.50%. Lastly, breakeven inflation has
increased since the previous monetary policy
decision. Regarding its components, inflation

22


**Chart 23**

**Merchandise and services core price subindex**

Annual percentage change

16

Food, beverages and tobacco

14 Non-food merchandise

12

10

8

6

4

2

F1 June

0

J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M

2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 2024

Source: INEGI.


-----

expectations implied in market instruments and
inflation risk premium increased.

The disinflationary process is expected to continue.
Although the depreciation of the Mexican peso
impacts the inflation forecast upwards, its effects are
partly offset by those associated with the greater
weakness of economic activity. The forecasts for
headline and core inflation are slightly adjusted in
some quarters. Headline inflation is still expected to
converge to the target in the fourth quarter of 2025.
These projections are subject to risks. On the upside:


i) persistence of core inflation; ii) greater foreign
exchange depreciation; iii) greater cost-related
pressures; iv) climate-related impacts, and v) the
intensification of geopolitical conflicts. On the
downside: i) weaker-than-anticipated economic
activity; ii) a lower pass-through effect from some
cost-related pressures, and iii) a lower-thananticipated effect of the exchange rate depreciation
on inflation. The balance of risks for the trajectory of
inflation within the forecast horizon remains biased to
the upside.


**Table 1**

**Consumer Price Index and components**

Annual percentage change

**1st fortnight June**

**Item** **April 2024** **May 2024**
**2024**

**CPI** **4.65** **4.69** **4.78**

**SubyacenteCore** **4.37** **4.21** **4.17**

**Merchandise** **3.67** **3.38** **3.33**

Food, beverages and tobacco 4.79 4.49 4.28

Non-food merchandise 2.34 2.05 2.18

**Services** **5.21** **5.22** **5.19**

Housing 3.73 3.81 3.86

Education (tuitions) 6.36 6.34 6.36

Other services 6.19 6.14 6.05

**No SubyacenteNon-core** **5.54** **6.19** **6.73**

**Agricultural and livestock products** **7.35** **8.44** **8.99**

Fruits and vegetablesFruits abd vegetables 18.57 18.55 17.28

Livestock productsLivestock -1.13 0.71 2.46

**Energy and government-authorized prices Energéticos y Tarifas Aut. por Gobierno** **3.98** **4.20** **4.74**

Energy productsEnergy 4.38 4.81 5.52

Government-authorized pricesTarifas Autorizadas por Gobierno 3.08 2.88 3.07

Source: INEGI.

23


-----

-----

