-----

-----

**FOREWARNING**
This document is provided for the reader’s convenience
only. The translation from the official Spanish version was
made by Banco de México’s staff. Discrepancies may arise
between the original document in Spanish and its English
translation. For this reason, the original Spanish version is
the only official document.


**1. PLACE, DATE AND PARTICIPANTS**

**1.1. Place: Meeting held by virtual means.**

**1.2. Date of Governing Board meeting: November**
9, 2022.

**1.3. Participants:**

Victoria Rodríguez, Governor.
Galia Borja, Deputy Governor.
Irene Espinosa, Deputy Governor.
Gerardo Esquivel, Deputy Governor.
Jonathan Heath, Deputy Governor.
Rogelio Eduardo Ramírez, Secretary of Finance and
Public Credit.
Elías Villanueva, Secretary of the Governing Board.

Prior to this meeting, preliminary work by Banco de
México’s staff analyzing the economic and financial
environment as well as the developments in inflation
and the determinants and outlook for inflation, was
conducted and presented to the Governing Board
(see Annex).

**2. ANALYSIS AND RATIONALE BEHIND THE**
**GOVERNING BOARD’S VOTING**

**_International environment_**

**Most members mentioned that a moderate**
**recovery of the global economy is expected**
**during the third quarter. They noted that this is**
**partly due to the reopening of activities in China.**
**Some members mentioned, as an additional factor,**
the rebound in the US economy. **One member**
attributed this rebound to an increase in exports, and
pointed out that domestic demand continued to
decelerate. **Nevertheless,** **most** **members**

**highlighted the weakening of the European**
**economies. Regarding labor markets, they stated**
**that in advanced economies they continued**
**showing strength.** However, **one member noted a**
gradual reduction in the tightness of the US labor
market, given the slight decrease in the vacancy-tounemployment ratio and a moderation in the
dynamism of non-farm payrolls. **Another member**
stated that despite the significant wage increases,


households’ purchasing power continues to be
eroded by high inflation.

**Most members mentioned that global growth**
**forecasts for 2023 continued to deteriorate. They**
**highlighted that according to forward-looking**
**indicators, there are signs of disturbances to**
**international trade. Some** members added that
forward-looking indicators for manufacturing and
services show weakness. **One member argued that**
the global economic slowdown is the result of global
monetary tightening, lower fiscal stimulus, and shocks
derived from the conflict in Ukraine. **Some members**
pointed out that a slowdown in fixed capital
investment in the United States is foreseen. **One**
member said that the real estate sector is already
showing a significant weakening and noted that
personal savings are at their lowest levels since 2015,
which in his/her view may suggest a reduction in
aggregate demand in the future. Among the risks to
**the global economy, most members highlighted**
**those associated with the pandemic, geopolitical**
**tensions, and tighter financial conditions. One**
member mentioned that the probability of a global
recession increased. Some members considered that
the balance of risks for world economic activity
remains biased to the downside.

**All members highlighted that pressures on**
**commodity prices and disruptions in supply**
**chains have shown signs of mitigation. One**
member pointed out that the above can be observed
in indexes that measure supply-chain pressures, in
pending orders, in delivery times, in input prices and
freight shipments. Most members noted that in
**certain economies headline inflation decreased.**
**One member mentioned that in some countries the**
inflation peak may have already been observed.
**However, most members warned that world**
**inflation remains high and above the central**
**banks'** **targets.** **Some** members noted that

pressures on core inflation persist. In this regard, one
member pointed out the divergence across regions.
He/she noted that there are economies where
domestic inflationary processes have remained
isolated from global pressures, some others where
inflation continues rising, and others where it has
started to decline. He/she considered that, although
the declines in headline inflation have not yet passed
through to the core component, they are relevant, as
the level of headline inflation matters for secondround effects and the persistence of the inflation index
components. He/she added that producer price
indices, which usually precede core inflation

dynamics, have improved in various economies.
He/she concluded that, looking ahead, lower

1


-----

inflationary pressures are expected. Some members
stated that convergence towards the central banks’
targets is still anticipated to take place between the
end of 2023 and 2024. Nevertheless, **one member**
warned that upside risks and uncertainty about the
future evolution of global inflation persist.

**Most members stated that a large number of**
**central banks continued raising their reference**
**rates, some of them in a smaller-than-expected**
**magnitude. They considered that in some**
**economies it is possible that the pace of upward**
**adjustments will moderate. Some members noted**
that certain central banks continued making large
adjustments to their interest rates. **Some members**
pointed out that certain Latin American central banks
announced the end of their hiking cycles or are
expected to reach it soon. In this context, **one**
member reflected on the assessment of risks that
central banks are facing: on the one hand, the risk of
prematurely halting the tightening process, causing
inflation to become more entrenched and more
difficult to fight against, and, on the other hand, the
risk that an excessive tightening will significantly
affect economic activity or generate financial
instability. **Most** **members** **mentioned** **that**

**reference rates are expected to remain elevated**
**for an extended period.**

**Regarding the Federal Reserve, all members**
**stated that, in its most recent decision, it raised**
**the federal funds rate by 75 basis points. Most**
**members considered that said institution could**
**slow down its pace of adjustments in the near**
**future. Some members stated that it announced that**
future increases will depend on the accumulated
monetary tightening, the lags through which monetary
policy operates, and on the evolution of the economy
and financial markets. Some members added that the
chairman of said institution stated that they now
foresee a higher terminal rate than previously
anticipated. **One member stated that he also**
mentioned that they will maintain a restrictive policy
stance for a prolonged period. **Another member**
added that he pointed out that they will follow a datadependent approach.

**Most members mentioned that interest rates**
**increased around the world and that financial**
**conditions** **remained** **tight.** **Some** members

highlighted that financial markets continued showing
volatility. One member noted that those of emerging
economies continued registering some deterioration.
He/she warned about the risks of a possible
excessive monetary tightening and a global recession
for international financial markets. **Some members**


underlined the deterioration of liquidity conditions in
fixed income markets. **Most members noted a**
**certain improvement in stock markets. Some**
members mentioned that this was due to better-thananticipated corporate earnings reports. One member
stated that an additional factor was the perception
that interest rates may have reached their peak
levels. Most members highlighted the strength of
**the US dollar. However,** **one member pointed out**
that it depreciated at the margin. Nonetheless, he
/she considered that, in a context of tight global
financial conditions, the US dollar’s strength could
lead to: i) a higher servicing cost for debt
denominated in that currency; ii) a higher passthrough of external inflationary pressures; iii) capital
outflows from emerging economies due to lower risk
appetite; and iv) greater risks to financial stability.

**_Economic activity in Mexico_**

**Most members highlighted that, according to**
**timely** **information,** **the** **Mexican** **economy**

**continued recovering during the third quarter.**
**Some** members stated that it exhibited a rate of
expansion similar to that of the previous two quarters.
**Most members pointed out that said rate was**
**higher than expected.** **Some members noted that**
economic activity has practically returned to its prepandemic levels.

**Most members stated that the three main**
**economic sectors contributed to the recovery.**
**However, they indicated that the recovery**
**continues to be heterogeneous. One member**
noted that approximately 18% of sector activity is still
more than 5% behind its pre-pandemic levels. Some
members warned that the Mexican economy will
continue facing an environment of economic
weakness and high global uncertainty. One member
added that the forecast of a moderation in economic
activity in the last quarter of the year is maintained,
although potentially smaller than previously expected.

**On** **the** **production** **side,** **most** **members**

**highlighted the favorable performance of the**
**manufacturing sector. One member pointed out that**
it has been supported by increased automotive
production. **Another member warned that the**
construction sector has trended downwards in recent
months. **Most members noted that tertiary**
**activities continue showing dynamism. One**
member stated that this was observed especially in
services that are more closely linked to manufacturing
activities. He/she added that the sectors more
associated with in-person activities exhibited lower
dynamism.

2


-----

**On the demand side, most members noted that**
**private consumption showed a reactivation in**
**August.** **Some members highlighted the boost in**
consumption of domestic goods and services. As for
the determinants of consumption, **some members**
mentioned that remittances remain at high levels.
**One member pointed out that they have accumulated**
29 months of increases at an annual rate, although
they show some signs of deceleration. **Another**
member noted that the real wage bill also remains at
high levels. In contrast, **some members stated that**
the consumer confidence index is below prepandemic levels. **Most members mentioned that**
**gross fixed investment has shown weakness.**
**Some members highlighted the stagnation of**
investment in construction. However, some members
noted the improvement in the transportation

equipment category. As for external demand, **some**
members highlighted the good performance of
exports, mainly of the automotive sector.

**Most members pointed out that unemployment**
**rates are at low levels. One member mentioned that**
formal employment has maintained a positive trend.
In this context, he/she considered that the labor
market continued performing adequately, and

**another member that it continues showing strength.**
However, one member noted that the recovery of this
market somewhat stagnated in the third quarter.
**Some members pointed out that indicators such as**
the labor participation rate are still at levels lower than
those observed prior to the pandemic. One member
indicated that, up to the second quarter of 2022, the
employment rate in the informal sector was above
28% and with a slight upward trend. In this regard,
**another member mentioned that there are mixed**
signals regarding the performance of the labor
market.

**Most members considered that slack conditions**
**in the economy continued decreasing. One**
member noted that the output gap estimate is not
statistically different from zero. However, **another**
member stated that slack conditions still remain wide,
given that the GDP of the third quarter of the year is
still far below its long-term trend. He/she stated that
slack is mainly due to the evolution of investment, as
well as consumption, which, despite having

surpassed its pre-pandemic levels, continues lagging
behind its trend trajectory. One member argued that
given the problems in measuring potential GDP, the
output gap could be smaller than estimated.

**_Inflation in Mexico_**

**All members highlighted that, in October,**
**headline inflation declined to 8.41%. Most**


**members stated that this was due to a decrease**
**in the non-core component. In this regard,** **one**
member mentioned that the reduction in headline
inflation did not occur for the appropriate reasons.
**Some members pointed out that this decrease was**
due to the behavior of specific prices. He/she added
that just over 40% of CPI items still register annual
variations higher than 10%, which suggests

generalized pressures. **Some members stated that,**
in October, headline inflation was below Banco de
México's forecasts. One member added that this was
also observed with the September figure. **Another**
member underlined that inflation has surprised to the
downside relative to analysts' expectations. **One**
member pointed out that there have been four
consecutive fortnights of decreases in annual
inflation. He/she noted that in October the annualized
monthly rate was slightly above its historical average.
He/she added that this indicates that pressures have
eased with respect to those observed in the first half
of the year. Nevertheless, **another** member

considered that headline and core inflation continue
to be affected by the accumulated pressures
associated with both the pandemic and the military
conflict.

**All members pointed out that core inflation**
**continued trending upwards, reaching 8.42% in**
**October. Most members highlighted that it has**
**been increasing for 23 months. One member**
emphasized the historically high levels of inflation
reached by this sub-index. Another member argued
that it still does not show clear signs of having
reached a peak. **Some members mentioned that it**
continues facing considerable pressures. **One**

member stated that the core component excluding
processed foods registered a significantly lower and
more stable annual inflation than that of the traditional
core component.

**All members highlighted that food merchandise**
**inflation is the one facing the greatest pressures.**
**One member stated that it has registered double-digit**
annual variations during the last eight months. Some
members expressed their concern that it continues
increasing and that more than 70% of its items
register annualized seasonally adjusted monthly
variations higher than 10%. **One member indicated**
that non-food merchandise also continues facing
pressures. Regarding services prices, **some**

members noted that they are responding to an
increase in demand due to greater mobility. **One**
emphasized that this upward trend is expected to
continue for the following months. As an additional
factor, **another member mentioned the higher**
operating costs. **Most members warned that food**

3


-----

**services prices are being subject to pressures.**
**One member pointed out that among non-tradable**
goods these are the ones that have increased the
most. Some members stated that pressures on food
merchandise prices have passed-through onto food
services prices. One member pointed out that these
two items account for more than half of the variation
in the core component. He/she indicated that
significant pressures are also observed in tourism
services. Some members noted that services inflation
decreased at the margin. **One member pointed out**
that this was due to a lower variation in
telecommunications prices. **Another member noted**
that the education and housing components have
behaved similarly to what was observed prior to the
pandemic.

**All members stated that non-core inflation**
**declined. Most members mentioned that this was**
**due to the behavior of L.P. gas prices. Some**
members noted that, in October, monthly non-core
inflation reached historically low levels. One member
pointed out that pressures on this component have
remained low and stable for several months.
Nevertheless, **another member expressed his/her**
concern that the favorable evolution of this
component is attributed mainly to the lower annual
price increases of a specific energy item, which are
partly explained by a base effect. **Some members**
added that agricultural and livestock product prices
registered smaller variations at the margin. **One**
member warned that their inflation remains at doubledigit levels.

**All members agreed that some of the shocks that**
**have affected inflation have shown signs of**
**easing and pointed out the lower pressures on**
**supply chains.** However, one member stated that
this has not been reflected in Mexico’s core inflation.
**Some members noted the decline in producer price**
inflation. One member highlighted that this reduction
was of 300 basis points between June and October.
He/she stated that this will eventually help core
inflation to start declining. **Another member pointed**
out that this decrease was particularly observed in the
prices of intermediate goods in the industrial sector,
whose annual inflation has accumulated four
consecutive declines. He/she stated that in order for
the inflationary problem to start to be resolved,
external pressures, especially in the United States,
must diminish. However, he/she warned that Mexico’s
price pressures will not ease immediately due to
growing domestic pressures, such as those derived
from minimum wage increases. He/she mentioned
that there is also an inertia of increases in the prices
of non-tradable goods that will not be easy to control.


He/she considered that there are some mixed signals
of lower external pressures and increasing domestic
pressures. **One** member stated that there are
additional cost pressures stemming from labor
markets, associated with the dynamism of

employment and the high rate of growth of nominal
wages, which is inconsistent with the inflation target.
**Another member added that commodity prices still**
remain at high levels and are exerting pressure on
various production costs.

**Most** **members** **highlighted** **that** **short-term**

**inflation expectations increased.** However, **one**
member mentioned that those for the next 12 months
decreased slightly in October. **All members noted**
**the upward adjustment in inflation expectations**
**for the medium term. Some members pointed out**
that their dispersion has increased. **One member**
stated that this indicates that there is progressively
less consensus regarding a certain level. He/she
pointed out that, in contrast to previous episodes,
where the increase in short-term expectations did not
pass-through onto longer-term ones, inflation

expectations for the next four years have now
reached the upper bound of the variability range.
He/she mentioned that it would seem that inflationary
expectations are more sensitive to upside inflation
surprises. He/she pointed out that the above could be
signs of a greater risk of unanchoring of inflation
expectations. As for long-term expectations, most
**members noted that they remained stable,**
**although above the target. One member stated that,**
for the core component, they increased between
August and October. Some members noted that the
distribution of longer-term expectations has become
biased to values higher than the median. Regarding
**expectations drawn from market instruments, all**
**members stated that they continued increasing.**
**One noted that the higher breakeven inflation rate**
indicates that there is great uncertainty about the
future of inflation. **Another member mentioned that**
long-term inflation expectations lay at 3.25%.

**Most members highlighted that for the short term,**
**forecasts for headline inflation were revised**
**marginally downwards, while those for core**
**inflation were revised slightly upwards. Some**
members pointed out that for the first time in several
months the forecast for headline inflation was not
adjusted upwards. **One member stated that this**
indicates that the balance of risks is starting to be
more consistent with central forecasts. However,
**some members remarked that inflation has not yet**
reached an inflection point. Meanwhile, **some**
members considered it is likely to have reached its
inflection point during the third quarter of the year.

4


-----

They foresaw that a downward trajectory of inflation
is likely to materialize in subsequent months. **One**
member noted that core inflation is expected to
continue rising over the next months, reaching a peak
in the fourth quarter of the year.

**With respect to upward risks to inflation, most**
**members highlighted the persistence of the core**
**component at high levels. One member mentioned**
the persisting risk that the pandemic and the
geopolitical conflict will continue exerting pressure on
prices of different goods and services. He/she added
that episodes of exchange rate depreciation, caused
by possible bouts of volatility in international financial
markets, cannot be ruled out. **Another member**
stated that, given that the output gap could be smaller
than estimated, demand-related pressures are likely
to be present.

**Most members warned that greater pressures**
**could be observed, given the increase in costs**
**associated with hiring conditions and wage**
**revisions.** **One member pointed out that revisions to**
contractual wages remain high, especially in the
private sector, as they attained 8.2% in September,
as compared to 4.5% registered in the public sector
ones. He/she highlighted that said increases were
higher than those observed in August, in a context in
which the global labor productivity indicator has
trended downwards for eight consecutive quarters.
He/she stated that increases to the minimum wage
expected for the next two years, lower labor
productivity, and the high inflation levels foreseen for
2023 would pose an even greater challenge for
tackling inflation. **Another member pointed out that,**
in his/her opinion, there are no widespread wagerelated pressures, and that they are rather

circumscribed and reflect the heterogeneous

economic recovery. He/she considered that, so far,
no wage-price spiral is observed, given that, contrary
to historical records, growth of real wages has
currently been lower than price increases. He/she
pointed out that some studies of international
institutions suggest that wage-price dynamics, such
as the currently observed, have not necessarily led to
a wage-price spiral, but rather to the recovery of real
wages once inflation starts to decline. He/she added
that the largest wage increases are currently
observed in sectors where salaries are more linked to
the minimum wage, therefore said increments
correspond to factors unrelated to the formation of
inflation expectations. He/she concluded that,

although there is no conclusive evidence that this type
of pressures are being faced, it is important to
continue monitoring the dynamics between inflation
and wages.


Regarding risks to the downside, **one member**
mentioned the lower inflationary pressures that could
derive from a greater-than-anticipated deceleration of
the global economy and from the resolution of
disruptions in production and distribution chains.
**Most members pointed out that the balance of**
**risks for the foreseen inflation trajectory remains**
**biased to the upside. One member mentioned that**
the balance remains considerably biased to the
upside, as no change in trend has occurred. Another
member noted that both observed and expected
inflation determinants have started to be distributed
closer around Banco de México’s central scenario.

**_Macrofinancial environment_**

**Most members highlighted that the Mexican peso**
**has appreciated and showed more resilience than**
**other currencies. They emphasized its orderly**
**behavior in an uncertain and volatile international**
**environment,** **characterized** **by** **greater** **risk**

**aversion.** **They pointed out that the resilience of**
**the Mexican peso has been associated with the**
**country’s sound macroeconomic fundamentals.**
**Some members mentioned as additional factors the**
relatively high levels of the volatility-adjusted interest
rate spread between Mexico and the United States.
**One member stated that this spread reflects the**
monetary policy actions implemented by Banco de
México. He/she added that the above does not mean
that there is a target for the exchange rate level.
He/she pointed out that an economy with free capital
mobility cannot simultaneously have an exchange
rate target and an independent monetary policy.
He/she emphasized that, by following a monetary
policy focused on price stability, operating under a
flexible exchange rate regime, the exchange rate
must continue to work as a shock absorber for the
economy.

**Most members pointed out that short-term**
**interest rates of government bonds increased,**
**while medium- and long-term rates registered**
**limited adjustments. One member stated that the**
short-term increases respond to the reference rate’s
hiking cycle, while medium- and long-term rates
showed some volatility, in line with the dynamics of
rates at the global level. Another member mentioned
that the yield curve of real interest rate instruments
registered significant increases, especially for shortterm nodes. He/she highlighted that Mexico’s
financial conditions index continues reflecting

tightness, due to persistent pressures in the debt
market, sovereign risk, inflation, and economic
growth. **One member added that default risk premia**
decreased, in contrast to what was observed in other

5


-----

emerging economies. **Some members highlighted**
the stock market gains, generated by the positive
quarterly data reported by firms.

Regarding commercial bank credit to firms, **one**
member pointed out that it continued recovering
gradually during the third quarter, with an

improvement in firms’ demand, although lending
conditions remained tight. He/she added that
consumer credit continues with a positive trend in real
terms, although a slower pace is anticipated in view
of the foreseen economic slowdown. He/she
underlined that banks’ loan delinquency rates have
been declining.

**_Monetary policy_**

**The Governing Board evaluated the magnitude**
**and diversity of the shocks that have affected**
**inflation and its determinants, along with the**
**evolution of medium- and long-term inflation**
**expectations and the price formation process. It**
**also considered the increasing challenges for**
**monetary policy stemming from the ongoing**
**tightening of global financial conditions, the**
**environment** **of** **significant** **uncertainty,** **the**

**inflationary pressures accumulated as a result of**
**the pandemic and the geopolitical conflict, the**
**possibility of greater effects on inflation, and the**
**monetary policy stance already attained in this**
**hiking cycle. Based on these considerations, the**
**Governing Board decided by majority to raise the**
**target for the overnight interbank interest rate by**
**75 basis points to 10.00%. The Governing Board**
**members added that, with this action, the**
**monetary policy stance adjusts to the trajectory**
**required for inflation to converge to its 3% target**
**within the forecast horizon.**

**The Board will thoroughly monitor inflationary**
**pressures as well as all factors that have an**
**incidence on the foreseen path for inflation and**
**its expectations. This, in order to set a policy rate**
**that is consistent at all times with both the orderly**
**and sustained convergence of headline inflation**
**to the 3% target within the time frame in which**
**monetary policy operates as well as with an**
**adequate adjustment of the economy and**
**financial markets. In its next meetings, the Board**
**will assess the magnitude of upward adjustments**
**to the reference rate based on the prevailing**
**conditions.**

**One** **member stated that, since the last monetary**
policy meeting, the Mexican economy has continued
facing a complex and uncertain environment,
characterized by deep, generalized, and persistent


inflationary pressures, as well as by tight monetary
and financial conditions at the global level. He/she
highlighted that, given the deep and persistent
inflationary shocks, a tight monetary policy stance is
required in order to contain inflation and to help it
begin decreasing towards the central bank’s target.
He/she pointed out that, in terms of the absolute
monetary policy stance, a 75 basis-point increase in
the reference rate would allow the ex-ante real
interest rate to reach a level that is unequivocally in
restrictive territory. He/she noted that it would send a
clear message regarding the central bank’s

commitment to fulfill its primary mandate of price
stability. He/she added that, since core inflation has
not started to decrease yet and the balance of risks
for inflation is biased to the upside, monetary policy
needs to be tightened further than it already has been.
In terms of the relative monetary policy stance, he/she
pointed out that a 75 basis-point increase would
maintain the reference rate spread between Mexico
and the United States at 600 basis points. In this
regard, he/she stated that Mexico is a small and open
economy with a high level of financial and commercial
integration with the United States and, therefore, it is
normal for the Federal Reserve’s actions to have
repercussions on the Mexican economy. In this
regard, he/she stated that the central bank conducts
its monetary policy considering all inflation

determinants and its expectations, including the
actions taken by the Federal Reserve. He/she argued
that both Mexico and the United States face
significant inflationary pressures and are undergoing
a cycle of monetary tightening, which does not imply
that Banco de México mechanically follows the steps
taken by the Federal Reserve. He/she considered
that, although increases in long-term inflation
expectations have been moderate, it is important to
monitor that these do not continue being revised
upwards, as it would make it difficult to achieve the
primary mandate. Looking ahead, he/she considered
that it would be important to further increase the
reference rate in order to maintain inflation
expectations anchored and to enable the reduction of
inflation to its target. He/she added that the
magnitude of future upward adjustments to the
reference rate will depend on the prevailing economic
conditions, considering the increases that have
already been implemented in this hiking cycle and
that the monetary policy stance is already in
restrictive territory.

**Another** **member stated that the upward trend in the**
core sub-index and the increasing pressures it faces
make the monetary policy outlook more complex.
He/she mentioned that, despite the significant
adjustments in the monetary policy stance, no

6


-----

inflection point has been observed in the inflation
trend yet. He/she argued that, on the one hand, there
are high and persistent inflation levels with a balance
of risks biased to the upside, and, on the other hand,
economic activity registers more dynamism than
expected, with an output gap that continues
narrowing. He/she added that inflationary pressures
related to the labor market are observed as well.
He/she underlined that all of the above occurs in an
international context that has become significantly
more adverse. With regard to the deterioration of
inflation expectations, he/she expressed concern that
they are above the inflation target, given that this can
pose risks to Banco de México’s credibility. He/she
considered that it is essential to communicate that the
reference rate will continue increasing and that the
magnitude of the upward adjustments will be
determined based on available information, in order
to achieve the convergence of inflation to its target.
He/she stated that this would not limit the room for
maneuver in the next monetary policy decisions, and
could contribute to monetary policy effectiveness and,
therefore, to minimize the disinflationary adjustment
costs. He/she argued that sending a timely, clear and
forceful signal is the only path to reducing the risk of
an unanchoring of inflation expectations and to
prevent the inertia of the inflationary process from
becoming entrenched. He/she cautioned that, if this
type of scenario were to materialize, it would be
extremely costly in the medium and long terms.
He/she expressed that all of the above more than
ever requires adherence to the primary mandate and
doing what is needed to enable the convergence of
inflation to its target in the foreseen time frame, and
to mitigate the deterioration of the price formation
process and the upward revisions in expectations.
He/she added that easing the conditions will not be
possible until inflation starts to follow a clear and
sustained downward trajectory and expectations
return to levels close to the 3% target. He/she
highlighted that, based on available information, it will
be necessary to maintain a restrictive monetary policy
stance throughout the planning horizon, which, in
his/her opinion, should be communicated explicitly.

**One** **member considered it important to reduce the**
pace of upward adjustments given the balance of
risks associated with monetary policy decisions, and
to signal that the terminal interest rate level may soon
be reached. He/she estimated that the recently
observed strength of the Mexican peso provides an
opportunity to do so. He/she expressed that, on the
one hand, there is a risk that the implemented
monetary tightening is insufficient, which would lead
to a more persistent inflationary process that would
be costly to revert, and, on the other hand, there is a


risk of implementing an excessive tightening, which
would affect financial and macroeconomic stability.
He/she added that a high financial cost can affect
firms, financial institutions and governments with high
leverage, and would deteriorate the economic and
employment growth outlook, which could increase
risk premia. In this regard, he/she noted that different
institutions have warned about the risks associated
with an excessive tightening of global financial
conditions. He/she cautioned that, considering the
increases that have been implemented, the risk of an
excessive tightening has increased, given that: i) the
ex-ante real interest rate, at 4%, is in a clearly
restrictive territory; and ii) if an ex-ante real interest
rate between 5 and 5.5% were to be attained, it would
be well above the estimated neutral interest rate,
which would affect consumption, investment and
credit. In contrast, he/she considered that the risk of
an insufficient tightening has diminished, as a result
of the reduction in different inflationary pressures
worldwide, the recent decrease in producer price
inflation, and the interest rate increases implemented
during this cycle. He/she argued that, considering the
described disjunctive, although the hiking cycle has to
continue, it is necessary to reduce the pace of
adjustment, calibrate adequately the next policy
decisions, and lower the probability of the described
risks materializing. He/she added that, even if the
pace of upward adjustments is reduced, it could be
possible to shorten or lengthen the cycle, if
necessary. However, in his/her opinion, maintaining
the current pace would considerably increase the risk
of an excessive tightening, with a final interest rate
that would be too high. He/she added that this
decision would signal that the end of the cycle is still
distant, which could negatively affect inflation
expectations. He/she stated that monetary policy
operates with a lag, and thus its effects will be more
evident over the following months. Therefore, he/she
considered that the upward cycle should end even
before a significant reduction in inflation is observed.
He/she argued that, to the extent that the central bank
communicates that the policy stance is now restrictive
enough, inflation expectations should begin to
decrease, leading to additional increases in the exante real interest rate and to a greater tightening of
financial conditions.

**Another** **member considered it necessary to**
continue consolidating a restrictive monetary policy,
at the same rate as in the previous decision, in view
of: i) the upward trend in core inflation; ii) the
deterioration of inflation expectations; iii) a balance of
risks for inflation that is considerably biased to the
upside; and iv) an inflation forecast that anticipates a
distant convergence to the target. He/she argued that

7


-----

reducing the pace of upward adjustments should only
be considered if the inflationary outlook improves,
specifically for its core component. He/she mentioned
that the economy’s cyclical conditions do not justify
relaxing the efforts to control inflation. He/she
considered the deterioration of inflation expectations
worrying, given that it suggests their possible
unanchoring, which would weaken the main

mechanism of monetary policy transmission. He/she
stated that further increases in inflation expectations
require greater efforts in adjusting the ex-ante real
interest rate. He/she mentioned that a level of 6% or
higher for said interest rate would be desirable as its
final level, conditional on the evolution of data,
particularly long-term inflation expectations. He/she
pointed out that, to determine the final interest rate,
previous monetary cycles should not be taken as a
reference, as the inflation level is currently higher and
its dynamics are more complex. He/she mentioned
that the final interest rate should be determined with
caution, as it could be the reference that would prevail
over a long period of time. He/she stated that the
interest rate spread should be maintained at least at
600 basis points with respect to the United States,
and thus the adjustments to the federal funds rate
must continue to be the floor. He/she argued that this
is a well-founded decision and not an automatic
reaction. He/she highlighted that said spread is
justified, not by the behavior of economic cycles of
México and the United States, which do not coincide,
but by the synchronization of the inflationary cycles
across both countries, characterized by a significant
upward trend of the core component. He/she added
that it will only be possible to decouple from the
Federal Reserve when the inflationary dynamics
diverge or when there is certainty regarding the
Federal Reserve’s final interest rate. He/she added
that a high spread would help to address: i) the
increasing external uncertainty; ii) the risk of
recession; iii) the tightening of global financial
conditions; iv) the risk of an idiosyncratic shock
derived from trade negotiations with the United
States; and v) external inflationary pressures, which
have been mitigated by the favorable performance of
the Mexican peso. He/she pointed out that the
inflationary outlook reveals mixed signals, and for
said reason it is important to have clarity as to how
these will be incorporated in the reaction function and
in the monetary cycle outlook. He/she added that the
forward guidance should be as explicit as possible,
and should be carefully communicated and

emphasize that this does not imply a commitment.
He/she stated that, considering the available
information, it should be communicated that the
upward cycle has not ended yet, although there is the
possibility of reducing the pace of adjustment. He/she


warned that when the interest rate reaches its final
point, it will remain at that level for some time, until
inflation begins following a clear downward trend and
the balance of risks improves. He/she pointed out that
communicating this forward guidance message
decisively would reinforce the central bank’s

credibility.

**One** **member considered it necessary to continue**
tightening monetary policy for the following reasons:
i) headline inflation remains high and its convergence
to the target poses significant challenges; ii) core
inflation maintains an upward trend and must be
contained to allow headline inflation to converge to its
target; iii) inflation expectations have continued to
deteriorate, which has made it difficult for the real
interest rate to increase proportionally to the
implemented nominal interest rate adjustments; and
iv) it is necessary to consolidate a more equilibrated
balance of risks for inflation. He/she mentioned that a
75 basis-point increase would prevent the inflationary
process from becoming entrenched and from
affecting the price formation process in the medium
term. In this regard, he/she noted that the recent
increases in the reference rate have been greater
than those observed in previous upward cycles, in
both nominal and real terms. He/she indicated that,
despite the shocks that have been observed, this has
allowed the ex-ante real interest rate to achieve
clearly restrictive levels and the nominal rate to reach
levels above both observed and expected inflation,
which will contribute to the process of convergence of
inflation. He/she added that monetary conditions that
affect the Mexican economy via the real interest rate
and the real exchange rate overall show greater
astringency as compared to other similar economies,
which would also suggest that the monetary policy
stance is consistent with the convergence of inflation
to its target. As to the relative monetary policy stance,
he/she underlined that a synchronization of the
monetary cycles between Mexico and the United
States is conditional to the type of shocks being
confronted, and thus is not mechanical, nor and end
in and of itself. Looking ahead, he/she considered it
important to monitor the evolution of the cyclical
conditions of both economies. As for the next
monetary policy decisions, he/she sustained that,
given the high uncertainty regarding the inflationary
shocks, it is necessary to maintain the required
flexibility in each decision. Therefore, he/she argued
that, at this moment, rather than providing a specific
guide about the terminal level of the rate, a monetary
policy stance that is consistent with a decrease in
inflationary pressures, with an improvement in
inflation expectations, and with inflation’s

convergence, must be consolidated. He/she pointed

8


-----

out that these elements will be key to determine the
adequate absolute, and consequently, relative,
monetary policy stances.

**3. MONETARY POLICY DECISION**

The Governing Board evaluated the magnitude and
diversity of the shocks that have affected inflation and
its determinants, along with the evolution of mediumand long-term inflation expectations and the price
formation process. It also considered the increasing
challenges for monetary policy stemming from the
ongoing tightening of global financial conditions, the
environment of significant uncertainty, the inflationary
pressures accumulated as a result of the pandemic
and the geopolitical conflict, the possibility of greater
effects on inflation, and the monetary policy stance
already attained in this hiking cycle. Based on these
considerations, the Board decided by majority to raise
the target for the overnight interbank interest rate by
75 basis points to 10.00%. With this action, the
monetary policy stance adjusts to the trajectory
required for inflation to converge to its 3% target
within the forecast horizon.

The Board will thoroughly monitor inflationary
pressures as well as all factors that have an incidence
on the foreseen path for inflation and its expectations.
This, in order to set a policy rate that is consistent at
all times with both the orderly and sustained
convergence of headline inflation to the 3% target
within the time frame in which monetary policy
operates as well as with an adequate adjustment of
the economy and financial markets. In its next
meetings, the Board will assess the magnitude of the
upward adjustments to the reference rate based on
the prevailing conditions.


**4. VOTING**

Victoria Rodríguez, Galia Borja, Irene Espinosa, and
Jonathan Heath voted in favor of increasing the target
for the overnight interbank interest rate by 75 basis
points to 10.00%. Gerardo Esquivel voted in favor of
increasing the target for the overnight interbank
interest rate by 50 basis points to 9.75%.

**5. DISSENTING OPINION / VOTE**

**Vote. Gerardo Esquivel.**

I consider it necessary to start reducing the pace of
the hiking cycle. This would signal that we are nearing
the cycle’s terminal rate and would also be consistent
with the current balance of risks. We are facing two
possible risks: an insufficient tightening (which could
translate into persistent, costly-to-revert inflation) and
an excessive tightening that would affect

macroeconomic and financial stability. As the
reference rate has been raised, the former risk has
decreased, while the latter one has increased. The
former, because external inflationary pressures have
started to subside and because the ex-ante real
interest rate already exceeds its neutral level
considerably. It does not seem necessary to tighten
much more. What is required is to allow the restrictive
monetary policy stance that has been attained, and
which works with a lagged effect, to continue
operating. It is important to point out that the proposed
increase would imply a decoupling from the Federal
Reserve and a reduction of the interest rate spread
with the United States. It is argued that, in order to
prevent foreign exchange and financial instability, the
abovementioned must be avoided. However,

recently, the Mexican peso has appreciated

significantly against the US dollar and other
currencies. This represents an ideal opportunity to
implement the referred adjustment with a minimal
risk.

9


-----

**ANNEX**

The information in this Annex was prepared for this
meeting by the staff of Banco de México’s Directorate
General of Economic Research and Directorate
General of Central Bank Operations. It does not
necessarily reflect the considerations of the members
of the Governing Board as to the monetary policy
decision.

**A.1. External conditions**

**A.1.1. World economic activity**

During the third quarter of 2022, global economic
activity was heterogeneous across countries.

Available indicators anticipate a moderate expansion
in that quarter with respect to the previous one, mainly
reflecting the reopening of economic activity in China
and a rebound in US growth. Other economies,
nevertheless, are estimated to show a moderation in
their pace of activity. In addition, prospects for the
global economy in 2023 have continued to
deteriorate. Forward-looking indicators like the
Purchasing Managers' Indices point to a deterioration
in the short term in various sectors of global economic
activity (Chart 1), as well as a slower pace of world
trade. The latter, in an environment of tighter global
financial conditions to contain the high levels of
inflation, as well as negative economic effects in
different regions and sectors derived from Russia's
invasion of Ukraine.

World inflation remains high and risks to the upside
persist, although pressures on commodity prices and
supply chain disruptions have shown signs of easing.
Core inflation, however, continued rising in most
cases, reflecting price increases across a broad
range of items. Financial conditions remained tight. In
this environment, a large number of central banks
continued raising their reference rates. Some of them,
like those of Australia, Canada and Norway,
announced raises that were lower than anticipated
and lower than in previous policy decisions, although
they foresee that it is likely that further upward
adjustments could be necessary. Reference rates are
thus expected to remain at high levels for a prolonged
period.

1 Expressed as a seasonally adjusted annualized quarterly rate,
the change in US GDP in the third quarter was 2.6%, -0.6% in the
second quarter, and -1.6% in the first quarter.


Among the most important risks to global economic
activity growth are those associated with the
COVID-19 pandemic, prolonged inflationary

pressures, worsening geopolitical tensions, and
tighter monetary and financial conditions.

**Chart 1**

**Global: Purchasing Managers’ Index: Production**

**Component**

Diffusion index, s. a.

60

58

56

54

52

50

48

46 Manufacturing

44 Manufacturing (excl. China)

Services

42 Services (excl. China)

October

40

2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022

s. a. / Seasonally adjusted figures.
Source: IHS Markit.

In the United States, Gross Domestic Product (GDP)
rebounded in the third quarter of 2022, growing at a
seasonally adjusted quarterly rate of 0.6%, after
having contracted 0.4% and 0.1% in the first and
second quarters of the year, respectively.[1] This
rebound was driven mainly by net exports. Personal
consumption continued registering a positive

contribution, although it lost dynamism due to the
tightening of financial conditions and the decline in
real wages. Residential and structural investment and
changes in inventories contributed negatively to GDP
growth (Chart 2).

US industrial production expanded 0.4% at a
seasonally adjusted monthly rate in September, after
having contracted 0.1% in August. This rebound
reflected growth in mining and manufacturing
production during the month. However, Purchasing
Managers' Indices suggest that, looking ahead, the
manufacturing sector will be constrained by a
slowdown in domestic and external demand, as well
as by a deterioration in business confidence.

10

|Col1|Col2|
|---|---|
|Manufacturing Manufacturing (excl. China) Services Services (excl. China) 2016 2017 2018 2019 sonally adjusted figures. S Markit. nited States, Gross Dom ded in the third quarter o ally adjusted quarterly contracted 0.4% and 0. quarters of the year, d was driven mainly by n ption continued regis tion, although it lost dy|October 2020 2021 2022 estic Product (GD f 2022, growing at rate of 0.6%, aft 1% in the first an respectively.1 Th et exports. Person tering a positiv namism due to th|


-----

**Chart 2**

**US Real GDP and Components**

Quarterly percentage rate and contribution in

percentage points, s. a.

3.0 Private consumption expenditures

2.5 Residential investmentNonresidential investment

2.0 Change in private inventoriesNet exports

1.5 Government consumption expenditures

Total

1.0

0.5

0.0

-0.5

-1.0

-1.5

-2.0

I II III IV I II III IV

2021 2022

a. e./ Seasonally adjusted figures.
Note: The shaded area refers to forecasts of GDPNow of November 9, 2022.
Source: BEA and GDPNow (Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta).

The US labor market continued showing signs of
tightening. Non-farm payrolls registered a monthly
average creation of 288 thousand new jobs during
September and October. The most notable increases
were in leisure and hospitality, health and

professional services. The unemployment rate
remained at low levels, standing at 3.7% in October,
while the vacancy rate remained high. Wage growth
has slowed slightly, although it remains at elevated
levels.

In the euro area, GDP growth was 0.2% at a
seasonally adjusted quarterly rate, after having
registered 0.8% growth in the second quarter of
2022.[2 ] The slowdown in economic activity reflected
the tightening of financial conditions in the region and
the effects of the military conflict in Ukraine on gas
supply and inflation. The latter has resulted in lower
household purchasing power, higher costs for firms,
and in a deterioration of consumer and business
confidence. The unemployment rate declined from
6.7% in August to 6.6% in September. The
Purchasing Managers' Indices point to a deterioration
in the short term in both manufacturing and services
activity due to the aforementioned factors.

The main emerging economies performed with a high
degree of heterogeneity that was more evident in
Emerging Europe and Latin America. These

economies have been affected differently by

tightening financial conditions, the COVID-19

2 Expressed as a seasonally adjusted annualized quarterly rate,
the change in euro area GDP was 0.7% in the third quarter of 2022
and 3.3% in the second quarter.


pandemic, the military conflict between Russia and
Ukraine, and the changes in commodity prices. In the
case of China, during the third quarter, GDP growth
showed some improvement as compared to the
previous quarter, following the lifting of mobility
restrictions to contain COVID-19 infections in that
country. However, other indicators, such as the
Purchasing Managers' Indexes point to a weakening
of said economy in an environment where the "zero
COVID-19" policy continues and the deterioration of
the real estate sector persists.[3]

Since México’s previous monetary policy decision,
international commodity prices registered mixed
results, with episodes of volatility. Oil prices rose at
the beginning of October with the announcement of
the agreement between the Organization of

Petroleum Exporting Countries and other producers
to significantly reduce oil production. Subsequently,
prices trended downwards temporarily due to risks of
a global economic recession and its implications for
energy demand. Recently, this trend was partially
reversed due to the uncertainty surrounding oil supply
worldwide in the coming months. Meanwhile, natural
gas reference prices in Europe decreased

significantly as warmer-than-expected weather

contributed to a decline in demand. Imports of
liquefied natural gas have allowed to store higher
levels of said fuel. In the United States, there was also
a sharp decline in natural gas prices as increased
production has allowed inventories to be refilled.
Industrial metal prices registered bouts of volatility
during the period. This was due to concerns about the
slowdown in world economic activity and the recent
upsurge in cases of COVID-19 in China. The prices
of most grains remained relatively stable. Wheat
prices trended downwards due to concerns about a
slowdown in world economic activity and its effect on
the demand for grains. At the end of October,
uncertainty regarding compliance with the Black Sea
security corridor agreement on grain exports has
generated volatility.

**A.1.2. Monetary policy and international financial**
**markets**

World inflation remained high and at levels unseen in
decades in some of the world's major economies.
This has continued to reflect price pressures in a wide
range of items, as a result of the ongoing imbalance
between the recovery of demand and supply in
different markets. It has also responded to the high

3 Expressed as an annual rate, the change in China's GDP was
0.4% in the second quarter of 2022 and 3.9% in the third quarter.

11


-----

world reference prices of food and energy. Pressures
on commodity prices and disruptions in global supply
chains, on the other hand, have shown signs of
easing.

In some of the major advanced economies, the recent
moderation in energy inflation has been reflected in a
decline in headline inflation. However, in most of
these economies, headline inflation remains

significantly above their central banks' targets, while
core inflation has continued rising

(Chart 3). In the United States, headline inflation as
measured by the consumer price index decreased
slightly from an annual rate of 8.3% in August to 8.2%
in September, although it still remains at a high level.
This decline mainly reflected a reduction in energy
and food inflation. Meanwhile, core inflation rose from
6.3 to 6.6%, reaching its highest level since 1982.
Inflation measured by the personal consumption
expenditure deflator remained unchanged at 6.2%
annually between August and September, while
inflation of its core component rose from 4.9 to 5.1%
during the same period. Analysts' short-term inflation
expectations remain at high levels, while for most of
the major advanced economies, longer-term inflation
expectations derived from financial instruments
registered limited movements.

**Chart 3**

**Selected Advanced Economies:**

**Headline Inflation**

Annual percentage change

10

United States PCE 1/

9

United States CPI

8

Euro area 3/

7

Japan 2/

6

United Kingdom

5

Canada

4

3

2

1

0

-1

-2 September

-3 October

-4

2005 2009 2013 2017 2021

1/ The personal consumption expenditure deflator is used.
2/ Excludes fresh food. This series does not exclude the effect of the increase
in the consumption tax in May 2014 and October 2019 nor the effect of the
free daycare and preschool program in October 2019.
3/ Preliminary figures up to October 2022.
Source: Bureau of Economic Analysis, Bureau of Labor Statistics, Eurostat,
Bank of Japan, Statistics Canada, Office of National Statistics.

In a large number of the main emerging economies,
headline inflation continued increasing and remained
significantly above their central banks' targets.
However, in recent readings, inflation declined in


some economies. The rise in inflation in some
countries continues to be explained, in general, by
higher energy and food prices, as well as by higher
core inflation. In some economies, inflation has also
been affected by the depreciation of their currencies.
Although in some cases headline inflation has been
reduced due to moderation in energy prices, it
remains at elevated levels.

In the environment described above, the central
banks of most of the major advanced economies have
continued raising their reference rates. Some of them,
such as those of Australia, Canada and Norway,
recently announced interest rate hikes that were
lower than expected and below those registered in
previous decisions. They also anticipated that
additional hikes are likely to be required. Regarding
their asset purchase programs, most central banks in
advanced economies continued to gradually reduce
their securities holdings. Looking ahead, expectations
drawn from financial instruments foresee that their
reference rates will remain at high levels for an
extended period (Chart 4).

**Chart 4**

**Reference Rates and Trajectories**

**Implied in OIS Curves[1/]**

Percent

|Col1|― European Central Bank de ― OIS implicit trajectory 03 N --- OIS implicit trajectory 23 S|posit rate ov 2022 ep 2022|Col4|Col5|Col6|Forecasts|Col8|Col9|Col10|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|


1/ OIS: Fixed floating interest rate swap where the fixed interest rate is
associated to the effective overnight reference rate.
2/ For the observed reference rate of the US, the average interest rate of the
target range of the federal funds rate (3.00% - 3.25%) is used.
Source: Banco de México with data from Bloomberg,

Among the recent monetary policy decisions of the
main advanced economies’ central banks, the
following stand out:

i) At its November meeting, the Federal Reserve

raised the target range for the federal funds rate
by 75 bps for the fourth consecutive time, placing
it between 3.75 and 4.00%. The Federal Open
Market Committee (FOMC) stated that, in

12


7.0% **――― Bank of Japan US Federal Reserve 2/ Bank of England** End of 2021 End of 2022 End of 2023 End of 2024

6.0% **― European Central Bank deposit rate**

**― OIS implicit trajectory 03 Nov 2022**
**--- OIS implicit trajectory 23 Sep 2022**

5.0%

4.0%

3.0%

2.0%

1.0%

0.0%

-1.0%

2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 2024


-----

determining the pace of future increases in the
target range, it will consider the cumulative
tightening of monetary policy, the lags with which
monetary policy affects economic activity and
inflation, and economic and financial

developments. The Committee anticipated that
successive increases in the target range will be
appropriate in order to achieve a monetary policy
stance that is sufficiently restrictive to return
inflation to 2% over time. However, the chairman
of that institution pointed out that, as the interest
rate approaches a level that is sufficiently
restrictive to bring inflation towards its target, it will
be appropriate to slow down the pace of increases.
In this regard, he added that the time to slow the
pace of hikes may come as soon as the next
meeting or the next one after that. He mentioned
that, while there is significant uncertainty as to
which interest rate level will be sufficiently
restrictive, there is still some way to go, and that
the data available since their previous meeting
suggested that the rate level the Committee may
reach will be higher than previously expected.
Regarding its balance sheet, the Committee
reiterated that it will continue to reduce its
securities holdings. In this context, the expected
trajectory for the federal funds rate implicit in
financial instruments registered an upward

adjustment during the reference period, reflecting
a reference interest rate level of around 4.4 and
5.0% for the end of 2022 and 2023, respectively.

ii) At its October meeting, the European Central

Bank increased its refinancing, key lending and
key deposit rates by 75 basis points to 2.00, 2.25
and 1.50%, respectively. It indicated that the
Governing Council has made substantial progress
in withdrawing its monetary stimulus and

reiterated that it expects to raise its reference rates
further. It highlighted that it will continue with its
approach of taking decisions meeting by meeting,
that is, without following a predetermined path. As
to its Asset Purchase Program (APP), the
president of that institution pointed out that in
December they will decide on the key principles for
its reduction. In addition, the Governing Council
decided to amend the terms and conditions of the
third series of targeted longer-term refinancing
operations (TLTRO III) to be consistent with the
process of monetary policy normalization and to
strengthen the transmission of increases in policy
rates to banks' lending conditions. Finally, it also
decided to change the remuneration of credit
institutions' minimum reserves from the interest
rate on the ECB's main refinancing operations to
the interest rate on the deposit facility in order to


better align this remuneration with money market
rates.

iii) In its November meeting, the Bank of England

increased its reference interest rate by 75 basis
points to 3.00%. It indicated that, although it is
possible that additional increases may be
required, they will reach a lower peak level than
that expected by financial markets. As for its
balance sheet, it began the sale of UK government
bonds from its Asset Purchase Facility (APF), after
having delayed it in September. Prior to that
meeting, it made temporary purchases of nominal
and inflation-linked long-term government bonds
that ended in mid-October and introduced a
temporary expanded collateral repo facility

(TECRF) that would end on November 10, among
other measures. This was in response to the
volatility in financial markets caused by the
announcement of a package of economic
measures that generated uncertainty about their
impact on the country's public balance sheet.

In the main emerging economies, most central banks
also continued raising their reference interest rates.
Meanwhile, some central banks left their interest rates
unchanged in their most recent decisions. Such was
the case of Poland, the Czech Republic, Ukraine,
Hungary and Brazil. Several have suggested that they
will keep their interest rates at current levels for an
extended period in order to ensure the convergence
of inflation to their targets. In the case of Brazil, they
added that they will not hesitate to resume the
tightening cycle if the disinflationary process does not
evolve as expected. In contrast, Turkey's central bank
made an additional interest rate cut of 150 basis
points.

In the environment described above, since the last
monetary policy decision in Mexico international
financial markets registered lower risk aversion,
although financial conditions remained tight (Chart 5).
In particular, the equity markets of most of the major
advanced and emerging economies showed a
recovery after having declined between August and
September. In foreign exchange markets, although
the US dollar has shown a correction in recent weeks,
after the strong appreciation of previous months, it
has remained at high levels against most of the
currencies of advanced and emerging economies.
Meanwhile, the yen continued weakening, in an
environment of greater divergence of the Bank of
Japan's monetary policy with respect to the rest of the
advanced economies. Interest rates on both shortand long-term government bonds in most major
advanced economies registered volatility (Chart 6). In

13


-----

the United Kingdom, government bond rates
decreased following the new government's

announcement of the suspension of certain fiscal
measures proposed by the previous government. In
emerging economies, interest rates exhibited a
heterogeneous behavior, with recent decreases in
some cases (Chart 7). In this context, since Mexico's
previous monetary policy decision, emerging

economies registered capital outflows, particularly
from fixed-income markets.

**Chart 5**

**Financial Conditions Index[1/]**

Units


-6%

-16%


**Chart 6**

**Change in Selected Financial Indicators from**

**September 23, 2022 to November 3, 2022**

Percent; basis points Percentage, basis points

24%


14%

4%


150

100


50

0


-50

-100


103

102


101

100


99

98


97


96

2019 2019 2019 2020 2020 2020 2021 2021 2021 2022 2022 2022J    M    S    J    M    S     J    M    S    J    M    S

2019           2020            2021           2022

Financial Conditions Index - United States
Financial Conditions Index - Global
Financial Conditions Index for Eurozone 2/
Financial Conditions Index for United Kingdom

1/ The financial conditions index is constructed considering the effect of five
variables on economic activity: the reference interest rate, the 10-year
government bond, the spread of investment-grade bonds over the
government debt bond with equivalent maturity, the ratio of a stock index with
10-year average earnings per share and the trade-weighted exchange rate.
Emerging economies include Brazil, Chile, China, Czech Republic, Hungary,
India, Indonesia, Israel, Malaysia, Mexico, Philippines, Poland, Romania,
South Korea, South Africa, Thailand, and Turkey. The global sample
includes G10 countries and emerging economies.
2/ In the case of emerging economies, the financial conditions index
considers the CDS as the credit spread component and includes the debtweighted exchange rate. The vertical black line indicates the last scheduled
meeting of Banco de México's Monetary Policy Committee.
Source: Prepared by Banco de México with Bloomberg and Goldman Sachs
data.


1/ DXY: a weighted average estimated by the Intercontinental Exchange
(ICE) of the nominal exchange rate of the main six currencies operated
globally with the following weights: EUR 57.6%, JPY: 13.6%, GBP: 11.9%,
CAD: 9.1%, SEK: 4.2%, and CHF: 3.6%.
Source: Bloomberg and ICE.

**Chart 7**

**Selected Emerging Economies: Financial Assets**

**Performance from September 26, 2022 to**

**November 4, 2022**

Percent, basis points


Note: An upward adjustment indicates currency appreciation. Interest rates
correspond to swap rates at th3 specified terms, except for Hungary, where
government securities with 3-year maturities were used as a reference. For
the Philippines, a 2-year swap rate was used, and for Russia, a 2-year and
3-year swap rate was used.

**A.2. Current situation of the Mexican economy**

**A.2.1. Mexican markets**

Regarding domestic markets, in the international
context described above, since Mexico’s previous
monetary policy decision the Mexican peso

14


-----

appreciated against the dollar, while short-term
interest rates increased and medium- and long-term
ones registered limited adjustments (Chart 8). The
above took place in an environment involving some
episodes of volatility in which an atmosphere of
caution prevails due to uncertainty related to the
evolution of inflation and the future actions of central
banks, particularly the Federal Reserve.

The Mexican peso fluctuated between 19.46 and
20.38 pesos per dollar, ending the reference period
since Mexico’s previous monetary policy decision with
an appreciation of 4.08% and showing greater
resilience than other currencies (Chart 9). This
occurred in a context in which both realized and
prospective trading conditions improved.

**Chart 8**

**Mexican Markets’ Performance**

Percent, MXN/USD and index


basis points in the short term and mixed results in the
medium- and long-term nodes of the yield curve. The
yield curve for real interest rate instruments registered
increases of 86 basis points in the one-year node and
of between 11 and 19 basis points in the rest of the
curve. Breakeven inflation implicit in the spreads
between nominal and real interest rates of market
instruments registered differentiated movements,
with decreases of up to 12 basis points in the short
and medium term and increases of up to 5 basis
points in the long term (Chart 11). These movements
took place in an environment in which trading
conditions improved with respect to the previous
period.

**Chart 10**

**Nominal Yield Curve of Government Securities**

Percent, basis points


11.0

10.5

10.0

9.5

9.0

8.5

8.0

7.5

7.0


2.0


5.0

4.5


21.8

21.3


4.0

3.5


20.8

20.3


3.0

2.5


59,000

57,000

55,000

53,000

51,000

49,000

47,000

45,000

43,000


19.8

19.3


M-bond


Inflation-indexed bonds


Range in year Range since previous monetary policy 26-Sep-22 03-Nov-22

decision

Source: Prepared by Banco de México.

**Chart 9**

**Mexican Peso Exchange Rate**

MXN/USD


Range in year Range since previous monetary policy 26-Sep-22 03-Nov-22


Source: PIP.

**Chart 11**

**Breakeven Inflation and Inflation Risk**

**Implied in Government Securities’ Yields**

Basis points


22.00

21.50


21.00

20.50


20.00

19.50


19.00

J  F  M A  M  J  J  A  S  O  N  D J  F  M  A M  J  J  A  S  O  N

2021 2022


Source: Prepared by Banco de México.

Since Mexico’s previous monetary policy decision,
interest rates on government securities registered
mixed results (Chart 10), with increases of up to 27


600

550

500

450

400

350 3-year

10-year

300 20-year

30-year

250

200

150

J  M M J  S  N J  M M J  S  N  J  M M J  S  N J  M M  J  S N

2019           2020           2021            2022


Source: PIP.

Regarding expectations for the monetary policy
reference rate, information implicit in the interest rate

15


-----

swap curve incorporates an increase of 75 basis
points for the November decision, while for the end of
2022 it points to a rate close to 10.62% (Chart 12).
Most analysts surveyed by Citibanamex anticipate
that the reference rate will be raised 75 basis points
in the November decision, while for the end of 2022
they anticipate a rate of 10.50%.

**Chart 12**

**Interbank Funding Rate Implied in TIIE Swaps**

Percent


6

4

2

0

-2

-4

-6


**Chart 13**

**Gross Domestic Product**

Quarterly percentage change, s. a.


12.50

11.50

10.50

9.50


12.50 Banxico overnight rate (reference

rate)

11.50 Implied interest rate in TIIE swaps -4

for 11/03/22 -17.96

10.50 Implied interest rate in TIIE swaps Q-III 1/

for 09/26/2022 -6

9.50 I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV I II III

2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022

8.50 s. a. / Seasonally adjusted figures.

1/ The Q3-2022 figure corresponds to GDP’s quarterly flash estimate by

7.50 INEGI.

Source: Mexico’s System on National Accounts (SCNM, for its Spanish

6.50 acronym), INEGI. 19/09/2022

5.50 15/09/2022

Regarding external demand, during July-September, 14/09/2022

4.50 13/09/2022

the average value of manufacturing exports with 12/09/2022

3.50 seasonally adjusted figures continued increasing. 09/09/2022

J  M  M  J  S  N  J M  M  J  S  N  J  M  M  J   S  N This was due to the improvement in both automotive 08/09/2022

2021               2022               2023 07/09/2022

Source: Prepared by Banco de México with Bloomberg data. and non-automotive exports (Chart 14).[4] On the

domestic demand side, in August private

**A.2.2. Economic activity in Mexico** consumption reactivated slightly, after having

remained sluggish in previous months, reflecting the

According to Mexico's GDP flash estimate published rebound in the consumption of services. In contrast,
by INEGI, during the third quarter of 2022 economic the consumption of goods continued exhibiting a
activity maintained a pace of growth similar to that of weak performance. Gross fixed investment remained
the two previous quarters and continued recovering sluggish, although in August it slightly expanded. It
(Chart 13). GDP would thus have reached a level stands out that the dynamism shown by machinery
similar to that reported in the last quarter of 2019, and equipment has been offset by the downward
period prior to the health emergency. trend in construction.
.

4 Refers to the value of merchandise exports in current dollars.

16


-----

130

120

110

100

90

80

70

60

50


200

180

160

140

120

100

80

60

40

J

2017


**Chart 14**

**Total Manufacturing Exports**

Indices 2013 = 100, s. a.

Automotive

Non-automotive

15.8 September


**Chart 16**

**Industrial Activity [1/]**

Indices 2013 = 100, s. a.

Total
Mining (22.3%)
Manufacturing (49.7%)
Construction (23.3%)
Utilities (4.7%) August


s. a. / Seasonally adjusted series and trend series based on data in nominal
US dollars. The former is represented by a solid line and the latter by a dotted
line
Source: Prepared by Banco de México with data from the Tax Administration
Service (SAT, for its Spanish acronym), the Ministry of the Economy (SE, for
its Spanish acronym), Banco de México, the National Institute of Statistics
and Geography (INEGI, for its Spanish acronym). Mexico’s Merchandise
Trade Balance, and the National System of Statistical and Geographical
Information (SNIEG, for its Spanish acronym), Information of national
interest.

On the production side, industrial activity stopped
growing in August (Chart 15). In particular,
manufacturing activities declined slightly, while
construction continued trending downwards and
mining exhibited a lack of dynamism (Chart 16).
There was a significant rebound in tertiary activities in
August. The improvement in accommodation and
food services stood out, in a context in which COVID19 cases have decreased.

**Chart 15**

**Global Indicator of Economic Activity**

Indices 2013 = 100, s. a.

130

120

110

100

90 Total

Secondary activities

80 Tertiary activities

Primary activities August

August

70

J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A JA

2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022

s. a. / Seasonally adjusted and trend series. The former is represented by a
solid line and the latter by a dotted line.
Source: Mexico’s System of National Accounts (SCNM, for its Spanish
acronym), INEGI.


J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A JA

2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022

s. a. / Seasonally adjusted and trend series. The former is represented by a
solid line and the latter by a dotted line.
1/ Figures in parenthesis correspond to their share in the total in 2013.
Source: Mexico’s System of National Accounts (SCNM, for its Spanish
acronym), INEGI.

Regarding the cyclical position of the economy, slack
conditions continued decreasing during the third
quarter of 2022. Based on timely information, the
negative output gap narrowed in its point estimate
(Chart 17). In September, both the national and urban
unemployment rates remained at low levels and even
decreased in their monthly comparison (Chart 18).
This took place in a context in which the employment
rate among working age population increased
marginally and the labor participation rate exhibited a
level similar to that of the previous month. Based on
seasonally adjusted figures, in September and
October, IMSS-insured jobs continued exhibiting
dynamism. Finally, in August, unit labor costs in the
manufacturing sector decreased at the margin for the
second consecutive month (Chart 19).

17


-----

**Chart 17**

**Output Gap Estimates [1/]**
**Excluding Oil Industry [4/ ]**

Potential output percentages, s. a.


**Chart 19**

**Productivity and Unit Labor Costs in the**

**Manufacturing Sector [1/]**

Indices 2013 = 100, s. a.


12

8

4

0

-4

-8

-12

-16

-20

-24


J

2017


M S J

2018


M S J

2019


M S J

2020


M S J

2021


M S J

2022


M S


s. a. / Calculations based on seasonally adjusted figures.
1/ Output gap estimated with a tail-corrected Hodrick-Prescott filter; see
Banco de México (2009), “Inflation Report, April-June 2009”, p.74.
2/ GDP figures up to the third quarter of 2022 and IGAE up to September
2022.
3/ Output gap confidence interval calculated with a method of unobserved
components.
4/ Excludes both oil and gas extraction, support services for mining, and
petroleum and coal products’ manufacturing.
Source: Prepared by Banco de México with INEGI data.

**Chart 18**

**National and Urban Unemployment Rates**

Percent, s. a.

6.5

Urban unemployment rate

6.0

National unemployment rate

5.5

5.0

4.5

4.0

3.5

3.0

September

2.5

J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S

2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022

s. a. / Seasonally adjusted and trend series. The former is represented by a
solid line and the latter by a dotted line.
Source: Prepared by Banco de México with data from ENOE, ETOE (from
April to June 2020), and ENOE new edition (ENOE[N]) from July to date.


125

Unit labor costs 157.4

120

Productivity

115

110

105

100

95

90

August

85

J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J A

2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022

s. a. / Seasonally adjusted and trend series. The former is represented by a
solid line and the latter by a dotted line.
1/ Productivity based on hours worked.
Source: Prepared by Banco de México with seasonally adjusted data of the
Monthly Manufacturing Industry Survey and industrial activity indicators of
Mexico’s System of National Accounts (Sistema de Cuentas Nacionales de
_México, SCNM), INEGI._

In September 2022, domestic financing to firms
registered a positive real annual variation for the third
consecutive month. Bank credit to firms continued
recovering gradually, exhibiting a positive real annual
variation for the fifth consecutive month. This, in a
context in which the demand for corporate credit
continued recovering and lending conditions

remained tight compared to those prevailing at the
beginning of the pandemic. These, however, had
been easing for smaller firms between the second half
of 2021 and the second quarter of 2022. Net
corporate debt issuance in the domestic market
increased during the third quarter, in contrast with the
negative flow observed in the first half of the year. As
for credit to households, commercial bank housing
portfolio maintained its pace of growth. In turn, bank
consumer credit continued increasing in real annual
terms, mainly as a result of the sustained dynamism
of payroll credit, credit cards, and personal loans. This
has taken place in a context in which household
demand for credit has continued increasing.

Mortgage lending and consumer credit conditions
remained relatively stable during the third quarter of
the year.

In September, interest rates on bank credit to firms
were at levels above those observed prior to the
pandemic. Corporate credit intermediation margins
did not show significant changes with respect to the
previous month and overall are at levels lower than
those observed prior to the pandemic. Interest rates

18


-----

on mortgages increased during the third quarter, after
having remained at levels around their historic lows
since August 2020. In May-June 2022, credit card
interest rates registered levels similar to those
observed in the previous bimester. As for portfolio
quality, in September 2022, corporate loan

delinquency rates decreased, while those of

mortgages were similar to those of the previous
month. In both segments, they remain at low levels.
Finally, consumer portfolio delinquency rates did not
show significant changes, thus remaining at levels
lower than those registered prior to the onset of the
pandemic.

**A.2.3. Development of inflation and inflation**
**outlook**

Between September and October 2022, annual
headline inflation decreased from 8.70 to 8.41%
(Chart 20 and Table 1). This result is explained by the
reduction in non-core inflation, given that core
inflation continued to increase.

**Chart 20**

**Consumer Price Index**

Annual percentage change

14

CPI

13

Core

12

Non-core

11
10

9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0

-1
-2

October

-3

J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S

2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022

Source: Banco de México and INEGI.

Between September and October 2022, annual core
inflation increased from 8.28 to 8.42%, thus
continuing the upward trend that it has shown since
December 2020. Although certain improvements
have been observed in the operation of global
production and supply chains, in addition to some
reduction in commodity prices, core inflation levels
remain high. In an environment of elevated global
demand, the aforementioned factors continue to exert
pressure on the prices of goods and services (Chart
21). In particular, annual inflation of merchandises
increased from 10.84 to 11.15% during the same
period. Within it, the lagged effects of price increases


in food commodities continued driving annual inflation
of food merchandises, which went from 13.38 to
13.95%. Annual inflation of non-food merchandises
also remained under pressure, registering levels of
8.00 and 8.03% during the same period (Chart 22).
Annual services inflation went from 5.35 to 5.30%,
mainly as a result of the reduction in the annual
variation of telecommunication services, since those
of food services, which were already at high levels,
continued increasing.

**Chart 21**

**Merchandise and Services Core Price Sub-index**

Annual percentage change

12

Merchandise

11 Services

10

9

8

7

6

5

4

3

2

1

October

0

J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S

2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022

Source: Banco de México and INEGI.

**Chart 22**

**Merchandise Core Price Sub-index**

Annual percentage change

16

Food, beverages and tobacco

14 Non-food merchandise

12

10

8

6

4

2

October

0

J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S

2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022

|Chart 20 Consumer Price Index Annual percentage change|Col2|Col3|Col4|
|---|---|---|---|
|CPI||||
|Core Non-core||||
|||||
|||||
|October||||


Source: Banco de México and INEGI.

Between September and October 2022, annual noncore inflation decreased from 9.96 to 8.36% (Chart 23
and Table 1). This was mainly due to the fall from 6.16
to 3.10% in annual energy inflation. This reflects the
lower annual variation in L.P. gas prices, which went
from -2.60 to -16.54%. Annual agricultural and
livestock product inflation remained at high levels,

19


-----

registering 15.05 and 14.25%, respectively, during
the same period.

**Chart 23**

**Non-core Price Sub-index**

Annual percentage change

25

20

15

10

5

0

-5

Non-core
Agricultural and livestock products

-10 Energy and government-authorized prices

October

-15

J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S

2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022


Source: Banco de México and INEGI.

Regarding inflation expectations drawn from the
survey conducted by Banco de México among private
sector specialists, between August and October the
median for headline inflation for the end of 2022
increased from 8.13 to 8.50%, while that for core
inflation rose from 7.67 to 8.29%. The median of
headline inflation expectations for the end of 2023
was revised from 4.66 to 5.09%, while that for core
inflation increased from 4.44 to 5.01%. The median of
headline inflation expectations for the medium term


increased from 3.85 to 4.00%, while that for core
inflation was adjusted from 3.80 to 4.00%. The
median of headline inflation expectations for the long
term (5 to 8 years) remained at 3.60% and for core
inflation increased from 3.50 to 3.55%. Finally,
compensation for inflation and inflationary risk
increased and remains at high levels. This was due to
increases in both expectations implied by market
instruments and the inflation risk premium, which
remains at high levels.

Inflation is still foreseen to converge to the 3% target
in the third quarter of 2024. These projections are
subject to risks. On the upside: i) persistence of core
inflation at high levels; ii) external inflationary
pressures associated with the pandemic; iii) greater
pressures on agricultural and livestock product prices
and on energy prices due to the ongoing geopolitical
conflict; iv) exchange rate depreciation; and v) costrelated pressures. On the downside: i) a greater-thananticipated slowdown of the world economy; ii) a
decline in the intensity of the geopolitical conflict; iii) a
better functioning of supply chains; iv) a lower passthrough effect from some cost-related pressures; and
v) a larger-than-anticipated effect from the Federal
Government’s measures to fight elevated prices.
Although some shocks have shown signs of
subsiding, the balance of risks that might have an
incidence on the trajectory of inflation within the
forecast horizon remains biased to the upside.

20


-----

**Table 1**

**Consumer Price Index and Components**

Annual percentage change

**Item** **August 2022** **September 2022** **October 2022**

**CPI** **8.70** **8.70** **8.41**

**SubyacenteCore** **8.05** **8.28** **8.42**

**Merchandise** **10.55** **10.84** **11.15**

Food, beverages and tobacco 12.94 13.38 13.95

Non-food merchandise 7.90 8.00 8.03

**Services** **5.19** **5.35** **5.30**

Housing 3.12 3.15 3.14

Education (tuitions) 3.68 4.49 4.49

Other services 7.31 7.44 7.33

**No SubyacenteNon-core** **10.65** **9.96** **8.36**

**Agricultural and livestock products** **14.90** **15.05** **14.25**

Fruits and vegetablesFruits abd vegetables 15.18 14.18 12.63

Livestock productsLivestock 14.68 15.79 15.61

**Energy and government-authorized prices Energéticos y Tarifas Aut. por Gobierno** **7.25** **5.88** **3.77**

Energy productsEnergy 8.14 6.16 3.10

Government-authorized pricesTarifas Autorizadas por Gobierno 5.19 5.23 5.42

Source: INEGI.


-----

-----

