-----

-----

**FOREWARNING**
This document is provided for the reader’s convenience
only. The translation from the official Spanish version was
made by Banco de México’s staff. Discrepancies may arise
between the original document in Spanish and its English
translation. For this reason, the original Spanish version is
the only official document.


**1. PLACE, DATE AND PARTICIPANTS**

**1.1. Place: Meeting held by virtual means.**

**1.2. Date of Governing Board meeting:** June 22,
2022.

**1.3. Participants:**

Victoria Rodríguez, Governor.
Galia Borja, Deputy Governor.
Irene Espinosa, Deputy Governor.
Gerardo Esquivel, Deputy Governor.
Jonathan Heath, Deputy Governor.
Rogelio Eduardo Ramírez, Secretary of Finance and
Public Credit.
Gabriel Yorio, Undersecretary of Finance and Public
Credit.
Elías Villanueva, Secretary of the Governing Board.

Prior to this meeting, preliminary work by Banco de
México’s staff analyzing the economic and financial
environment as well as the developments in inflation
and the determinants and outlook for inflation, was
conducted and presented to the Governing Board
(see Annex).

**2. ANALYSIS AND RATIONALE BEHIND THE**
**GOVERNING BOARD’S VOTING**

**_International environment_**

**Most members stated that available indicators**
**suggest that global economic activity slowed**
**down during the second quarter, affected mainly**
**by mobility restrictions in China and the**
**repercussions of the military conflict. One**
member added that it was also affected by the
tightening of financial conditions. **Another member**
said that performance remains heterogeneous
among countries and sectors. He/she noted that in
the United States, the reduction of fiscal and
monetary stimuli has started to affect some GDP
components, such as residential investment,

although consumption continues to show dynamism.
**One member indicated that said economy continues**
to recover, albeit with a reduction in consumer
confidence and a weakening of growth expectations.


Meanwhile, **some members mentioned that labor**
markets in advanced economies continue

functioning strongly, with increases in wages and in
the number of vacancies.

**Most members noted that the outlook for global**
**economic growth was revised downwards. One**
member mentioned that the conflict in Ukraine, the
partial shutdown of activities in China and less lax
financial conditions contributed to that revision.
He/she pointed out that, nevertheless, an expansion
of close to 3% is still expected for 2022 and 2023.
**Most members agreed that the outlook is**
**uncertain. Some members stated that among global**
risks, those associated with the pandemic, the
persistence of inflationary pressures, the

intensification of geopolitical tensions and greater
adjustments in economic, monetary and financial
conditions, stand out. One member warned about the
increasing likelihood of a pronounced slowdown, and
even a recession, in the United States. **Another**
member indicated that the contraction of the Chinese
economy expected for the second quarter of the year
may have implications for global demand. **Most**
**members noted that the balance of risks for**
**global economic activity is biased to the**
**downside.**

**All members highlighted the high levels that**
**world inflation has registered. Most members**
**mentioned that in some cases, levels unseen in**
**decades have been registered. They also noted**
**that inflation continued to be pressured by the**
**persistence of bottlenecks, the effects of the**
**geopolitical conflict and the recovery of demand.**
**Likewise, they emphasized the high commodity**
**prices, especially of food and energy products.**
**One member added the boost to spending from fiscal**
and monetary stimuli provided in response to the
pandemic. **Some members highlighted that a more**
generalized increase in prices is observed. **Most**
**members stated that, in the United States, CPI**
**inflation reached 8.6% in May. One member noted**
that core inflation declined marginally. **Some**
members highlighted that in the euro area inflation
rose to 8.1% in May and **some members indicated**
that, in this context, global short-term inflation
expectations continued increasing. **One member**
pointed out that inflation convergence towards
central banks’ targets continues to be expected for
the end of 2023 and early 2024. **Another member**
warned about the possibility of tighter labor market
conditions. **One member considered that the**
environment for inflation remains very complex and
with a high degree of uncertainty.

1


-----

**All members said that a large number of central**
**banks have continued raising their reference**
**rates. Some members detailed that such actions**
have the aim of moderating aggregate spending. All
**members mentioned that in its latest monetary**
**policy decision, the Federal Reserve raised the**
**target range for the federal funds rate by 75 basis**
**points and anticipated future adjustments.** **Most**
**members added that such an increase had not**
**been observed since 1994.** **Some members**
pointed out that it was larger than expected. **Most**
**members added that, based on financial market**
**data, the federal funds rate is expected to reach**
**levels above 3.5%. One member noted that such**
level is above the neutral range. He/she highlighted
that the European Central Bank left the reference
rate unchanged in June and announced that it would
increase it by 25 basis points in each of its next two
decisions. Some members mentioned that emerging
economies also continued raising their reference
rates. One member elaborated that, in most cases,
the ex-ante real interest rate is still below its neutral
level. He/she noted that, within this group, only
Brazil, Chile and Mexico have positive ex-ante real
interest rates. He/she added that, although in the first
two cases the inflation rate is above 10%, Mexico
stands out as one of the Latin American countries
with the lowest annual inflation rate. **Another**
member stated that a more accelerated reduction of
monetary stimulus worldwide is still expected.

**All members noted that in this context, global**
**financial conditions tightened further. Most**
**members noted that the dollar strengthened,**
**interest rates increased, especially at the shorter-**
**term nodes, and equity indices registered losses,**
**in a context of risk aversion. Regarding financial**
markets of emerging economies, **some members**
noted that they presented a negative performance,
with adverse effects on their currencies. **One**
member also mentioned the negative impact
observed in stock markets and risk premia as
measured by CDS premia. **Some members stated**
that yield curves flattened. One member added that
outflows were registered in fixed-income and equity
assets, mainly from China and other Asian
economies. Some members mentioned that a more
abrupt than expected monetary normalization
processes could lead to further tightening and
greater volatility in global financial conditions. **One**
member pointed out that this could lead to capital
outflows from emerging economies.


**_Economic activity in Mexico_**

**Most members agreed that the economic**
**recovery is expected to continue in the second**
**quarter of 2022. Some members indicated that this**
is already being observed in certain timely indicators.
**One member stated that the recovery would be**
supported by the improved performance of tertiary
activities.

**On the supply side, most members noted that**
**industrial production continued recovering in**
**April, given the favorable performance of the**
**manufacturing sector. Some members added that**
industrial activity was driven by several of its
components, although they specified that

construction continues to show sluggishness. Some
members highlighted that the negative effects on the
automotive industry have diminished. **One member**
pointed out that the capacity utilization rate in the
manufacturing sector registered historical highs.
He/she noted that in June there were fewer technical
shutdowns in assembly plants, although the
production of light vehicles has not yet regained its
pre-pandemic levels. **Some members emphasized**
that the recovery of services continues to show
heterogeneity. **One member noted a marginal**
moderation in retail activities and a greater
dynamism in leisure, lodging and food preparation
services.

**On the demand side, most members underlined**
**that consumption continues to recover. They**
**detailed** **that** **various** **determinants** **of**

**consumption remain at high levels, such as**
**consumer confidence, the total wage bill, and**
**remittances. Some members highlighted that for**
nine consecutive months the monthly indicator of
private consumption has been showing small
increases. One member pointed out that its growth
has been driven mainly by the consumption of
services and non-durable goods. **Another member**
emphasized that consumption of goods and services
has already surpassed pre-pandemic levels. **Some**
members added that leading indicators, such as
ANTAD (Asociación Nacional De Tiendas De
_Autoservicio y Departamentales, for its acronym in_
Spanish) sales, and credit and debit card spending,
suggest that private consumption continued to
improve in the second quarter. **Most members**
**highlighted** **that** **investment** **showed** **an**

**improvement in March, driven by the component**
**of machinery and equipment other than for**
**transportation. However, they pointed out that**
**investment continues to show sluggishness,**
**particularly investment in construction. One**

2


-----

member mentioned the lag observed in both the
construction and the transportation equipment
components of investment.

**Regarding the external sector, most members**
**highlighted the good performance of non-**
**automotive manufacturing exports. One member**
detailed that this was due to increases in both volume
and price. **Another member highlighted the impact**
of problems on the supply of microprocessors on
automotive exports in April. One member noted that
non-oil imports have shown a significant upward
trend, especially those of capital goods, while
intermediate and consumer goods’ imports kept a
positive trend, which has increased the trade deficit.

**Most members agreed that various labor market**
**indicators have continued to improve, although**
**the recovery remains incomplete. They also**
**noted that unemployment, underemployment**
**and labor participation rates, as well as**
**employment** **in** **IMSS-insured** **jobs,** **have**

**continued to show progress. One member pointed**
out that this is particularly true for the northern region
of the country and within the manufacturing industry.
**Another member indicated that in April, the national**
and urban unemployment rates were at low levels, in
an environment in which the labor participation rate
and the employment-to-working-age-population ratio
continued approaching their pre-pandemic levels.
**One member added that some experimental**
indicators of vacancy levels show that these maintain
a good pace of growth. In this context, **some**
members noted that nominal wage revisions for
IMSS-insured workers registered an annual increase
of 11%, a new maximum, while wage revisions in the
private sector registered an 8.2% increase. However,
they emphasized that certain labor market indicators,
such as employment levels, show weakness and
remain below their pre-pandemic levels. **One**
member noted that the number of inactive workers
among the working-age population remains above
the level observed before the pandemic. **Another**
member added that relative to its trend level, the
number of IMSS-insured workers has also shown
weakness.

**Most members pointed out that slack conditions**
**in the economy have decreased. They stated that**
**these are expected to continue decreasing**
**gradually.** However, **one member stated that**
Mexico's GDP is still lagging with respect to both the
trend and the absolute level that prevailed prior to the
pandemic. He/she added that some services, such
as lodging, food preparation and leisure, still register
levels of activity below their pre-pandemic levels.


He/she stressed that there is still room for the
economy to grow as some services continue to
recover and some manufacturing industries regain
the use of their installed capacity, without necessarily
creating additional inflationary pressures.

**Some members agreed that the environment for**
economic recovery remains uncertain. One member
said that, given the uncertainty regarding the
evolution of the pandemic, the persistence of supply
chain disruptions and inflationary pressures, and the
expectation of a further tightening of monetary
conditions, a complex global economic environment
prevails, which keeps the balance of risks for
economic growth biased to the downside.

**_Inflation in Mexico_**

**Most members mentioned that in the first**
**fortnight of June, headline and core inflation**
**registered annual variations of 7.88 and 7.47%,**
**respectively,** **and remained at elevated levels.**
**One member highlighted that most of the CPI**
components have accelerated their growth. He/she
detailed that monthly inflation in May surpassed
analysts' expectations and for the third consecutive
year was positive whereas typically it used to be
negative. Another member noted that inflation is well
above the target and that pressures at the margin,
measured by standardized monthly changes,

persisted during May and June. **Some members**
noted that certain indicators of central tendency
reflect generalized pressures. One member detailed
that in the first fortnight of June, 45% of the items in
the CPI basket showed seasonally adjusted monthly
variations above 10%.

Regarding the different shocks that have affected
inflation, this member indicated that the combination
of the shocks derived from the pandemic and those
associated with the military conflict, maintains an
extremely complex environment and with a high
degree of uncertainty. He/she added that inflation is
suffering from the depth, simultaneity and longer
duration of shocks. He/she considered that it is being
affected by global factors and is particularly
pressured by increases in international food
references. Meanwhile, **another member said that,**
although inflation in Mexico is part of a global
phenomenon, it also stands out for being relatively
contained and at a lower level than in other similar
emerging economies as well as in advanced
economies. He/she indicated that this is due to a less
lax monetary policy stance, the absence of
inflationary pressures on the demand side and the
Federal Government's fuel price policy. One member
mentioned that despite this pricing policy and a

3


-----

flexible and resilient exchange rate, which has
allowed the economy to absorb part of the external
inflation pass-through, a generalized inflationary
phenomenon is being confronted, with inflation rates
unseen in over 20 years and which have shown
resistance to decline.

**Most** **members** **noted** **that** **core** **inflation**

**responded mainly to inflationary pressures from**
**abroad on energy and food prices, and to higher**
**production costs. One member added the**
pressures related to the recovery of domestic
consumption. In this context, **some members**
highlighted that the core component maintains an
ongoing sequence of increases since December
2020. Most members highlighted the increase in
**food commodity prices, associated with the**
**phenomenon of global commodity inflation. One**
member pointed out that this sub-index registers a
double-digit inflation and highlighted, in particular,
the effect on wheat and dairy products’ prices.
**Another member pointed out that the price increases**
of these commodities affect lower-income

households to a greater extent, as they allocate a
higher proportion of spending to consumption of such
goods. **One** member indicated that if the food
merchandise component were excluded from core
inflation, as in other countries, the annual change in
core inflation would still be above the inflation target,
but at a much lower level. He/she added that this
reflects that pressures on food services and non-food
merchandise are lower than those on food
merchandise. **Some** members mentioned

inflationary pressures in the services component.
**One member considered it concerning that services**
inflation, which to a greater extent reflects domestic
pressures, has maintained an upward trend for more
than a year and is located above the target for
headline inflation.

**Most members indicated that non-core inflation**
**remains at high levels.** **Some members highlighted**
the pressures on agricultural and livestock products.
**With respect to inflation in energy prices, most**
**members pointed out that it has remained**
**relatively subdued by the policies set by the**
**Federal Government. One member added that,**
because of the gasoline price subsidy, no

multiplicative effects on other prices are observed.

**Most** **members** **mentioned** **that** **inflation**

**expectations for 2022 and 2023 increased**
**considerably again. One member noted that**
inflation expectations for both years are well above
the inflation target. **Another** member indicated that
although inflation expectations for the end of 2022


and for the subsequent 12 months continue at high
levels, the former remained close to their level
observed during the previous month and the latter
decreased at the margin. **One member considered**
that short-term expectations have increased since
June 2021 and stated that, in his/her opinion, they
will surely continue to be revised upwards.

**Most members pointed out that medium- and**
**long-term** **headline** **inflation** **expectations**

**increased slightly and remain at levels above the**
**target. Some members indicated that the increase in**
long-term expectations is an alert regarding the
beginning of an expectations’ unanchoring process,
which is important to revert. Some members added
that these expectations had remained stable for a
long period. One member emphasized that long-term
expectations for core inflation have remained stable.
**Most members stated that expectations drawn**
**from market instruments continued adjusting**
**upwards.** **One member** specified that the ones for
the average of 6-to-10 years still remain at low levels,
although they have shown steady increases over the
course of several months.

**Most members stated that given the greater-than-**
**anticipated** **inflationary** **pressures,** **inflation**

**forecasts have been revised upwards once again.**
**They pointed out that inflation convergence to**
**the 3% target is still expected to be attained**
**during the first quarter of 2024. One member**
noted that forecasts for the next four quarters already
exceed market expectations. **Another member**
pointed out that the seasonally adjusted annualized
quarterly change is expected to lie above 10% in the
second quarter of 2022, its highest value during this
period of high inflation. He/she mentioned that the
increase in inflation registered in most CPI
components in recent months has generated doubts
over when the inflection point could be reached.
He/she noted that, recently, inflation was anticipated
to peak between April and May, and to start declining
beginning in June. He/she added that currently it is
expected to reach its peak in August or September
and headline and core inflations are estimated to
begin declining in the fourth quarter of 2022. He/she
underlined that the headline inflation forecast for said
quarter was revised upwards by over 100 basis
points. He/she pointed out that recurring forecast
adjustments are due to a continuous accumulation of
unanticipated shocks, which has been a problem
during the last couple of years in Mexico and in other
countries.

**Among upward risks to inflation, most members**
**mentioned** **external** **inflationary** **pressures**

4


-----

**associated with the pandemic, greater pressures**
**on agricultural and livestock product prices and**
**on energy prices due to the ongoing geopolitical**
**conflict** **and** **cost-related** **pressures.** **Some**

members highlighted the labor costs. **One member**
pointed out that although a wage-price spiral cannot
be confirmed, firms can be expected to pass through
part of their higher labor costs onto final consumers,
in response to the growing demand. **Another**
member considered that the cost increase could be
reflecting the all-time highs registered in capacity
utilization in the manufacturing sector. **Some**
members emphasized as a risk that core inflation
persist at high levels and a depreciation of the
exchange rate. **Most members mentioned that**
**there is high uncertainty regarding the time it will**
**take for the effects of these shocks to start to**
**fade, and added that the occurrence or the**
**intensification of additional disturbances cannot**
**be ruled out.** Among downward risks, **some**
members pointed to the possibility that the Policy
Program to Fight Inflation and High Prices (PACIC,
for its acronym in Spanish) will have a greater-thananticipated effect, while one member stated that its
impact would be marginal and would be mainly
associated with the gasoline subsidy. He/she
underlined that the viability of this measure will
depend on whether it can be financed without
affecting the fiscal balance. **Another member**
mentioned, among downward risks, the following: i)
a decline in the intensity of the military conflict; ii) an
improvement in supply chains; and iii) a greater-thanexpected effect from the negative output gap. **One**
member stated that the withdrawal of fiscal and
monetary stimuli at the global level would contribute
to mitigate inflationary pressures worldwide and,
consequently, domestic ones. **Another member**
stressed that it is worrying that conjunctural risks,
such as climate-related factors, logistical problems
and input costs, showed a greater deterioration than
that perceived during previous inflation episodes,
which suggests a concurrence of risks greater than
previously observed. **Most members considered**
**that the balance of risks for the expected inflation**
**trajectory** **within** **the** **forecast** **horizon** **is**

**significantly biased to the upside.**

**_Macrofinancial environment_**

**Most members emphasized that the negative**
**behavior of domestic financial markets was in**
**line with that observed at the global level. They**
**highlighted that the exchange rate showed an**
**orderly** **performance,** while **one** member

considered that its trading conditions deteriorated
somewhat at the margin. Some members recognized


that the exchange rate depreciated slightly. However,
they pointed out its resilience, given the country’s
sound macroeconomic fundamentals and the broad
volatility-adjusted interest rate spread relative to the
United States. One member added that its favorable
behavior is also due to lower idiosyncratic risks
relative to other economies in the region. **Another**
member noted that so far this year the Mexican peso
has appreciated slightly. **One member pointed out**
that forward-looking indicators for the Mexican peso
show improvements both according to market
metrics and analysts’ expectations.

**Most members pointed out that short- and long-**
**term interest rates increased.** **Some members**
highlighted the flattening of the yield curve. **One**
member stated that its slope is at low levels, in line
with the international trend. He/she added that the
real yield curve has declined, especially for shorter
terms. He/she indicated that foreign capital inflows to
_Bonos and_ _Udibonos_ in search of yield and shelter
from high inflation levels will continue. **Another**
member highlighted that default premia increased
given the environment of higher risk aversion. Some
members pointed out that the stock market
registered a decline of more than 2%.

**One member expressed the need, in this context of**
high risks and high uncertainty, for the economies
characterized by a high degree of financial and
commercial integration with the rest of the world, and
that are exposed to external shocks, to maintain a
solid macroeconomic policy stance at all times.
He/she pointed out that, within the scope of Banco
de México’s attributions, this implies pursuing low
and stable inflation and safeguarding the strength of
the financial system. He/she underlined that the
relative monetary policy stance is appropriate, which
along with solid macroeconomic fundamentals, such
as fiscal discipline and sustainable external

accounts, allows the economy to face possible
negative external shocks.

**_Monetary policy_**

**The Governing Board evaluated the magnitude**
**and diversity of the shocks that have affected**
**inflation and its determinants, along with the risk**
**of contamination of medium- and long-term**
**inflation expectations and of the price formation**
**process. Most members also considered the**
**increasing challenges for monetary policy,**
**stemming from the ongoing tightening of global**
**financial** **conditions,** **the** **environment** **of**

**significant** **uncertainty** **and** **inflationary**

**pressures associated with the geopolitical**
**conflict and with new cases of COVID-19 in**

5


-----

**China, as well as the possibility of greater**
**negative effects on inflation. Based on these**
**considerations, all members voted for raising the**
**target for the overnight interbank interest rate by**
**75 basis points to 7.75%. Most members**
**emphasized that, with this action, the monetary**
**policy stance adjusts to the trajectory required**
**for inflation to converge to its 3% target within**
**the forecast horizon.**

**The Governing Board expressed that it will**
**thoroughly monitor inflationary pressures as**
**well as all factors that have an incidence on the**
**foreseen path for inflation and its expectations.**
**The latter, in order to set a policy rate that is**
**consistent at all times both with the orderly and**
**sustained convergence of inflation to the target,**
**as well as with an adequate adjustment of the**
**economy and financial markets. The Board**
**added that for the following monetary policy**
**decisions, it intends to continue increasing the**
**reference rate and will evaluate taking the same**
**forceful measures if required.**

**One member considered that the recent monetary**
policy decision of the Federal Reserve and the recent
volatility in global financial markets lead to a
proportional response in order to preserve the
relative monetary policy stance, promoting stability in
domestic markets. Likewise, he/she considered that
looking forward, the absolute stance will be
increasingly important and the relative stance will be
less so. He/she argued that this is because, first, the
current decision places the real interest rate above
the level considered as neutral, and second, there is
enough space for an eventual reduction of the spread
between the reference rates in Mexico and in the US.
He/she emphasized the importance of a gradual
transition to a moderately restrictive absolute stance
in order to prevent the current inflationary

phenomenon from generating second-round effects
on the price formation process, but stressed also the
importance of avoiding an excessive tightening.
He/she pointed out that the real interest rate, which
for Mexico is among the highest in the world, affects
different variables, such as credit, investment and
durable goods’ consumption. He/she forewarned that
it is necessary to avoid an excessive tightening,
which may result counterproductive even to preserve
macroeconomic and financial stability, and therefore,
to control inflation. He/she considered that the
increase observed in emerging economies’ risk
premia is associated with the deterioration in their
economic outlook and in their public finances, which
partly derives from monetary tightening and reflects
the limits of monetary policy to preserve


macroeconomic stability in emerging economies.
He/she mentioned, as additional reasons, that the
inflation rebound is caused by global factors and thus
an excessive tightening in Mexico would bring little
gains in terms of controlling domestic inflation, and
that unlike other countries that provided ample fiscal
and monetary stimuli, Mexico does not register an
out-of-control growth of aggregate demand. He/she
mentioned that during the following quarter, there
may be conditions to begin dissociating from the
pace of the Federal Reserve’s rate increases, given
that: i) the volatility adjusted interest rate spread
relative to the United States is among the highest in
the emerging economies and is at all-time highs; ii)
from a medium-term perspective, the Mexican peso
stands out for its sound performance and low
volatility, which reflects solid macroeconomic

fundamentals; iii) Mexico began its normalization
process earlier and is closer to the zone considered
as restrictive; iv) unlike other emerging economies
and the United States, Mexico does not face
demand- or labor market-related inflationary

pressures; and v) inflation in Mexico is less distant
from its target, as compared to other countries.

**Another** **member mentioned that given the**
deterioration in the balance of risks and the
persistence of high inflation levels, this decision,
rather than a change in the pace, will give the
necessary boost to attain an interest rate trajectory
consistent with the convergence of inflation to its
target. He/she underlined that, although the

monetary policy adjustments that have been
implemented allow the relative position with the
United States to be solid, given the recent, larger
than expected increase in the reference rate of the
United States, and given tighter financial conditions
worldwide, as well as an increase of perceived risk
aversion, the relative monetary policy stance must be
thoroughly monitored, while inflationary pressures
persist. In this regard, he/she mentioned that the
shocks associated with the armed conflict continue
affecting commodity prices, while the resurgence of
COVID-19 cases in China and the subsequent
restrictions to mobility continue affecting the
reestablishment of supply chains, and it remains
unclear if they could be lifted in the short-term.
He/she considered that it is inevitable to act forcefully
to address the inflationary pressures that are
perceived in the convergence trajectory of inflation to
its target and which have caused a deterioration in
the inflation forecasts, although the period of
convergence remains constant. He/she underlined
that given the lag at which monetary policy operates,
the ex-ante real interest rate may need to lie above
the upper threshold of the range for the neutral rate

6


-----

for the stance to be more effective. He/she added
that looking ahead, it is necessary to carefully assess
if another increase of a similar magnitude is
necessary which would ensure the anchoring of
inflation expectations, allow the ex-ante real rate to
adjust more efficiently as compared to the expected
inflation trajectory and prevent the emergence of
second-round effects on price formation. He/she
indicated that the actions taken, complemented with
the adequate use of communication tools, have been
more effective, and that it is important that this
continues, especially in periods of high uncertainty,
given that an orderly adjustment of financial markets
is necessary in view of Banco de México’s decisions.

**One member stated that Mexico is currently facing**
an even more complex inflation environment. He/she
forewarned that, since the last monetary policy
decision, the expected inflation trajectory at year end
has been revised by over 100 basis points, that the
balance of risks to inflation maintains a considerable
upward bias, and that the possibility that inflationary
shocks will be longer-lasting, that they will intensify
or that new shocks will emerge, cannot be ruled out.
He/she considered that in this environment, a faster
rate of tightening is urgently required to achieve a
restrictive monetary policy stance. He/she added that
the effects of the pandemic on world inflation, a
greater international monetary tightening and the
deterioration of inflation expectations, call for
maintaining this rate of tightening at least during the
following monetary policy decision. He/she

mentioned four factors to be considered in fighting
inflation. The first factor is to take the monetary
stance to a restrictive region. He/she point out that
although the current hiking cycle began in June 2021,
inflation expectations increased, so that the

monetary policy stance is barely in the lower part of
the neutral range. He/she mentioned that, after the
75 bp increase, it would reach the upper threshold of
the neutral range, and, given a new possible upward
revision in the expectations, this increase will not be
sufficient to reach a restrictive monetary policy
stance. Thus, an adjustment of a similar magnitude
will be necessary in the next decision. He/she
emphasized that the cyclical conditions become
secondary and no effort must be spared in controlling
inflation. Second, he/she noted that a necessary but
not sufficient condition for inflation to decline in
Mexico, is that it declines in the United States.
He/she expressed that inflation in the United States
reached very high levels, which pushed the Federal
Reserve to increase its reference rate by 75bp.
He/she pointed out that Mexico’s relative monetary
policy stance has been enough to confront the
episodes of higher volatility. Therefore, he/she


considered that the Federal Reserve’s increase must
be matched, in order to maintain the interest rate
spread between the two countries. Third, the support,
albeit marginal, of other efforts to reduce inflation,
such as the PACIC and especially the fiscal stimulus
to the price of gasoline. The fourth is characterized
by a combination of patience and luck. Patience in
waiting for the current shocks to dissipate and luck
for new shocks not to emerge. He/she sustained that
the expected inflection point in the headline and core
inflation trends during the fourth quarter does not
depend exclusively on Banco de México, thus it is
important to remain cautious. He/she expressed the
opinion that the current challenges demand a
communication policy that is free of ambiguities, with
precise qualitative and quantitative information about
the future policy actions. Furthermore, he/she
pointed out that, given that the monetary tightening
works mainly through the expectations channel, it is
important to have and effective communication. This
opens the discussion to improve the communication
strategy towards a more robust framework. He/she
pointed out that some pioneering central banks have
a forward guidance in which, in addition to the
inflation and growth forecasts, they publish the
reference rates’ trajectory, which is consistent with
the inflation forecast. He/she considered that such
communication policy could strengthen the monetary
policy transmission. The above assuming that said
trajectory would not imply a commitment regarding
future decisions, but rather only a guide over its
possible course. He/she noted that an explanation
could be added on how this path could be changed
in response to a number of events. He/she argued
that measures of this kind should be thoroughly
analyzed and, if implemented, it should be done in a
cautious manner.

**Another member recalled that from the beginning of**
the current cycle, it was pointed out that the
challenge was for inflationary pressures, which at the
time where considered to be transitory and
generated by supply shocks, not to affect price
formation and the anchoring of expectations. He/she
added that the relevance of expectations, especially
those for longer terms, in monetary policy

transmission, was highlighted, and that these could
be affected by persistent and high levels of inflation,
even in the absence of demand pressures. He/she
added that it was emphasized that the central bank’s
credibility helps to maintain expectations anchored
and contributes to a more efficient monetary policy.
He/she pointed out that twelve months later, there
are high levels of inflation, unseen in more than 20
years, a generalized inflationary phenomenon which
affects a large number of goods and services, and

7


-----

which has shown resistance to decline despite the
adjustments in the monetary policy stance, and the
most concerning, the beginning of the unanchoring
of medium- and long-term expectations. He/she
highlighted that all of this has taken place despite two
factors that have contributed to reduce additional
inflationary pressures: a flexible and resilient
exchange rate, which has allowed the economy to
absorb part of the pass-through of external inflation,
and the energy price policy implemented by the
Federal Government to limit their increase in real
terms. He/she considered that it is essential to take
firm and forceful actions to restore confidence in the
commitment to convergence to the target within the
forecast horizon. He/she considered it necessary to
take the reference rate to restrictive territory, and that
increasing the rate of adjustment of monetary policy
cannot be postponed. He/she argued that regarding
the expectations channel, there are studies that show
that, even in the face of supply shocks, reference rate
increases contribute to mitigate the effects on longterm expectations. He/she added that in the face of
inflationary pressures from abroad, a 75 bp increase
would also reinforce the exchange rate channel.
He/she considered it fundamental that

communication allows the anticipation of the more
restrictive monetary conditions needed to achieve
the convergence of inflation to the target, given the
growing risks to price stability. He/she expressed that
only with the proposed increase and anticipating
more restrictive monetary conditions can the central
bank’s commitment to its constitutional mandate be
endorsed and the anchoring of inflation expectations
guaranteed. He/she argued that the way to induce
lower interest rates in the future, as well as an
expansion of financing and credit, to the benefit of
economic activity and employment, is precisely by
raising the reference rate in a timely and sufficient
manner, and by avoiding more severe rate increases
in the future. He/she warned that, if this is not done,
the social cost in terms of production and
employment will undoubtedly be much higher.
He/she stated that the main current challenge is the
high level of inflation.

**One member** considered that monetary policy in
Mexico has continued to face a highly complex
environment. Given the high social and economic
costs derived from inflation, and given that these
affect the most vulnerable population to a greater
extent, it is essential to act with the necessary
determination to achieve low and stable inflation.
He/she argued that the confluence of factors, such
as those associated with the pandemic and the
geopolitical conflict, among others, has led to a
generalized inflationary shock of great magnitude,


which could have long-term effects on the dynamics
of inflation in Mexico and he/she added that, in such
an environment, the possibility of price formation
contamination may increase. He/she warned that an
unanchoring of inflation expectations, mainly of those
for longer terms, would make convergence to the
target more difficult. He/she pointed out that
international monetary and financial conditions are in
circumstances unseen in several decades,

especially in terms of the Federal Reserve's pace of
monetary tightening, which could have significant
repercussions on global and domestic financial
markets, including the exchange rate, and could
make it difficult to control inflation in Mexico. In view
of the deteriorating environment, it is necessary to
strengthen the monetary policy stance and confirm
the commitment that the necessary actions will be
taken so that inflation expectations remain anchored
and a deterioration of the price formation process is
avoided. He/she expressed that, at the present
juncture, there must not be any doubt about the
central bank’s determination to achieve the

convergence of inflation to the target within the
forecast horizon. This, considering that it is important
to address the described scenario in a decisive
manner, in order to comply with Banco de México’s
obligation with the Mexican population. He/she
stated that, looking ahead, the evolution of all
inflation determinants should continue to be
considered, including inflation expectations,

especially longer-term ones, slack conditions and the
evolution of financial markets as well as the relative
monetary policy stance. He/she considered that in
the next monetary policy decisions, Banco de México
should continue the cycle of reference rate
increases, assessing whether it is necessary to take
the same forceful measures based on the outlook for
inflation and its expectations. All of the above, in
order for Banco de México to adopt the necessary
actions to comply with its constitutional mandate of
maintaining low and stable inflation.

**3. MONETARY POLICY DECISION**

The Governing Board evaluated the magnitude and
diversity of the shocks that have affected inflation
and its determinants, along with the risk of
contamination of medium- and long-term inflation
expectations and of the price formation process. It
also considered the increasing challenges for
monetary policy stemming from the ongoing
tightening of global financial conditions, the

environment of significant uncertainty, and

inflationary pressures associated with the

geopolitical conflict and with the resurgence of
COVID-19 cases in China, as well as the possibility

8


-----

of greater effects on inflation. Based on these
considerations, and with the presence of all its
members, the Board decided unanimously to raise
the target for the overnight interbank interest rate, on
this occasion, by 75 basis points to 7.75%. With this
action, the monetary policy stance adjusts to the
trajectory required for inflation to converge to its 3%
target within the forecast horizon.

The Board will monitor thoroughly inflationary
pressures as well as all factors that have an
incidence on the foreseen path for inflation and its
expectations. This, in order to set a policy rate that is
consistent at all times with the trajectory needed to
facilitate the orderly and sustained convergence of


headline inflation to the 3% target within the time
frame in which monetary policy operates as well as
an adequate adjustment of the economy and
financial markets. For the next policy decisions, the
Board intends to continue raising the reference rate
and will evaluate taking the same forceful measures
if conditions so require.

**4. VOTING**

Victoria Rodríguez, Galia Borja, Irene Espinosa,
Gerardo Esquivel and Jonathan Heath voted in favor
of increasing the target for the overnight interbank
interest rate by 75 basis points to 7.75%.

9


-----

**ANNEX**

The information in this Annex was prepared for this
meeting by the staff of Banco de México’s Directorate
General of Economic Research and Directorate
General of Central Bank Operations. It does not
necessarily reflect the considerations of the

members of the Governing Board as to the monetary
policy decision.

**A.1. External conditions**

**A.1.1. World economic activity**

Available indicators suggest that global economic
activity slowed down during the second quarter of
2022 (Chart 1), as a result of the military conflict in
Ukraine, mobility restrictions in China due to the
resurgence of COVID-19 cases towards the end of
the first quarter, and the tightening of financial
conditions worldwide. Heterogeneity across

countries is expected to have increased during the
second quarter, as some of the main advanced
economies are expected to recover from the first
quarter, while some of the main emerging

economies, like China and Russia, are foreseen to
contract. World inflation continued increasing, in
some cases reaching its highest levels in decades,
pressured by the persistence of bottlenecks, the
recovery of demand, and the high levels of food and
energy prices. In this environment, a large number of
central banks continued raising their reference rates,
while expectations of a faster reduction of monetary
stimulus worldwide have continued to increase.
Financial conditions tightened further, interest rates
rose and the dollar strengthened, in a context of risk
aversion. Among global risks to growth, those
associated with the evolution of the pandemic, the
persistence of inflationary pressures, the escalation
of geopolitical tensions, and the further adjustments
of economic, monetary and financial conditions stand
out.

1 Expressed as a seasonally adjusted quarterly annualized rate,
US GDP grew at a rate of -1.5% during the first quarter of 2022.


**Global: Purchasing Managers’ Index:**

**Production Component**

Diffusion index, s. a.

65

60

55

50

45

40

35 Manufacturing

Manufacturing (excl. China)

30 Services

Services (excl. China)

25 May

20

2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022

s. a. / Seasonally adjusted figures.
Source: IHS Markit.

In the United States, after having contracted during
the first quarter of the year at a seasonally adjusted
quarterly rate of 0.4%, available indicators suggest
that economic activity registered a moderate

1

recovery during the second quarter (Chart 2).

Although economic activity has been supported by
consumption and by a lower negative contribution of
net exports, investment in machinery and equipment
has moderated and residential investment has
weakened. Even though private consumption

appears to have continued contributing positively to
growth during the second quarter, it faces greater
risks due to tighter financial conditions and weaker
consumer confidence.

US industrial production moderated its pace of
expansion by growing at a monthly rate of 0.2% in
May, after having grown 1.4% in April. This
weakening reflected a lower growth in gas and
electricity generation activities, as well as a slight
contraction of manufacturing activity. In contrast,
mining recovered at a faster rate, supported by oil
and gas drilling and production. The Manufacturing
Purchasing Managers' Index suggests that the
sector's expansion will continue facing supply
shortages and higher production costs.

10

|Chart 1 Global: Purchasing Managers’ Index: Production Component  Diffusion index, s. a.|Col2|
|---|---|
|||
|Manufacturing Manufacturing (excl. China) Services Services (excl. China)|May|


-----

**Chart 2**

**US Real GDP and Components**

Quarterly percentage rate and contribution in

percentage points, s. a.


10

5

0

-5

-10

-15


50

45

40

35

30

25

20

15

10

5

0


s. a. / Seasonally adjusted figures.
Note: The shaded area refers to Blue Chip Economic indicators of June
2022.
Source: BEA, and Blue Chip Economic Indicators of June 2022.

The US labor market continued to improve in May,
thus remaining under tight conditions. The non-farm
payroll increased by 390 thousand jobs in May, after
having grown by 436 thousand jobs in April. This
mainly reflected growth of leisure, hospitality,
education and professional services. In May, the
unemployment rate remained at 3.6% for a third
consecutive month, in a context in which labor
participation increased. The vacancy rate remains
high and wage growth remains at high levels.

In the euro area, available indicators suggest that
economic activity has continued growing at a slow
rate throughout the second quarter of 2022, after
having expanded at a seasonally adjusted quarterly
rate of 0.6% in the first quarter.[2] The weakness of
economic activity continued being attributed to
bottlenecks, the increase in energy and food prices,
and the impact of Russia and Ukraine’s military
conflict on trade and production. The unemployment
rate remained unchanged in April (as compared to
the previous month), at a level of 6.8%. The latest
Purchasing Managers' Indices point to a continued
recovery in services in light of the easing of
restrictions to deal with COVID-19 cases, on the one
hand, and, to a slower pace of growth of
manufacturing activity stemming from the lower
growth of China and the conflict between Russia and
Ukraine, on the other.

2 In annualized terms, euro area GDP registered a quarter-onquarter seasonally adjusted variation of 2.5% during the first
quarter of 2022.
3 In annualized terms, Japan’s GDP registered a quarter-onquarter seasonally adjusted variation of -0.5 during the first quarter
of 2022.


In Japan, available information suggests a rebound
of economic activity during the second quarter of
2022, after having contracted at a seasonally
adjusted quarterly rate of -0.1% during the first
quarter.[3] This was due to the growth of domestic
demand, mainly attributed to higher household
consumption and business investment. External
demand remained weak, as a result of disruptions in
supply chains. In this environment, the

unemployment rate decreased from 2.6% in March
to 2.5% in April. Purchasing Managers' Indices
suggest a rebound in services and a slower pace of
expansion in the manufacturing sector due to the
continued disruptions in production chains.

In the main emerging economies, available indicators
suggest a slower pace of growth during the second
quarter of the year, although with a marked
heterogeneity across countries and regions,

depending on the relevance of commodities in their
external sector, as well as on their level of exposure
to distortions in supply chains and the evolution of the
pandemic. In China, available indicators point to a
strong contraction during the second quarter as a
result of mobility restrictions determined by the
country's zero-COVID policy.[4] While these

restrictions were mostly lifted at the beginning of
June, several cities reinstated some of them by midmonth. In other emerging economies, Purchasing
Managers' Indices remain in expansion territory,
suggesting that the weakening of China has not
significantly affected growth in other regions. In
Emerging Europe, available indicators suggest a
sharp contraction in Russia as a result of the
geopolitical conflict and the economic sanctions
imposed on that country.

International commodity prices registered a mixed
behavior since Mexico's previous monetary policy
decision, remaining at high levels and exhibiting
volatility. Oil prices rose during most of the period,
driven by factors such as the European Union's
agreement to phase out Russian oil imports,
expectations of a recovery of oil demand in China,
and the beginning of the summer season in the
United States. These factors succeeded in largely
offsetting the downward pressures generated by the
Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries
and allied countries (OPEC+) decision to increase
their production targets in July and August. In the

4 In annualized terms, China’s GDP grew at a rate of 4.8% during
the first quarter of 2022.

11


-----

United States, the price of natural gas increased due
to the rise in exports and the increased demand by
electricity generators at the beginning of summer. In
the European market, natural gas prices trended
downwards during most of May, although in
subsequent weeks they increased due to

interruptions in natural gas pipeline supply from
Russia. Industrial metal prices overall trended
upwards during the second half of May and early
June in response to the partial easing of lockdown
measures to contain COVID-19 cases in China.
However, the recent resurgence of COVID-19 cases
in cities such as Beijing and Shanghai has renewed
the risks for economic recovery in that country and
exerted downward pressure on the prices of these
metals. Grain prices have decreased since Mexico's
previous monetary policy decision due to diplomatic
efforts to restore food and fertilizer shipping routes
from Ukraine and Russia, as well as lingering
concerns about global economic slowdown leading
to a lower demand for grains. Nevertheless, these
prices remain at relatively high levels due to
uncertainty stemming from the military conflict
between Russia and Ukraine.

**A.1.2. Monetary policy and international financial**
**markets**

Inflation continued increasing worldwide, reaching its
highest levels in four decades in some cases, driven
by greater and worsening inflationary pressures,
among which those related to energy and food prices
stand out. Inflation developments are associated with
the recovery of demand and persistent bottlenecks,
along with the greater pressures on commodity
prices partly stemming from the invasion of Ukraine.

In most major advanced economies, headline and
core inflation continued increasing (Chart 3),
remaining above their central banks’ targets. In the
United States, after having declined in April to a level
of 8.3%, CPI’s annual rate of change rose to 8.6% in
May, reflecting an increase in food inflation from 9.4
to 10.1% and in energy inflation from 30.3 to 34.6%.
Core inflation decreased marginally from 6.2 to 6.0%.
Short-term inflation expectations for the main
advanced economies drawn from surveys continued
being revised upwards, while long-term ones have
remained relatively stable.


**Chart 3**

**Selected Advanced Economies:**

**Headline Inflation**

Annual percentage change

9 United States PCE 1/

8 United States CPI

Japan 2/

7

Euro area

6 United Kingdom

5 Canada

4

3

2

1

0

-1

-2 May

April

-3 April

-4

2005 2009 2013 2017 2021

1/ The personal consumption expenditure deflator is used.
2/ Excludes fresh food. This series does not exclude the effect of the
increase in the consumption tax in May 2014 and October 2019 nor the
effect of the free daycare and preschool program in October 2019.
Source: Bureau of Economic Analysis, Bureau of Labor Statistics, Eurostat,
Bank of Japan, Statistics Canada, Office of National Statistics.

Headline inflation continued rising in most of the main
emerging economies, remaining above their central
banks' targets, although in some cases it moderated
slightly. This increase has resulted from an increase
in energy and food prices as well as in the core
component, in a context of high commodity prices
and persistent disruptions in supply chains due to the
geopolitical conflict in Eastern Europe and the strict
lockdown measures imposed in China.

In this context, the central banks of most major
advanced economies have continued reducing their
monetary stimulus, with some even accelerating the
process. The central banks of the United States, the
United Kingdom, Canada, Australia, New Zealand
and South Korea continued raising their interest
rates. In the United States and Australia, reference
rates were raised more than in previous decisions.
The Swiss central bank surprised markets by
increasing its rate by 50 basis points for the first time
since 2007. The European Central Bank stated that
it intends to raise its rates in its July and September
meetings. Regarding asset purchase programs,
most central banks continued gradually reducing
their asset holdings. The European Central Bank
announced that it will conclude its asset purchase
program on July 1, while the Bank of Japan
continued purchasing certain assets. The greater
inflationary pressures worldwide and the upward
risks to inflation have led to expectations of an
accelerated reduction of monetary stimulus by the
central banks of the main advanced economies
through interest rate increases and a reduction in the

12


-----

size of their balance sheets. Thus, the expected
trajectories for reference interest rates drawn from
financial instruments foresee once again a faster
pace of increases in most major advanced
economies than previously expected (Chart 4).

**Chart 4**

**Reference Rates and Trajectories**

**Implied in OIS Curves[1/]**

Percent


4.0% **― US Federal Reserve 2/**

**― Bank of England**
**― Bank of Japan**

**― European Central Bank deposit rate**

3.0% **― OIS implicit trajectory 17 Jun 2022**

**--- OIS implicit trajectory 06 May 2022**

2.0%

1.0%

0.0%

End of End of End of

-1.0% 2020 2021 2022

2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023

|%|― US Federal Reserve 2/ ―|Col3|Col4|Col5|Col6|Col7|Col8|Col9|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
||― Bank of England ― Bank of Japan ― European Central Bank depo ― OIS implicit trajectory 17 Jun --- OIS implicit trajectory 06 May|sit rate 2022 2022||||Forecasts|||
||||||||||
||||||||||
||||||||||


End of
2023


1/ OIS: Fixed floating interest rate swap where the fixed interest rate is
associated to the effective overnight reference rate.
2/ For the observed reference rate of the US, the average interest rate of
the target range of the federal funds rate (1.50% - 1.75%) is used.
Source: Banco de México with data from Bloomberg,

Among the recent monetary policy decisions of the main
advanced economies’ central banks, the following stand
out:

i) At its June meeting, the Federal Reserve raised

the target range for the federal funds rate by 75
basis points, the greatest increase since 1994, to
1.50-1.75%, and reiterated that it anticipates
successive increases in the target rate would be
appropriate. In this regard, the chairman pointed
out that the pace of said adjustments will continue
to depend on incoming data and the evolution of
the economic outlook. He added that a 75-basis
point increase is unusually large, that adjustments
of this magnitude are not expected to be common,
although he stated that a 50 or 75 basis point
increase seems more likely at their next meeting.
Regarding the Federal Reserve's balance sheet,
the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC)
announced it will continue reducing its holdings of
Treasury securities, agency debt, and mortgagebacked securities, as outlined in the Plans to
Reduce the Size of the Federal Reserve's
Balance Sheet published in May. Meanwhile, the
FOMC's median for headline inflation

expectations was revised upwards for 2022, from
4.3 in March to 5.2% in June, and downwards for
2023, from 2.7 to 2.6%, and for 2024, from 2.3 to
2.2%. As for core inflation, medians were revised


upward, from 4.1 to 4.3% for 2022 and from 2.6 to
2.7% for 2023, while for 2024 it remained
unchanged at 2.3%. The medians for growth
expectations were revised downward to 1.7% in
2022 and 2023 and to 1.9% in 2024, while
unemployment expectations were revised upward
for all years, rising from 3.7% in 2022 to 4.1% in
2024. As for expectations regarding the reference
interest rate, the medians increased from 1.9 to
3.4% for 2022, from 2.8 to 3.8% for 2023, from 2.8
to 3.4% for 2024, and from 2.4 to 2.5% for the long
term. In this context, the expected trajectory for
the federal funds rate implied by financial
instruments was revised upwards once again
during the reported period and reflects, according
the latest available information, an increase in the
interest rate at the end of 2022 similar to that
expected in June by the median of the
Committee's expectations.

ii) At its June meeting, the European Central Bank

left its refinancing, key lending and key deposit
rates unchanged at 0.0, 0.25 and -0.5%,
respectively. Nevertheless, it announced that the
Governing Council intends to raise these rates by
25 basis points at its July meeting and expects to
increase them again in September, noting that the
magnitude of the upward adjustment will depend
on medium-term inflation expectations, and that,
if the inflation outlook deteriorates, a larger
increase would be appropriate. After September,
it anticipates further gradual and sustained
increases in interest rates, stating that the pace of
adjustment will depend on data and its

assessment on the evolution of inflation in the
medium term. Regarding its Asset Purchase
Program (APP), it announced its conclusion on
July 1, 2022, in line with previous expectations of
concluding asset purchases in the third quarter of
the year. It also mentioned that the Governing
Council intends to continue reinvesting, in full,
principal payments on securities purchased under
the program maturing over an extended period
after the date on which the interest rate increase
begins and for as long as necessary to maintain
ample liquidity conditions and an appropriate
monetary policy stance. Regarding its Pandemic
Emergency Purchase Program (PEPP), it

reiterated its intention to reinvest, at least until the
end of 2024, the principal payments on maturing
securities. It also mentioned that throughout its
monetary policy normalization process, the
Governing Council will maintain optionality, data
dependence, gradualism, and flexibility in the
conduction of monetary policy. To address
potential fragmentation risks that could contribute

13


-----

to an uneven transmission of monetary policy
normalization across jurisdictions within the
monetary union, in a subsequent unscheduled
meeting on June 15, the Council decided that it
will apply flexibility in reinvesting overdue
reimbursements of the PEPP portfolio and will
request to accelerate the creation of a new antifragmentation tool for the European market.

iii) At its June meeting, the Bank of Japan left its

reference rate unchanged at -0.1% and its longterm interest rate target (indexed to its 10-year
bond) at around 0%. It restated that it expects
interest rates to remain at their current levels or
even lower. As part of its curve control strategy, it
also clarified that it will offer to buy 10-year
government bonds at 0.25% every business day
through fixed-rate purchase operations, unless it
is highly likely that no bids are received. It also left
its guidelines regarding purchases of assets other
than government bonds unchanged.

Since Mexico’s previous monetary policy decision, a
large number of central banks in major emerging
economies continued raising their reference interest
rates. These included Mexico, Chile, Peru, Brazil,
Hungary, the Czech Republic, Poland, Israel, India
and South Africa. The Philippines increased its
interest rate for the first time since the beginning of
the pandemic, and Ukraine announced its first
increase since the beginning of the conflict with
Russia, raising it by 150 basis points to 25.0%. It is
worth noting that the Russian central bank continued
lowering its interest rate, announcing a 300-basis
point and an additional 150-basis point cut to 9.5%.
China announced a 15-basis point cut in its 5-year
loan prime rate (LPR) in May.

International financial markets recently registered
greater volatility, after it had decreased during most
of May and early June. This occurred in an
environment in which, despite higher optimism due
to the decrease in COVID-19 cases and the easing
of mobility restrictions in China, concerns regarding
the high levels of inflation and uncertainty about the
rate of withdrawal of monetary stimulus by major
advanced economies and its impact on economic
activity, as well as the evolution of geopolitical
tensions and the pandemic, continued. In this
context, financial conditions tightened further during
the period, although with some heterogeneity across
countries and asset classes (Chart 5). In particular,
stock markets in most main advanced and emerging
economies exhibited a negative behavior since
Mexico’s previous monetary policy decision, given
that, despite the gains registered in the first half of


the period, indices have fallen in recent weeks. In
foreign exchange markets, after having weakened
during the second half of May against most
currencies of advanced economies, the US dollar
resumed its appreciation trend in response to
expectations regarding the withdrawal of monetary
stimulus and the recent inflation figures in the United
States. The currencies of emerging economies
overall appreciated in May, and have partially
reversed this trend in recent weeks. In most major
advanced economies, short- and long-term

government bond interest rates increased due to
expectations of a continued withdrawal of monetary
stimulus (Chart 6). In most emerging economies,
long-term interest rates exhibited a mixed behavior
(Chart 7). In this context, since Mexico's previous
monetary policy decision, there have been capital
outflows from emerging economies in both fixed
income and equity markets, although this trend
reversed recently in the equity markets of some
Asian and Latin American economies.

**Chart 5**

**Financial Conditions Index[1/]**

Units Units

106

Financial Conditions Index - United States 105

Financial Conditions Index - Global

104

Financial Conditions Index- Euro area 2/

Financial Conditions Index- Emerging Market Economies 103

102

101

100

99

98

97

96

2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022

1/ The financial conditions index is constructed considering the effect of five
variables on economic activity: the reference interest rate, the 10-year
government bond, the spread of investment-grade bonds over the
government debt bond with equivalent maturity, the ratio of a stock index
with 10-year average earnings per share and the trade-weighted exchange
rate. Emerging economies include Brazil, Chile, China, Czech Republic,
Hungary, India, Indonesia, Israel, Malaysia, Mexico, Philippines, Poland,
Romania, South Korea, South Africa, Thailand, and Turkey. The global
sample includes G10 countries and emerging economies.
2/ In the case of emerging economies, the financial conditions index
considers the CDS as the credit spread component and includes the debtweighted exchange rate. The vertical black line indicates the last scheduled
meeting of Banco de México's Monetary Policy Committee.
Source: Prepared by Banco de México with Bloomberg and Goldman Sachs
data.

14


-----

**Chart 6**

**Change in Selected Financial Indicators from**

**May 6, 2022 to June 17, 2022**

Percent; basis points Percentage, basis points


yield curve behaved similarly to that of other fixed
income markets at a global level, in a period
characterized by greater volatility derived from the
75-basis point adjustment of the Federal Reserve's
target range for the federal funds rate (Chart 8).

**Chart 8**

**Mexican Markets’ Performance**

Percent, MXN/USD and index


30%

20%


150

100


4.5

4.0


10%

0%


United Kingdom


50

0


2.5

2.0


21.8

21.3


-10%

-20%


-50

-100


3.5

3.0


20.8

20.3


1/ The MSCI Emerging Markets Index consists of 24 countries.
2/ DXY: a weighted average estimated by the Intercontinental Exchange
(ICE) of the nominal exchange rate of the main six currencies operated
globally with the following weights: EUR 57.6%, JPY: 13.6%, GBP: 11.9%,
CAD: 9.1%, SEK: 4.2%, and CHF: 3.6%.
Source: Bloomberg and ICE.

**Chart 7**

**Selected Emerging Economies: Financial Assets**

**Performance since May 9, 2022**

Percent, basis points


Range in year Range since last monetary policy decision 09-May-22 17-Jun-22


Source: Prepared by Banco de México.

The Mexican peso fluctuated in a range of one peso
and 6 cents, between 19.53 and 20.59 pesos per
dollar, ending the period with an appreciation of
0.65% (Chart 9). This occurred in a context in which
both spot and future trading conditions slightly
deteriorated.

**Chart 9**

**Mexican Peso Exchange Rate with Moving**


10.0

9.5

9.0

8.5

8.0

7.5

7.0


59,000

57,000

55,000

53,000

51,000

49,000

47,000


19.8

19.3


M Bond


Inflation-indexed bonds


Note: An upward adjustment indicates currency appreciation. Interest rates Note: A positive performance in currencies, indicates appreciation. Interest rates correspond to swap rates
correspond to swap rates at th3 specified terms, except for Hungary, where
government securities with 3-year maturities were used as a reference. For
the Philippines, a 2-year swap rate was used, and for Russia, a 2-year and
3-year swap rate was used.
Source: Bloomberg.

**A.2. Current situation of the Mexican economy**

**A.2.1. Mexican markets**

In the international context described above, in
domestic financial markets, the exchange rate
maintained an orderly behavior, while short- and
medium-term interest rates increased. Thus, the

|and 6 Region Country Currencies Equity Interest Interest CDS dollar, markets rates 2Y rates 10Y 0.65% Mexico 0.65% -2.12% 66 -7 14 Brazil 0.14% -3.32% 24 16 38 both Latin Chile -0.79% 6.81% -4 -29 0 deteri America Colombia 4.62% -3.80% 73 66 -13 Peru 2.68% -3.27% -11 -36 -7 Russia 19.92% -0.52% -395 -380 5,347 Me Poland 0.37% -2.18% 146 91 13 Emerging Turkey -14.91% 2.58% 340 -343 135 Europe Czech Republic 0.91% -0.27% 90 79 -4 Hungary -5.01% -4.68% 122 111 39 25.50 China 0.63% 10.36% -5 1 -2 25.00 24.50 Malaysia -0.35% -6.97% -25 -14 -2 24.00 India -0.67% -5.27% 23 -4 8 23.50 Asia 23.00 Philippines -3.00% -6.30% 8 30 -6 22.50 Thailand -1.96% -2.82% -1 -36 0 22.00 21.50 Indonesia -1.89% 0.96% -2 23 -2 21.00 20.50 Africa South Africa 1.00% -0.47% 17 15 13 20.00 19.50 oNteot:e :A An p ouspitivwe aperrdfo ramdanjuces itnm cuerrnent ciinesd, iincdaictaetess acpuprrerceianticony. Iantperpesrte ractieas tcioornre.s pIonntde troe sswta pr aratteess 19.00 orrespond to swap rates at th3 specified terms, except for Hungary, where 18.50 18.00 overnment securities with 3-year maturities were used as a reference. For 17.50 17.00|cents, between 19.53 and 20.59 pesos ending the period with an appreciation (Chart 9). This occurred in a context in w spot and future trading conditions slig orated. Chart 9 xican Peso Exchange Rate with Moving Averages MXN/USD Peso mexicano Promedio móvil de 100 días Promedio móvil de 50 días|
|---|---|


Source: Prepared by Banco de México.

The yield curve on government securities flattened,
in line with the behavior of other yield curves
worldwide (Chart 10), with increases of up to 73 basis
points in short- and medium-term interest rates and
decreases of up to 22 basis points in longer-term
ones, in line with expectations of a more restrictive
monetary policy stance by Banco de México. The

15


25.50
25.00
24.50
24.00
23.50
23.00
22.50
22.00
21.50
21.00
20.50
20.00
19.50
19.00
18.50
18.00
17.50
17.00


E  F  M  A  M  J  J   A  S  O  N  D  E  F  M  A  M  J  J  A  S  O  N  D  E  F  M  A M  J


2020 2021 2022


-----

yield curve on real interest rate instruments also
registered decreases of up to 59 basis points for the
short term and up to 21 basis points for the long term.
In this context, breakeven inflation registered
movements of between -21 and 69 basis points for
all terms (Chart 11). These adjustments took place in
an environment in which trading conditions

deteriorated during the period covering the monetary
policy decision.

**Chart 10**

**Nominal Yield Curve of Government Securities**

Percent, basis points

10.00 105

9.50 90

9.00 75

8.50 60

8.00 45

7.50 30

7.00 15

6.50 0

6.00 -15

5.50 -30

5.00 -45

09-may-22 17-jun-22 Cambio (09-may-22 al 17-jun-22)

Rango de operación en el periodo

Note: The chart does not include bonds maturing in December 2021 and
June 2022. CETES with similar maturities are considered.
Source: PIP.

Regarding expectations for the trajectory of the
monetary policy reference rate, information implied
by the Interbank Equilibrium Interest Rate (TIIE, for
its Spanish acronym) swaps curve incorporates an
increase of 93 basis points for the June decision and
an additional 76 basis points for the August decision,
while for the end of 2022 it points to a reference rate
close to 10.37% (Chart 12). Most forecasters
surveyed by Citibanamex anticipate the reference
rate to increase by 75 basis points to 7.75% in the
June decision, while for the end of 2022 a rate of
9.00% is expected.


**Chart 11**

**Breakeven Inflation in Government Securities’**

**Yields**

Basis points

550

525

500

475

450

425

400

375

350

325

300 3-year

10-year

275 20-year

250 30-year

3-year average

225 10-year average

200 20-year average

30-year average

175

150

J      M M       J        S       N       J       M       M

2021                                                         2022

Source: PIP.

**Chart 12**

**Interbank Funding Rate Implied in TIIE Swaps**

Percent

10.75

Banxico overnight rate-reference rate
Implied overnight interest rate in funding TIIE futures contracts

9.75 Implied overnight interest rate in the government bond yield curve

Implied interest rate in TIIE swaps for 06/17/22
Implied interest rate in TIIE swaps for 05/09/22

8.75

7.75

6.75

5.75

4.75

3.75

J   M   M    J    S    N    J M   M    J    S    N

2021                       2022

Source: Prepared by Banco de México with Bloomberg data.

**A.2.2. Economic activity in Mexico**

After having reactivated during the first quarter of
2022, economic activity is expected to have
continued recovering in the second quarter (Chart
13). However, high uncertainty regarding the future
evolution of the pandemic, disruptions in global
supply chains, and the global economic environment
prevails.

Regarding external demand, in April the value of
automotive exports fell at the margin, while that of the
rest of the manufacturing exports continued

16


-----

increasing (Chart 14).[5] By destination, manufacturing
exports to the United States stagnated, while
shipments to the rest of the world contracted.

**Chart 13**

**Gross Domestic Product**

Quarterly percentage change, s. a.

6

13.62

4

2

0

-2

-4

-17.84

-6 I Trim.

I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV I

2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022

s. a. / Seasonally adjusted figures.
Source: Mexico’s System on National Accounts (SCNM, for its Spanish
acronym), INEGI.

**Chart 14**

**Total Manufacturing Exports**

Indices 2013 = 100, s.a.

200

Total

180 Automotive

Non-automotive

160

140

120

100

80

60

15.3 April

40

J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A

2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022

s. a. / Seasonally adjusted series and trend series based on data in nominal
US dollars. The former is represented by a solid line and the latter by a
dotted line
Source: Prepared by Banco de México with data from the Tax
Administration Service (SAT, for its Spanish acronym), the Ministry of the
Economy (SE, for its Spanish acronym), Banco de México, the National
Institute of Statistics and Geography (INEGI, for its Spanish acronym).
Mexico’s Merchandise Trade Balance, and the National System of
Statistical and Geographical Information (SNIEG, for its Spanish acronym),
Information of national interest.

On the domestic demand side, based on its monthly
indicator, private consumption continued showing
dynamism in March, accumulating nine months with
increases at the margin and being above is February
2020 level. The consumption of both goods and
services trended upwards. Meanwhile, in March,
gross fixed investment reversed the decline

5 Refers to the value of merchandise exports in current dollars.
This value differs from that reported for goods exports in Mexico’s


observed in the previous month and was above its
pre-pandemic level. Investment spending on

construction partially reversed February's decline,
while machinery and equipment continued trending
upwards.

On the production side, industrial activity continued
reactivating at the beginning of the second quarter of
2022 (Chart 15) mainly as a result of the dynamism
of the manufacturing sector and a moderate
reactivation of the construction sector (Chart 16),
albeit the latter remains at low levels. Despite having
increased at the margin, mining remained sluggish.
Meanwhile, at the end of the first quarter, tertiary
activities halted their recovery. This reflected the
performance at the margin of trade and of
professional, corporate and business support

services, as well as of educational and health
services. In contrast, the rest of the items registered
monthly increases.

**Chart 15**

**Global Indicator of Economic Activity**

Indices 2013 = 100, s. a.

120 140

115 130

110 120

105 110

100 100

95 90

Total IGAE 1/

90 Industrial production 2/ 80

Services IGAE 1/

85 Agricultural and livestock products IGAE 1/ 70

80 60

75 March 50

April

70 40

J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A

2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022

s. a. / Seasonally adjusted and trend series. The former is represented by a
solid line and the latter by a dotted line.
1/ Figures up to March 2022
2/ Figures up to April 2022 from the Monthly Indicator of Industrial Activity.
Source: Mexico’s System of National Accounts (SCNM, for its Spanish
acronym), INEGI.

System of National Accounts, since the latter represents value
added, measured in constant pesos.

17


-----

**Chart 16**

**Industrial Activity[1/]**

Indices 2013 = 100, s. a.


**Chart 17**

**Output Gap Estimates[1/]**

**Excluding Oil Industry[4/ ]**

Potential output percentages, s. a.


130

120

110

100

90

80

70

60


J


A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A

2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022


12

8

4

0

-4

-8

-12

-16

-20

-24


J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M

2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022

s. a. / Calculations based on seasonally adjusted figures.
1/ Output gap estimated with a tail-corrected Hodrick-Prescott filter; see
Banco de México (2009), “Inflation Report, April-June 2009”, p.74.
2/ GDP figures up to the first quarter of 2022 and IGAE up to March 2022.
3/ Output gap confidence interval calculated with a method of unobserved
components.
4/ Excludes both oil and gas extraction, support services for mining, and
petroleum and coal products’ manufacturing.
Source: Prepared by Banco de México with INEGI data.

**Chart 18**

**National and Urban Unemployment Rates**

Percent, s. a.

8.0

National unemployment rate

7.5

Urban unemployment rate

7.0

6.5

6.0

5.5

5.0

4.5

4.0

3.5

3.0

April

2.5

JA J O JA J O JA J O JA J O JA J O JA J O JA J O JA J O JA J O JA J O JA J O JA J O JA J O JA J O JA

2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022

s.a. / Seasonally adjusted series and trend series. The former is
represented by a solid line and the latter by a dotted line.
Source: Prepared by Banco de México with data from ENOE, ETOE (from
April to June 2020), and ENOE new edition (ENOE[N]) from July to date.

18


2013


March


s. a. / Seasonally adjusted and trend series. The former is represented by a
solid line and the latter by a dotted line.

1/ Figures in parenthesis correspond to their share in the total in 2013.

Source: Mexico’s System of National Accounts (SCNM, for its Spanish
acronym), INEGI.

Regarding the cyclical position of the economy, the
estimated output gap reduced its slack at the end of
the first quarter of the year (Chart 17). During the
second quarter, economic slack is expected to have
continued to diminish gradually. In April, several
labor market indicators showed an improvement. In
particular, both national and urban unemployment
rates decreased in relation to March, with the former
being at its lowest recorded level since January 2005
and the latter being at levels similar to those
observed prior to the health emergency (Chart 18).
This took place in a context in which the labor
participation rate and the employment rate among
the working age population grew at the margin.
Meanwhile, with seasonally adjusted figures, the net
creation of IMSS-insured jobs continued trending
upwards in April and May 2022. Finally, in April, unit
labor costs in the manufacturing sector accumulated
three months with monthly increases, remaining
above the levels registered prior to the health
emergency (Chart 19).


-----

**Chart 19**

**Productivity and Unit Labor Costs in the**

**Manufacturing Sector[1/]**
Indices 2013 = 100, s. a.


130

Unit labor costs 158.3

Productivity

120

110

100

90

April

80

J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J A

2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022


s. a. / Seasonally adjusted and trend series. The former is represented by a
solid line and the latter by a dotted line.
1/ Productivity based on hours worked.
Source: Prepared by Banco de México with seasonally adjusted data of the
Monthly Manufacturing Industry Survey and industrial activity indicators of
Mexico’s System of National Accounts (Sistema de Cuentas Nacionales de
México, SCNM), INEGI.

In April 2022, domestic financing to firms continued
moderating its annual rate of contraction in real
terms. Within it, bank credit to firms continued its
gradual recovery, which began in the last quarter of
2021 and has been reflected in increases in the
balance of credit in the last two quarters. This, in a
context in which corporate credit demand continued
recovering, while lending conditions remained tight
compared to those at the beginning of the pandemic,
although these have been easing for smaller firms
since the second half of 2021. Net corporate debt
issuance in the domestic market was negative during
the first four months of this year. As for credit to
households, commercial bank housing portfolios
regained dynamism in March and April. In turn,
outstanding bank consumer credit registered a
positive real annual variation for the fourth
consecutive month, mainly as a result of the
sustained dynamism of payroll credit and credit card
portfolios. This has taken place in a context in which
household demand for credit has been gradually
recovering. Household lending conditions remained
stable, while consumer credit conditions eased
during the first quarter of the year.


Interest rates on bank credit to firms have followed
the dynamics of the overnight interbank interest rate.
During the first quarter of 2022, corporate credit
intermediation margins narrowed, and therefore are
generally at levels lower than those observed prior to
the pandemic. At the same time, mortgage loan
interest rates remained at levels around their
historical lows. Meanwhile, in February 2022 credit
card interest rates registered a level similar to that
observed during the fourth quarter of 2021, while
personal credit rates increased. Regarding portfolio
quality, in April 2022, corporate and housing loan
delinquency rates declined and remained at low
levels. Lastly, consumer portfolio delinquency rates
also declined, remaining at levels lower than those
registered prior to the onset of the pandemic,
although they continue to be high.

**A.2.3. Development of inflation and inflation**
**outlook**

Between April and the first half of June 2022, annual
headline inflation increased and remained at high
levels, going from 7.68 to 7.88% (Chart 20 and Table
1). Inflation continued being pressured by the effects
of the pandemic shocks that have not faded, in
addition to more recent ones associated with the
military conflict between Russia and Ukraine. This
caused core inflation to continue trending upwards
and non-core inflation to remain at high levels and
with a resistance to decline.

**Chart 20**

**Consumer Price Index**

Annual percentage change

14

13 CPI

12 Core

11

10 Non-core

9

8

7

6

5

4

3

2

1

0

-1

-2

-3 F1 June

J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M

2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022

Source: Banco de México and INEGI.

Annual core inflation increased from 7.22 to 7.47%
between April and the first half of June 2022. This
component continued to reflect the pressures
affecting both merchandise and services prices. In
the case of merchandise, its annual inflation
increased from 9.33 to 9.85% during the

19


-----

aforementioned periods (Chart 21), driven by
disruptions in production and distribution chains,
higher international energy and food prices and, in
general, higher production costs. During the same
period, annual food merchandise inflation rose from
10.88 to 11.71%, while non-food merchandise
inflation increased from 7.61 to 7.80% (Chart 22).
Annual service inflation went from 4.83 to 4.77% on
the same dates. High levels of inflation in services,
especially those other than housing and education,
reflect an increase in pent up demand and higher
business operating costs. In this regard, it is worth
noting that increases in energy and food prices have
also exerted pressure on inflation of certain services,
such as transportation and food.

**Chart 21**

**Merchandise and Services Core Price Sub-index**

Annual percentage change

11

Merchandise

10

Services

9

8

7

6

5

4

3

2


Between April and May 2022, annual non-core
inflation shifted from 9.07 to 9.13% (Chart 23 and
Table 1). Within it, annual inflation of agricultural and
livestock products was 14.36 and 14.31% on the
aforementioned dates. Inflation of fruits and
vegetables, as well as of livestock products,
remained at high levels, pressured by the increase in
the price of production inputs, such as fertilizers and
grains, which has further worsened since the
geopolitical conflict. Meanwhile, annual energy
inflation decreased from 5.91 to 5.84% between the
aforementioned periods.

**Chart 23**

**Non-core Price Sub-index**

Annual percentage change

25

20

15

10

5

0

Non-core

-5 Agricultural and livestock products

Energy and government-authorized prices

-10


-15


F1 June


1

0


F1 June


J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M

2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022

Source: Banco de México and INEGI.

Regarding inflation expectations from the survey
conducted by Banco de México among private sector
forecasters, from April to May the median for
headline inflation for the end of 2022 increased from
6.75 to 6.81%, while that for the core component rose
from 6.00 to 6.38%. At the same time, the median of
headline inflation expectations at the end of 2023
was revised upwards from 4.13 to 4.34%, while that
for core inflation was revised from 4.00 to 4.14%. The
median of headline inflation expectations for the
medium term increased from 3.76 to 3.80%, while
that for core inflation remained at 3.70%. Likewise,
the median of headline inflation expectations for the
long term (5 to 8 years) increased from 3.55 to 3.60%
and for core inflation remained stable at 3.50%.
Finally, breakeven inflation exhibited volatility. Within
it, expectations implied by market instruments
continued rising, while the inflation risk premium
remains at elevated levels.

In view of greater-than-anticipated pressures on
inflation, the forecast for headline inflation was
revised upward until the third quarter of 2023 and that
for core inflation was adjusted upward for the entire
horizon, although convergence to the 3% target is

20


J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M

2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022

Source: Banco de México and INEGI.

**Chart 22**

**Merchandise Core Price Sub-index**

Annual percentage change

14

12

10

8

6

4

2

Food, beverages and tobacco Non-food merchandise F1 June

0

J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M

2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022

Source: Banco de México and INEGI.


-----

still expected to be reached in the first quarter of
2024. These projections are subject to risks. On the
upside: i) persistence of core inflation at high levels;
ii) external inflationary pressures associated with the
pandemic; iii) greater pressures on agricultural and
livestock product prices and on energy prices due to
the ongoing geopolitical conflict; iv) exchange rate
depreciation; and v) cost-related pressures. On the
downside: i) a decline in the intensity of the


geopolitical conflict; ii) a better functioning of supply
chains; iii) a greater-than-expected effect from the
negative output gap; and iv) a larger-than-anticipated
effect from the Policy Program to Fight Inflation and
High Prices. The balance of risks for the trajectory of
inflation within the forecast horizon is biased
significantly to the upside.


**Table 1**

**Consumer Price Index and Components**

Annual percentage change

**1st fortnight June**

**Item** **April 2022** **May 2022**
**2022**

**CPI** **7.68** **7.65** **7.88**

**SubyacenteCore** **7.22** **7.28** **7.47**

**Merchandise** **9.33** **9.53** **9.85**

Food, beverages and tobacco 10.88 11.27 11.71

Non-food merchandise 7.61 7.61 7.80

**Services** **4.83** **4.74** **4.77**

Housing 2.76 2.84 2.97

Education (tuitions) 3.18 3.24 3.31

Other services 7.01 6.71 6.64

**No SubyacenteNon-core** **9.07** **8.77** **9.13**

**Agricultural and livestock products** **14.36** **13.08** **14.31**

Fruits and vegetablesFruits abd vegetables 15.84 12.88 13.29

Livestock productsLivestock 13.21 13.24 15.12

**Energy and government-authorized prices Energéticos y Tarifas Aut. por Gobierno** **5.18** **5.44** **5.15**

Energy productsEnergy 5.91 6.30 5.84

Government-authorized pricesTarifas Autorizadas por Gobierno 3.40 3.41 3.51

Source: INEGI.

21


-----

-----

