-----

-----

**FOREWARNING**
This document is provided for the reader’s convenience
only. The translation from the official Spanish version was
made by Banco de México’s staff. Discrepancies may arise
between the original document in Spanish and its English
translation. For this reason, the original Spanish version is
the only official document.


**1. PLACE, DATE AND PARTICIPANTS**

**1.1. Place:** Meeting held by virtual means.

**1.2. Date of Governing Board meeting:** February
9, 2022.

**1.3. Participants:**

Victoria Rodríguez, Governor.
Galia Borja, Deputy Governor.
Irene Espinosa, Deputy Governor.
Gerardo Esquivel, Deputy Governor.
Jonathan Heath, Deputy Governor.
Rogelio Eduardo Ramírez, Secretary of Finance and
Public Credit.
Gabriel Yorio, Undersecretary of Finance and Public
Credit.
Elías Villanueva, Secretary of the Governing Board.

Prior to this meeting, preliminary work by Banco de
México’s staff analyzing the economic and financial
environment as well as the developments in inflation
and the determinants and outlook for inflation, was
conducted and presented to the Governing Board
(see Annex).

**2. ANALYSIS AND RATIONALE BEHIND THE**
**GOVERNING BOARD’S VOTING**

**_International environment_**

**Most members mentioned that world economic**
**activity continued recovering during the fourth**
**quarter of 2021, although at a slower rate and**
**heterogeneously across countries and sectors,**
**due to the evolution of the pandemic and the**
**actions implemented by their health, monetary**
**and fiscal authorities. The majority of members**
**stated that the resurgence of infections led to**
**new restrictions in several countries and that**
**global supply chains remain affected. One**
member recalled that in 2021 the global economy
shifted from a partial shutdown of activities to a
scenario of expansion, with disruptions in the
production processes. Another member pointed out
that some leading indicators suggest that, at the
beginning of 2022, tertiary activities moderated, while


industrial activities recovered gradually, although in
emerging economies said sector stopped expanding.
He/she stated that, according to the latest projections
of the International Monetary Fund, weakness of
economic activity at the beginning of the year might
be attenuated starting from the second quarter, once
the Omicron wave loses strength and economic
activity starts to normalize. He/she noted that some
indices related to back orders, new orders and
delivery times have improved at the margin.

**The majority of members highlighted that the**
**world growth outlook for 2022 has been revised**
**downwards. Some** members stated that this was
due to the expectation of lower fiscal and monetary
stimuli, especially in the United States. One member
added the higher number of infections and the
persistence of disruptions in supply chains. Another
member indicated that these disruptions will possibly
dissipate by the end of the year. Some members
considered that the main risks to the global economy
are those associated with the pandemic. One
member underlined the high inflation levels and their
persistence. **Another** member noted that, in
economies with a fragile and incomplete recovery,
the tightening of monetary conditions represents a
risk to growth, employment, and macroeconomic
stability. Some members pointed out that the
balance of risks for the global economy is biased to
the downside.

**Most members mentioned that world inflation**
**continued** **increasing** **due** **to** **pressures**

**originated by bottlenecks in production, the**
**reallocation of spending towards merchandise,**
**and high commodity prices, in particular of food**
**and energy products. One member stated that**
some of these prices have reached all-time highs and
that they are expected to continue rising, while
**another member mentioned that, based on food and**
energy futures’ markets, these prices are anticipated
to decline slowly within one year. One member
pointed out that disruptions in global value chains
have contributed to the higher prices of industrial
inputs and have reduced their availability, as in the
case of semiconductors. Another member noted that
high inflation could also be the result of wage-related
pressures and high transportation costs. One
member pointed out that sea freight costs are at
unprecedented levels and act as a negative supply
shock, raising costs and generating substitution
effects that generalize the pressures towards other
goods. **Some** members noted that inflation is well
above the targets of most central banks. **One**
member mentioned that, although inflation is
expected to decline during the year, its convergence

1


-----

would be slower as compared to what was foreseen
in December, especially for developed economies.

**Most members stated that short-term inflation**
**expectations** **kept** **increasing** **in** **major**

**economies. One** member indicated that, despite
remaining at levels below those of observed inflation,
inflation expectations have been deteriorating and
the implicit breakeven inflation rate remains high.
**Some** members noted that longer-term inflation
expectations drawn from financial instruments
registered moderate changes. **One** member

considered that inflation remains transitory and will
begin to decline once the pandemic-related

disruptions are resolved. **Another** member

considered that pandemic-related shocks have
turned out to be more profound and longer-lasting
than previously anticipated. He/she delved into how
the amount of slack in advanced economies has
decreased, in view of a solid labor demand and a
slow recovery of labor participation. He/she added
that this could lead to wage-related pressures, which,
along with an upward revision in inflation

expectations, increases the risk of a more persistent
inflationary process. One member listed among risks
to the price formation process the sustainability of
public and private finances, geopolitical tensions,
and emergencies associated with climate change.

**Most members pointed out that faster reductions**
**of** **the** **monetary** **stimuli** **are** **anticipated**

**worldwide. The majority of members mentioned**
**that** **various** **central** **banks** **in** **advanced**

**economies have already started to withdraw their**
**monetary stimuli.** However, **one** member added
that, so far, most of them maintain highly
accommodative policy stances. He/she recalled that
central banks of advanced economies reduced their
policy rates aggressively in 2020, while during 2021
they remained patient and kept rates at historically
low levels. He/she considered that this can be
explained by their diagnosis about inflation not
changing fundamentally. **All members mentioned**
**that, in its latest monetary policy decision, the**
**Federal Reserve announced that it will continue**
**reducing the pace of its asset purchases, and**
**that it will soon increase the target range for the**
**federal funds rate. One** member stated that the
balance sheet reduction could begin in the middle of
this year. Most members added that the market is
**anticipating the first increase to the target range**
**in March. One** member pointed out that the pace
and the speed of such increments could exceed
those originally estimated. Another member noted
that, given the economy’s strength and the high
levels of inflation, the Federal Reserve’s current


monetary cycle is expected to be faster than the
previous one. One member mentioned that the
Federal Reserve has been cautious about its
communication and has reiterated that the

adjustment will be gradual, which implies that it will
seek to avoid surprising the markets. **Another**
member pointed out that although the decisions of
that central bank have been well communicated,
orderly and predictable, currently there is less
guidance that allows foreknowledge of the magnitude
and pace of the cycle. Some members underlined
that the Bank of England once again increased its
reference rate and that the European Central Bank is
preparing to tighten its monetary policy stance. One
member added that the Bank of Canada is also
preparing to do so.

**Most members noted that the central banks of**
**various emerging market economies continued**
**increasing their reference rates. One member**
pointed out that in their latest meetings they did so at
an accelerated pace. **Another member stated that**
many economies are expected to increase their
reference rates to maintain financial stability and to
avoid significant exchange rate depreciations. **One**
member added that only the People’s Bank of China
will maintain a more accommodative policy stance,
due to a more marked moderation of its economic
activity, the instability in its real estate sector, and the
high levels of debt of its provinces.

**Most members highlighted that interest rates for**
**all terms have increased worldwide. Some**
members noted that most economies exhibited a
flattening of their yield curve. One member indicated
that additional increments in interest rates for
different terms are expected throughout the year.
**Most members pointed out that stock markets in**
**advanced economies registered losses. One**
member stated that the technology sector has been
especially sensitive to the new narrative of the central
banks. Another member added that risk premia have
increased. Some members noted that stock markets
in emerging economies registered gains, in part, due
to the undervaluation they registered during the
previous months. Some members underlined that
the currencies in some of these economies
appreciated, especially in Latin America. They
mentioned that capital inflows towards equity assets
continue, while capital flows directed towards fixedrate instruments registered moderate outflows.
**Some members indicated that international financial**
markets registered volatility, driven by expectations
of less accommodative monetary policy stances.
**One member stated that the higher number of**

2


-----

infections and the high valuation of certain financial
assets also contributed to the above.

**Most** **members** **considered** **that** **a** **tighter**

**monetary policy stance in advanced economies**
**poses risks to financial markets. Some members**
emphasized the risks to capital flows, fixed-income
assets, and currencies of emerging market

economies. **Some** members mentioned that there
does not seem to be a consensus as to the pace and
magnitude of the withdrawal of monetary stimulus by
the Federal Reserve, which could continue exerting
pressure on markets. **One** member added that the
materialization of some geopolitical risks could cause
a reallocation of portfolios at the global level.
**Another** member pointed out that the balance of
risks to financial stability has deteriorated.

**_Economic activity in Mexico_**

**All members highlighted that, based on the latest**
**information,** **economic** **activity** **contracted**

**slightly during the fourth quarter of 2021. Most**
**members mentioned that said contraction mainly**
**derived from a fall in the services sector. One**
member underlined the decline in mobility caused by
the contagion rate. Most members pointed out that
**the recovery remains heterogeneous across**
**sectors. One** member added that the economic
weakness is reflected in the high percentage of
sectors that have still not recovered their prepandemic levels.

**On the supply side, most members highlighted**
**the weakness of industrial production. The**
**majority** **of** **members** **pointed** **out** **that**

**construction exhibits a deficient performance**
**and that manufacturing remains weak. One**
member stated that the latter have been mainly
supported by the automotive industry, and that a
modest progress in the resolution of shortage
problems in this sector is expected this year. He/she
noted that it is estimated that the shortage of
semiconductors may have affected GDP growth in
2021 by approximately 1.3 percentage points.
He/she underlined the fall in electricity generation
and the weakness of mining. **Some** members
mentioned that services continue to be affected by
the new regulation on labor outsourcing. **Some**
members mentioned the mixed behavior observed
within services. **One** member added that a greater
setback in temporary accommodation and food
preparation activities has been observed, together
with a higher dynamism in trade, while professional,
corporate and business support services continue
registering a significant negative contribution.


**On the demand side, most members stated that**
**exports performed better towards the last quarter**
**of 2021. One** member added that non-automotive
exports continue recovering and that automotive
exports show an incipient rebound. Another member
pointed out that, in general, exports have exceeded
their levels registered prior to 2020, driven by the US
economy’s recovery. However, **one** member noted
that automotive exports remain affected by supply
restrictions. **Most** **members** **indicated** **that**

**consumption continues recovering gradually.**
**One** member stated that its evolution has mainly
been concentrated in imported goods. Another
member added that private consumption has still not
reached its pre-pandemic levels. One member
pointed out that, although sales reported by the
National Retailers Association of Mexico (ANTAD, for
its Spanish acronym) continue expanding, it has
been at an increasingly slower rate. He/she added
that consumer confidence has declined for two
consecutive months, although it still remains at high
levels. He/she also mentioned that, despite the fact
that the wage bill has continued growing, the average
monthly income remains stagnated. He/she argued
that remittances have registered the best

performance of the last 18 years, although significant
challenges are anticipated in the future, given the
lower levels of economic growth in the United States,
the decreased fiscal stimuli, and the level of
employment of Mexican migrants in said country that
has already surpassed its pre-pandemic levels. Most
**members** **highlighted** **that** **investment** **has**

**contracted. One** member pointed out that it has
resumed its decreasing trend observed since 2018.
**Another** member pointed out that it has remained
stagnant since March 2021.

**Some** members underlined that certain labor
indicators remain deteriorated. They noted that
unemployment and underemployment rates are still
above pre-pandemic levels. **One member argued**
that, although formal employment has already
recovered and total employment is close to its prepandemic level, public policy should strive to attain
the employment levels that would have been
observed if the pandemic had not taken place.
He/she indicated that some estimates place that gap
at around one million formal jobs.

**Most** **members** **agreed** **that** **ample** **slack**

**conditions persisted. Some** members noted
significant differences across sectors. One member
underlined that GDP’s deviation from its prepandemic trend suggests that the output gap could
be above 10%. **Another member highlighted the**
need to address the challenges in potential GDP

3


-----

measurement to have a better comprehension of
slack conditions and of demand-related inflationary
pressures. Looking ahead, some members indicated
that slack conditions are expected to remain ample.
**One** member added that significant differences by
sector and gender are expected to persist.

**Some members** mentioned that growth expectations
for 2022 have been revised downwards. **One**
member pointed out that the above responds to the
lower growth observed during the second half of
2021, which could extend to the first quarter of 2022.
**Another member underlined that economic recovery**
shows signs of sluggishness and fragility. One
member forewarned about the risk of an even greater
economic downturn.

**_Inflation in Mexico_**

**Most members highlighted that the rise in**
**inflation is a generalized phenomenon and that**
**various measures of trend inflation show**
**increases. One** member pointed out that, despite
the decrease of inflation in January, there is a greater
number of CPI items whose prices increased at rates
above 6%. Another member mentioned that the
arguments of price increases being due to seasonal
factors or comparison base effects are no longer
valid. One member reiterated that inflation in Mexico
is being affected by a global phenomenon, whose
origins lie in pandemic-related factors. **Some**
members pointed out that inflation remains at levels
very much above the 3% target. **Some** members
mentioned that by the end of 2021 it reached levels
unseen in two decades. One member underlined that
Mexico's inflation gap is high compared to a broad
group of emerging countries. **Another** member
warned that CPI simulations by income decile show
that inflation is markedly higher in lower-income
households.

**Most members mentioned that, from November**
**to January headline inflation decreased mainly**
**due to the deceleration of the non-core**
**component. Some** members noted that said
deceleration is largely explained by the reduction in
the inflation of energy and agricultural and livestock
products’ prices. One member highlighted, however,
that the non-core component has posted double-digit
annual increases. He/she said that this reflects the
high levels of both energy and agricultural and
livestock product prices. **Another** member

mentioned that, in general, pressures on food prices
have increased, with a larger number of them
registering double-digit annual variations. He/she
added that this has occurred despite the fact that the
exchange rate and the international prices of food


commodities have exhibited a better performance,
which suggests that there is a significant lag between
these variables and food prices in Mexico, which
makes these pressures recede slowly and thus they
may be synchronized with new shocks. Finally, one
member pointed out that given the high volatility
levels and the random behavior of the non-core
component, the observed decline cannot be taken as
a permanent improvement given the current
inflationary pressures.

**All members mentioned that core inflation**
**continued to increase. Some members highlighted**
that it has risen in each of the last 14 months. One
member added that this reflects the persistence of
the shocks that have affected it. Another noted that
in January this component reached a level unseen in
20 years. **One member added that it reached a**
historical high since the inflation-targeting scheme
was adopted. **Another** member expressed his/her
concern over the path of this component as it signals
headline inflation’s trajectory in the medium term.
He/she underlined that in the last five monetary
policy decisions, core inflation has been at levels
higher than anticipated. **The majority of members**
**pointed out that within the core component, both**
**merchandise and services inflation increased.**
**Some** members indicated that, regarding core
inflation, the proportion of items with price increases
above 5% continued trending upwards, reaching
record levels of 80%. **One** member indicated that,
although part of the initial increase in merchandise
inflation was due to changes in the relative prices of
merchandise with respect to services, the

concurrence of additional shocks and their

persistence have generated a high inertia in this
component. **Another** member stated that the
pressures that continue to be observed within food
merchandise are associated with the behavior of
prices of products derived from soybeans, corn and
wheat. He/she underlined that price variations in nonfood merchandise prices are also relevant and that
they have taken place along with recent upward
variations in the prices of education services, and
more persistently, in those of food services. **One**
member mentioned that services inflation has
followed an upward trend as a result of the reopening
of activities, the increase in their demand, and
vaccinations. He/she noted that inflation of services
excluding housing and education exceeded 6% in
January. **Another member pointed out that, unlike**
other countries, core inflation in Mexico includes food
merchandise, which tends to be volatile and highly
susceptible to supply shocks. Therefore, he/she
suggested focusing on the alternative core index
Banco de México has used in other occasions, which

4


-----

includes merchandise and services, but excludes
food merchandise. Regarding this index, he/she
highlighted that: i) its annual inflation rate is 100 basis
points below that of traditional core inflation; ii) it has
remained more stable in recent months, while the
traditional one has increased; and iii) pressures at
the margin for this index decreased significantly in
January, when annualized monthly inflation was
close to its historical average.

**All** **members** **mentioned** **that** **inflation**

**expectations for 2022 and 2023 increased again.**
**Most members noted that medium- and long-term**
**expectations remained stable, although** **some**
members pointed out that at levels above 3%. One
mentioned that expectations for the next twelve
months have remained more stable and declined
recently, while medium-term expectations also
improved at the margin. Nevertheless, he/she
pointed out that expectations for the short and
medium terms remain at high levels, above those
observed in other inflationary periods. He/she
highlighted the current discrepancy between

analysts’ inflation expectations and Banco de
México's forecasts for 2023. **Another** member
mentioned that the deterioration of inflation

expectations increases the risk of them becoming
unanchored. Meanwhile, **one member pointed out**
that short-term inflation expectations have not
stopped increasing despite the sequence of interest
rate increases. Most members **stated that inflation**
**expectations** **derived** **from** **market-based**

**instruments continued trending upwards.** **One**
member added that although the ten-year inflation
risk premium apparently is decreasing, it remains at
levels similar to those recorded in stress episodes.
**Another member underlined that the higher levels of**
inflation risk premia implicit in market instruments
reflect a greater risk of long-term expectations
becoming unanchored. However, one member noted
that expectations drawn from market instruments for
the 6-10 year average stood at 3.07% in January.
He/she mentioned that the contrast between shortand long-term expectations suggests that analysts
and markets foresee that the current inflationary
pressures will eventually ease.

**Most members pointed out that forecasts for**
**headline and core inflation increased again.** **One**
member mentioned that they were adjusted upwards
for the next five quarters. Some members added that
their annual measures are expected to converge to
the 3% target by the end of the forecast horizon. One
member stated that the forecasts have repeatedly
undershot when anticipating the trajectory of inflation
given the continuous appearance of unexpected


shocks. Thus, he/she pointed out that the

convergence of the core component will depend on
the absence of additional shocks, which he/she
considered is a strong assumption given the high
levels of oil, commodities, sea freight and food
prices. He/she mentioned that the shocks that have
affected core inflation are expected to continue at
least until the second half of 2022, and that its
components most susceptible to shocks related to
energy prices and the exchange rate will remain
under pressure. Another member noted that inflation
forecasts have continued to be revised upwards
since the current tightening cycle began in June
2021. He/she indicated that core inflation is expected
to reach its highest point in the first quarter of 2022,
as the inflationary shocks that were observed in the
same period of the previous year begin to fade.
He/she added that, from then onward, it is expected
to decline steadily in part because of the lesser
pressures that the non-core component has been
subject to, which tend to affect core inflation with
some lag. He/she pointed out that this is expected to
take place mainly through food merchandise prices,
which would reflect the lower pressures on
agricultural input prices. **One member highlighted**
that the outlook for inflation continued to deteriorate,
given the deviation of its trajectory from what was
previously forecast.

**Most members stated that the increase in**
**inflation** **has** **been** **persistent,** **especially**

**regarding its core component. One** member
added that this not only responds to temporary
external pressures. However, **another member**
mentioned that the temporary effects of increases in
energy prices and in some agricultural and livestock
product prices have started to fade. He/she added
that this process is expected to continue and
contribute to further declines in inflation.

**Among upward risks to inflation, most members**
**highlighted** **cost-related pressures and the**
**persistence of core inflation at high levels. Some**
members added external inflationary pressures,
exchange rate depreciation, and increases in energy
prices. **One** member stated that, insofar as the
pandemic transitions to a more favorable stage, there
could be a reallocation of spending towards services,
which could exert pressure on service prices.
**Another member noted the risk of continuing**
imbalances between supply and demand, due to
rigidities in production or the evolution of the
pandemic. Some members mentioned that there is a
positive correlation between the level of inflation and
its persistence, and thus high levels of inflation carry
the risk of the price formation process becoming

5


-----

contaminated. One member added the risk of wage
revisions being influenced by observed inflation and
by minimum wage increases. Among downward
risks, another member mentioned: i) a greater-thanexpected effect from the negative output gap, ii)
social distancing measures, and iii) exchange rate
appreciation. **Most members** **stated that the**
**balance of risks for inflation within the forecast**
**horizon remains biased to the upside. One**
member highlighted that the balance of risks has
continued to deteriorate.

**_Macrofinancial environment_**

**Most members mentioned that the exchange rate**
**appreciated and interest rates increased, mainly**
**short-term ones. Some** members noted that, in
general, domestic financial markets performed
favorably, in line with what was observed in Latin
America. They also stated that the behavior of
interest rates led to a flattening of the yield curve.
They pointed out that the stock market registered
gains. **One member added that default risk premia**
were slightly above the level observed in the previous
monetary policy meeting.

**Some members mentioned that the economy is well**
positioned to face a global monetary tightening cycle.
They highlighted the low levels of the current account
deficit and of non-resident investors' holdings of
government debt. One member considered that this
reduces the vulnerability of the peso. **Another**
member added the fiscal balance and the level of
international reserves. **One member considered**
necessary to maintain a solid macroeconomic
stance, procuring a low and stable inflation and the
soundness of the financial system, given the
country’s high degree of trade and financial
integration with the rest of the world and its exposure
to external shocks. He/she added that this is
essential given the outlook of a further monetary
tightening worldwide.

**Most members highlighted the weakness of**
**credit to firms.** **Some members** considered that this
obeys to structural demand factors, which reflects the
deterioration of investment climate. **One** member
underlined that this is unrelated to the current
monetary policy stance. **Another** member

emphasized that financing to the non-financial
private sector continued to moderate its contraction.
He/she stated that, in 2021, external sources of
financing registered a negative balance for the first
time in 12 years, while domestic sources rebounded
due to increases in the reference rate. He/she
mentioned that mortgage lending displays an upward
trend. One member stated that monthly variations of


credit to the private sector have finally started to be
positive towards the end of last year. However,
he/she considered that this improvement is not
enough and is at risk due to the interest rate
increases, which would have an impact on the
demand for credit. He/she pointed out that during the
fourth quarter of 2021, the annual flow of domestic
financing to the private sector accounted for 1.1% of
GDP, in contrast to the 3.2% recorded in 2017, prior
to the tightening of monetary conditions in Mexico.

**_Monetary policy_**

**The Governing Board evaluated the magnitude**
**and diversity of the shocks that have affected**
**inflation and its determinants, along with the risk**
**of medium- and long-term inflation expectations**
**and price formation becoming contaminated, as**
**well as the additional challenges posed by the**
**ongoing tightening of global monetary and**
**financial** **conditions.** **Based** **on** **these**

**considerations, on this occasion, the majority**
**decided to increase the target for the overnight**
**interbank interest rate by 50 basis points to**
**6.00%. Most members highlighted that, with this**
**action, the monetary policy stance adjusts to the**
**trajectory required for inflation to converge to its**
**3% target within the forecast horizon. They**
**expressed that for the next monetary policy**
**decisions, the Board will monitor thoroughly**
**inflationary pressures as well as all factors that**
**have an incidence on the foreseen path for**
**inflation and its expectations. The latter, in order**
**to set a policy rate that is consistent at all times**
**with both an orderly and sustained convergence**
**of headline inflation to the 3% target** **and an**
**adequate adjustment of the economy and**
**financial markets.**

**One** **member highlighted that, in contrast to other**
economies, Mexico provided a reduced monetary
stimulus in 2020 and started to withdraw it early in
2021, despite its sound fundamentals. He/she noted
that Mexico's monetary policy stance is currently
among the least accommodative among emerging
market economies, surpassed only by economies
with geopolitical conflicts or deteriorated

macroeconomic fundamentals. He/she considered
that, given the mandate of price stability, an increase
in the reference rate is justified, especially to
preserve financial stability. However, he/she

mentioned that the concern is whether to raise it by
25 or 50 basis points. He/she questioned the
arguments for accelerating the monetary tightening.
First, the real interest rate has not changed

6


-----

significantly despite the previous increases to the
reference rate. In this regard, he/she pointed out that
these increases created the expectation of a more
permanent inflation, and therefore did not affect the
real interest rate. Second, as to the Federal
Reserve's adjustments possibly being greater than
anticipated, he/she highlighted that said central bank
has reiterated that it will adjust its rates gradually.
He/she stated that, if the adjustment were greater
than expected, given that Banco de México makes
its decisions in calendar dates close to those of the
Federal Reserve, there would be time to react and in
this regard he/she considered unnecessary to act
ahead or over-react to that central bank’s actions.
He/she added that, given its robust macroeconomic
stance, Mexico is in a better position to face the Fed’s
restrictive cycle. Third, he/she mentioned that
although other emerging economies have increased
their reference rates at a quick pace, the relevant
variable is the interest rate level and that Mexico
continues having one of the highest among these
economies. He/she noted that, in other economies,
the greater adjustment is due to the fact that they
reduced them more markedly in the past or because
they face idiosyncratic problems. He/she mentioned
that the current inflationary phenomenon is mostly
explained by factors linked to the evolution of the
pandemic and that, in the face of these exogenous
pressures, there is not much that a more restrictive
monetary policy stance can do. He/she added that
the cost associated with a higher rate must be
considered, as there is the risk of reaching a
restrictive policy stance too soon, thus affecting the
economic recovery. He/she mentioned that this
would generate greater risk aversion and

macroeconomic instability, which could translate into
exchange rate- and price-related pressures, making
it difficult to achieve Banco de México's objective.
He/she stated that the central bank’s actions and the
way it communicates them affect both expectations
and the price formation process.

**Another member considered that some readings on**
inflation and its expectations have started to move in
the right direction. However, he/she noted that it is
still necessary to strengthen the downward trajectory
of inflation, given that pressures have not dissipated,
and to make the balance of risks to inflation more
neutral and symmetric around the medium-term
forecasts. He/she stated that there is empirical
evidence of a positive correlation between high levels
of inflation and its degree of persistence, and
therefore if price variations do not begin to revert,
there is the risk of inflation becoming more persistent.
He/she considered that, throughout this inflationary
episode, inflation expectations have been more


sensitive by incorporating increases when observed
inflation has been higher than expected, but have
reacted less when it has decreased for some months,
which in his/her opinion suggests that monetary
policy should support more decisively the decline in
inflation. He/she mentioned that the fact that the real
ex-ante interest rate has increased since the last
meeting indicates that the stance adopted by Banco
de México is consistent with its mandate, but added
that it is necessary to continue in this direction in
order to influence short- and long-term expectations.
He/she stated that, in view of the Federal Reserve's
announced cycle of monetary normalization, the
decisions taken by Banco de México since last year
place our country in a relatively solid monetary
position compared to that of the United States, and
such position is close to reaching, both in nominal
and real terms, the largest spread observed in the
last cycle. He/she argued that, under different
macroeconomic metrics, Mexico is well positioned
with respect to previous monetary cycles, and thus it
must not assume a mechanical rule with respect to
the Federal Reserve's adjustments, but rather act by
assessing all the information available at each
moment in time. He/she considered that Banco de
México faces a scenario of slow economic recovery
and persistent inflation, especially in its core
component, which represents a complex

combination. He/she mentioned that maintaining a
robust monetary policy stance in the face of
persistent inflation will allow to better address the
challenges ahead and thus fulfill the constitutional
mandate of price stability.

**One member highlighted that core inflation was**
again higher than anticipated in January, that
medium-term expectations were revised upwards,
and that the new forecast trajectory for inflation was
above that previously published. He/she warned that
current inflation is not a temporary phenomenon
focused on the prices of certain CPI items and that,
if the policy response is not decisive, there is the risk
of having a more persistent inflationary episode and
of long-term expectations becoming unanchored,
which would reduce the effectiveness of the
expectations channel, which is the most relevant
channel for monetary policy. He/she considered that
given the continuing emergence of unanticipated
shocks, the adjustments prescribed by the monetary
models have not been sufficient to attain the
convergence to the inflation target. He/she

highlighted that, so far, given the continuous increase
in expected inflation, the reference rate increases
have been neutralized in the ex-ante real interest
rate. He/she stated that, in his/her opinion, the
dilemma is between maintaining the current pace of

7


-----

increase at 50 basis points or raising it to 75 basis
points. He/she considered that the decision should
seek a balance among three factors: high levels of
inflation that are not receding, which is the primary
factor, the imminent interest rate increases by the
Federal Reserve, and the adverse cyclical conditions
of the economy. He/she noted that, although Banco
de México started the cycle a little earlier and from a
less expansionary level than most central banks, if it
does not accelerate the monetary tightening, it will be
overtaken by most of them, since some countries
have raised their rates at a triple-digit pace in their
last meetings, and intend to maintain said pace.
He/she argued that a pace of adjustment must be
adopted in order to synchronize the domestic and
global monetary cycles. The relative monetary policy
stance must be adjusted cautiously in terms of
margin of maneuver with regards to possible
deviations from the cycle of rate increases by the
Federal Reserve, in order to address, in a nonmechanical way, the short- and medium-term
inflationary effects and the equilibrium of the
abovementioned factors. He/she added that,

although the cyclical position of the economy seems
to provide some room to maneuver, core inflation
remains on a strong upward trend. He/she stressed
that the main challenge is to control core inflation,
which is above 6%, remains on an inertial upward
trajectory, and is persistent. He/she underlined that
actions must be taken to maintain long-term
expectations anchored and Banco de México’s
credibility about its commitment to its primary
objective of price stability. He/she considered that
lessons from recent experience are that the
monetary astringency necessary to anchor

expectations and ensure compliance with the price
stability mandate should not be underestimated, and
that achieving that objective is the best social
contribution to the country, since neglecting it would
imply regressive effects on the most vulnerable
population.

**Another** **member** highlighted a fundamental

dilemma in the face of historically and persistently
high levels of inflation, especially in its core
component, in a complex international environment
and with an economy that contracted during the third
and fourth quarters of 2021. He/she noted that the
appropriate pace at which to reduce monetary
stimulus must be assessed to ensure an orderly
convergence to the target. He/she underlined four
factors to act decisively. First, recent analyses
suggest that the presence of a possible inflationary
inertia may lead to an unanchoring of expectations.
He/she indicated that this could occur if inflation is
systematically above forecasts and these tend to be


revised upwards, as has occurred previously.
Second, monetary policy actions have not achieved
the desired effect on the real interest rate. He/she
argued that underestimating future inflation

systematically leads to lower real interest rates than
those consistent with the disinflationary process,
which implies maintaining higher real rates in the
future and for a longer period of time. Third, a
balance of risks to inflation that is clearly biased to
the upside. Fourth, the risks to global financial
stability that have increased with the confirmation of
the tightening cycle in the United States. He/she
added that the increase in slack conditions does not
justify a moderation in the monetary policy stance
because the limited impulse that could be achieved
would not offset the cost of expectations becoming
unanchored, which would imply a more aggressive
adjustment in the future, with higher costs for the
population. He/she warned that the deterioration of
the inflationary outlook has increased the risk of
delaying the convergence of inflation to the target,
thus affecting price dynamics. He/she expressed that
an increase of 50 basis points to the reference rate
would contribute to maintain consistency between
the communication regarding the primary objective
and the actions to achieve it. He/she pointed out that
these actions are intended to strengthen the
expectations channel and limit demand pressures.
He/she added that this measure places the central
bank in a better position to face more astringent
global financial conditions. He/she considered it
fundamental for the monetary policy statement to
mention that the balance of risks for inflation has
continued to deteriorate, and that it restates the
central bank’s commitment to price stability. Finally,
he/she recalled that the greatest contribution that the
central bank can make to foster sustained growth
and increase the population’s welfare is to guarantee
compliance with its constitutional mandate. He/she
highlighted that, with these actions, it is possible to
lay the foundations of stability and confidence
necessary to promote investment and a better
allocation of resources in the economy.

**One member noted that Banco de México has faced**
an unprecedented environment, in which atypical,
deep and widespread shocks derived from the
pandemic have posed significant challenges for the
fulfillment of its mandate to safeguard the stability of
the currency's purchasing power. He/she stated that
the main challenge is that world inflation has reached
levels unseen in decades. He/she argued that, given
the social and economic costs derived from high
inflation, which affect the lower-income population to
a greater extent, monetary policy must continue
focusing on consolidating an environment of low and

8


-----

stable inflation. He/she stated that allowing inflation
to remain at high levels, considering that inflation
expectations might continue to be affected, could
erode monetary policy’s credibility, posing an
obstacle for the convergence of inflation to the target,
and affecting domestic financial markets and
economic activity. He/she considered that in the
current scenario, the central bank's commitment to
fulfilling its mandate should be strengthened. He/she
mentioned that the monetary policy response must
be consistent with the convergence of inflation to its
target in the forecast horizon and should seek to
keep inflation expectations anchored. He/she

considered that Banco de México’s communication
should provide certainty that the necessary actions
will be taken so that the price formation process is
not contaminated. He/she argued that the above, in
addition to having a favorable impact on the
convergence of inflation to its target, will contribute to
induce orderly conditions in the foreign exchange
and fixed income markets, in an environment where
the international monetary cycle might generate
volatility. He/she added that the outlook for monetary
policy has become more complex, given the outlook
for a faster withdrawal of monetary stimulus around
the world, particularly in the United States. He/she
pointed out that the upcoming decisions should
consider, as the Governing Board has been doing,
the evolution of all inflation determinants, including
inflation expectations, especially longer-term ones,
cost-related pressures, slack conditions, the

evolution of financial markets, and international
monetary policy. He/she expressed that the evolution
of the shocks that have exerted pressures on inflation
must be considered, evaluating whether they are
starting to mitigate as economic conditions normalize
and, at the same time, monitoring the risk of new
shocks arising or the effects of those already
observed becoming amplified.

**3. MONETARY POLICY DECISION**

The Governing Board evaluated the magnitude and
diversity of the shocks that have affected inflation
and its determinants, along with the risk of mediumand long-term inflation expectations and price
formation becoming contaminated, as well as the
additional challenges posed by the ongoing

tightening of global monetary and financial

conditions. Based on these considerations, on this
occasion, the Board decided to increase the target
for the overnight interbank interest rate by 50 basis
points to 6.00%. With this action, the monetary policy


stance adjusts to the trajectory required for inflation
to converge to its 3% target within the forecast
horizon.

For the next monetary policy decisions, the Board will
monitor thoroughly inflationary pressures as well as
all factors that have an incidence on the foreseen
path for inflation and its expectations. The latter, in
order to set a policy rate that is consistent at all times
with both an orderly and sustained convergence of
headline inflation to the 3% target within the time
frame in which monetary policy operates and an
adequate adjustment of the economy and financial
markets.

**4. VOTING**

Victoria Rodríguez, Galia Borja, Irene Espinosa, and
Jonathan Heath voted in favor of increasing the
target for the overnight interbank interest rate by 50
basis points to 6.00%. Gerardo Esquivel voted in
favor of increasing the target for the overnight
interbank interest rate by 25 basis points to 5.75%.

**5. DISSENTING OPINIONS / VOTES**

**Vote. Gerardo Esquivel**

The anticipated beginning of the Federal Reserve’s
restrictive cycle will have significant implications for
international financial markets. Banco de México
must remain vigilant and be prepared to take the
necessary actions to guarantee the country’s
financial stability. From June to date, the target rate
in Mexico has increased by 150 basis points, in the
same magnitude as the interest rate spread relative
to the United States. This implies that we have
already taken steps forward in addressing this issue.
For this reason, I believe that a 25-basis point
increase should be enough to face the uncertainty
before the referred cycle begins. It must also be
recalled that headline inflation reached an all-time
high during the second fortnight of November, and
that it has already started to decrease. Moreover,
although core inflation has continued to increase, it is
foreseen to reach its highest level during the first
quarter of 2022, and from that point, to also start
decreasing. I reiterate that I do not consider it
appropriate to get too far ahead of the Fed's interest
rate normalization process because that could take
us too soon to a very restrictive monetary policy
stance, which could have detrimental economic and
financial effects.

9


-----

**ANNEX**

The information in this Annex was prepared for this
meeting by the staff of Banco de México’s Directorate
General of Economic Research and Directorate
General of Central Bank Operations. It does not
necessarily reflect the considerations of the

members of the Governing Board as to the monetary
policy decision.

**A.1. External conditions**

**A.1.1. World economic activity**

World economic activity continued recovering during
the fourth quarter of 2021, although at a slower rate
than expected due to the persistent bottlenecks in
supply chains and the resurgence of infections due
to the Omicron variant of the SARS-CoV-2 virus. This
recovery continued to be heterogeneous across
countries and sectors due to differences in the
evolution of the pandemic and in vaccinations, as
well as to the different responses of the health,
monetary and fiscal authorities. Leading indicators
have shown a moderation in service activities, while
industrial activities have continued to gradually
recover (Chart 1).

World inflation continued increasing as a result of
price pressures across a broader range of items.
These pressures have resulted from bottlenecks in
production, the reallocation of spending towards
merchandise, high food and energy prices, as well as
the recovery of some services affected by the
pandemic. As a result, in most major economies,
both advanced and emerging, inflation remained
above their central banks' targets.

The central banks of most of the main advanced
economies continued adjusting their monetary policy
stances, by slowing the pace of asset purchases, in
some cases by increasing their reference rates, or by
announcing that they would be raised soon. In
emerging market economies, a large number of
central banks continued to increase their reference
rates.

1 Expressed as a quarterly annualized rate, US seasonally
adjusted GDP grew at a rate of 2.3% in the third quarter of 2021
and of 6.9% in the fourth.


In this environment, international financial markets
performed positively during the second half of
December, although with greater volatility and risk
aversion in January, associated with the monetary
policy adjustments by some of the systemically
important economies and the expectation of a fasterthan-anticipated withdrawal of monetary stimulus in
view of the continued increase in world inflation. In
this context, there was a tightening of financial
conditions in which interest rates increased and the
dollar strengthened moderately.

The evolution of the global economy continues to be
subject to a high degree of uncertainty, particularly
associated with the COVID-19 pandemic or the
possibility that it becomes an endemic disease, the
global vaccination process, disruptions in supply
chains, the evolution of inflationary pressures,
adjustments in monetary and financial conditions,
and the evolution of geopolitical tensions in various
countries.

**Chart 1**

**Global: Purchasing Managers’ Index:**

**Production Component**

Diffusion index, s. a.

65

60

55

50

45

40

35 Manufacturing

Manufacturing (excl. China)

30 Services

Services (excl. China)

25 January

20

2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022

s. a. / Seasonally adjusted figures.
Source: IHS Markit.

In the United States, economic activity accelerated
its pace of expansion during the fourth quarter of
2021, by growing at a seasonally adjusted quarterly
rate of 1.7%, after having grown 0.6% in the previous

1

quarter (Chart 2). This was mainly due to a recovery

in inventory investment, as well as a moderate
rebound in household consumption, which in turn
benefited from still accommodative financial

conditions, favorable household balance sheets, and

10


-----

the solid recovery of employment. Fixed investment
recovered moderately, limited by the increase in the
prices of capital goods. In contrast, residential
investment and government spending contributed
negatively to growth during the same quarter. Net
exports had a null contribution to growth given that,
although exports had a positive contribution, this was
offset by the negative contribution of imports.

**Chart 2**

**US Real GDP and Components**

Quarterly percentage rate and contribution in

percentage points, s. a.

10

8

6

4

2

0

-2 Private consumption expenditures

Residential investment

-4 Nonresidential investment

-6 Change in private inventories

Net exports

-8 Government consumption expenditures

-10 Total


-12


0

|Chart 2 US Real GDP and Components Quarterly percentage rate and contribution in percentage points, s. a.|Col2|Col3|Col4|Col5|Col6|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|Private consumption expenditures Residential investment Nonresidential investment Change in private inventories Net exports Government consumption expenditures Total||||||
|I II III IV 2016|I II III IV 2017|I II III IV 2018|I II III IV 2019|I II III IV 2020|I II III IV 2021|


s. a. / Seasonally adjusted figures.
Source: BEA.

US industrial production contracted at a monthly rate
of 0.1% in December, after having grown 0.7% in
November. This moderation was due to a 1.5%
contraction in gas and electricity generation and a
0.3% contraction in manufacturing activity, largely
explained by the decline in automotive production,
which continued to resent the effects of bottlenecks
and the shortage of semiconductors. These
contractions were offset by a 2% expansion in mining
that mainly reflected improvements in the oil and gas
sector. The manufacturing Purchasing Managers'
Index (PMI) suggests that this sector will continue to
recover, although it is expected to remain limited by
the persistence of bottlenecks, high input costs, and
labor shortages.

The US labor market continued to improve in
December and January despite the higher

absenteeism due to the surge of new infections
caused by the Omicron variant of the SARS-CoV-2
virus. Non-farm payrolls increased by 489,000 jobs
on average during the same months, after having
expanded by 647,000 jobs in November, reflecting
the continued expansion of employment in private

2 In annualized terms, euro area GDP registered a quarter-onquarter seasonally adjusted variation of 1.2% in the fourth quarter
of 2021 and of 9.4% in the third.


services. The level of employment in January was
below its pre-pandemic level by 2.9 million jobs. The
slight increase in the unemployment rate from 3.9%
in December to 4.0% in January was mainly due to
an increase in labor force participation.

In the euro area, growth in economic activity
moderated during the fourth quarter of 2021, at a
seasonally adjusted quarterly rate of 0.3%, after
having expanded 2.3% during the third quarter.[2]
Economic activity has continued to recover gradually
in the region, with GDP recovering its pre-pandemic
level, driven by the positive impact of both monetary
and fiscal stimulus on domestic demand. However,
the slower pace of growth was the result of lower
mobility associated with the resurgence of COVID-19
infections, the impact on production chains, the sharp
increase in energy prices, and the shortage of
materials, equipment, and labor. The unemployment
rate decreased from 7.1% in November to 7.0% in
December. Purchasing Managers' Indices suggest a
slowdown in the service sector during the first quarter
of the year and a gradual recovery in manufacturing
activity.

In Japan, available information suggests that
economic activity rebounded during the fourth
quarter of 2021, after having contracted at a
seasonally adjusted quarterly rate of 0.9% during the
third quarter.[3] This would reflect the normalization of
productive activities following the lifting of the state of
emergency in October, lower supply constraints,
strong private consumption, and high mobility levels,
despite the increase in new COVID-19 cases at the
end of 2021. Unemployment declined slightly from
2.8% in November to 2.7% in December. Purchasing
Managers' Indices suggest that the manufacturing
sector would continue to expand and that the
services sector would contract.

In the main emerging economies, during the fourth
quarter of 2021, growth was also heterogeneous
across regions and countries, depending on the
evolution of the pandemic and each country's
exposure to the impact on global supply chains. In
Emerging Asia, available information points to a
rebound in the pace of GDP growth in most
economies, partly due to relatively high levels of
mobility despite the new wave of COVID-19 cases.
China exhibited a slight recovery by growing from a
seasonally adjusted quarterly rate of 0.7% during the
third quarter to 1.6% during the fourth, as both the
effects of the imposition of strict restrictions to

3 In annualized terms, the quarterly seasonally adjusted variation
of Japan’s GDP during the third quarter of 2021 was -3.6%.

11


-----

contain COVID-19 cases in some regions and the
electricity rationing measures implemented during
the third quarter faded.[4] In Latin America, indicators
point to a slower pace of recovery of economic
activity in most countries, while in Emerging Europe,
available indicators suggest that the recovery has
taken place at a heterogeneous pace, depending on
the restrictions adopted as a result of the resurgence
of COVID-19 cases in some economies of the region.

International commodity prices have increased since
Mexico's previous monetary policy decision. Oil
prices increased and even in February 2022 reached
their highest level in more than seven years. This
was the result of the decision by the Organization of
Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC) and other
producers to maintain production cuts, the technical
difficulties that have prevented several members
from reaching their production quotas, the continued
recovery in demand for oil, and the risks to supply
posed by increasing geopolitical tensions in Eastern
Europe and the Middle East. Natural gas prices
increased in the United States as a result of the low
temperatures recorded in the northwest region of the
country at the beginning of the year, while in the
European market, reference prices decreased due to
the effect of warmer temperatures forecast in
Europe, lower demand in Asia, and the greater
volume of imports from countries such as the United
States and Norway that has contributed to offset the
lower flow of natural gas from Russia to the region.
Meanwhile, the prices of most grains increased due
to the uncertainty surrounding world supply caused
by the effects of drought on harvests in Argentina and
Brazil, as well as geopolitical conflicts in major
producing regions such as Ukraine. The prices of
most industrial metals followed an upward trend
since Mexico's previous monetary policy decision.
Steel prices were driven by expectations of a higher
demand, mainly from China, in an environment of low
inventory levels. Likewise, aluminum and copper
prices increased significantly due to a strong demand
and the higher prices of energy and other inputs.

**A.1.2. Monetary policy and international financial**
**markets**

Headline and core inflation continued increasing
worldwide, reflecting price pressures in a wider range
of items, although there is still heterogeneity across
countries. This has been the result of bottlenecks in
production chains, the reallocation of household
spending towards merchandise, high food and

4 In annualized terms, China GDP registered a quarter-on-quarter
seasonally adjusted variation of 4.0% in the fourth quarter of 2021
and of 4.9% in the third.


energy prices, and the recovery of certain services
affected by the pandemic.

Headline inflation in most major advanced

economies continued to be above their central banks'
targets, except for Japan, whose inflation remains at
low levels (Chart 3). In this context, short-term
inflation expectations drawn from surveys continued
to increase for these economies, while long-term
inflation expectations drawn from financial

instruments have generally shown limited

adjustments.

**Chart 3**

**Selected Advanced Economies:**

**Headline Inflation**

Annual percentage change

6.0 United States PCE 1/
5.5 United States CPI
5.0 Japan 2/
4.5

Euro area 3/

4.0

United Kingdom

3.5
3.0 Canada
2.5
2.0
1.5
1.0
0.5
0.0

-0.5
-1.0
-1.5
-2.0 DecemberJanuary
-2.5
-3.0

2005 2009 2013 2017 2021

1/ The personal consumption expenditure deflator is used.
2/ Excludes fresh food. This series does not exclude the effect of the rise in
consumption tax in May 2014 and October 2019, nor the effect of the free
daycare and preschool program in October 2019.
3/ Preliminary figures for January.
Source: Bureau of Economic Analysis, Bureau of Labor Statistics, Eurostat,
Bank of Japan, Statistics Canada, Office of National Statistics.

In most of the main emerging economies, inflation
continued to increase. This was the result of the
effects of the pandemic and, in some cases, the
depreciation of their exchange rates. In most of these
economies, inflation remained above their central
banks' targets, except for some in the Asian region,
such as Indonesia and China.

In this context, the central banks of most of the main
advanced economies continued adjusting their
monetary policy stances, by slowing the pace of net
asset purchases, in some cases by increasing their
reference rates, or by announcing that they would be
raised soon. This, together with the continuous
increase in world inflation, led to expectations of a
faster reduction of monetary stimulus worldwide. In
this regard, expectations drawn from financial

12


-----

instruments foresee a faster pace of interest rate
increases in most of the main advanced economies
than previously expected, anticipating increases
throughout 2022 and 2023 (Chart 4).

**Chart 4**

**Reference Rates and Trajectories**

**Implied in OIS Curves[1/]**

Percent

3.0% **――― US Federal Reserve 2/ Bank of England Bank of Japan** Next increase Feb.3, 2022 3/Next increase Dec.10, 2021

2.5% **― Bank of Canada**

**― European Central Bank deposit rate**
**― OIS implicit trajectory Feb.3, 2022**

2.0% **--- OIS implicit trajectory Dec.10, 2021**

1.5%

1.0%

0.5%

0.0%

-0.5%

End of End of End of End of

-1.0% 2020 2021 2022 2023

2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023

1/ OIS: Fixed floating interest rate swap where the fixed interest rate is
associated to the effective overnight reference rate.
2/ For the observed reference rate of the US, the average interest rate of
the target range of the federal funds rate (0.0% - 0.25%) is used.
3/ A first increase of 25 bps is assumed for the US Federal Reserve and the
Bank of Canada, and 10bps for the European Central Bank and 15bps for
the Bank of Japan. For the Bank of England, a date has not been set for the
next rate increase given that it has already started its rate rising cycle.
Source: Banco de México with data from Bloomberg.

Among the recent monetary policy decisions in the
main advanced economies, the following stand out:

i) At its January meeting, the Federal Reserve left

unchanged its target range for the federal funds
rate at 0.0-0.25%. It pointed out that, with inflation
well above 2% and a strong labor market, the
Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC)

expects that it will soon be appropriate to increase
the target range for the federal funds rate. It also
decided to continue reducing the monthly pace of
its net asset purchases and that it will bring them
to an end at the beginning of March. The Federal
Reserve also released a series of principles for
reducing the size of its balance sheet. It stated
that it expects said reduction to begin after the
process for raising the federal funds rate has
begun and that it would be carried out in a
predictable manner, through adjustments to the
reinvestment amounts of securities maturities.
Regarding the timing for the interest rate
increase, the Fed’s Chairman stated at a press
conference that, assuming conditions are

appropriate to do so, the Committee could
consider raising the federal funds rate at its March
meeting. In this context, the implied trajectory of
financial instruments incorporates the expectation


of around four to five rate increases by the end of
2022 and between two and three during 2023.
The Chairman of said institution pointed out that
the current conditions of the US economy are
different from those that triggered the beginning
of reference rate increases in 2015, as there is
greater strength in economic activity and the labor
market, as well as higher levels of inflation, and
that such differences will probably have important
implications for the appropriate pace of monetary
policy adjustments.

ii) At its February meeting, the European Central

Bank (ECB) confirmed the decisions announced
at its previous meeting. In particular, it maintained
its refinancing, key deposit and key lending rates
unchanged at 0.0, -0.5 and 0.25%, respectively. It
also reiterated the conditions under which the
Governing Council expects interest rates to
remain at or below current levels. Regarding its
Pandemic Emergency Program (PEPP), it

reiterated that: i) in the first quarter of this year the
Council is making net asset purchases at a slower
pace than in the fourth quarter of 2021; ii) that it
will end net asset purchases by the end of March
2022; and iii) that it will reinvest until at least the
end of 2024, the principal payment of maturing
securities. In addition, it left the monthly pace of
purchases under its Asset Purchase Program
(APP) unchanged, in line with what was
announced at its December policy decision, and
net purchases are expected to end shortly before
the ECB begins to raise interest rates.

iii) At its January meeting, the Bank of Japan left its

reference rate at -0.1% and its long-term interest
rate target (indexed to its 10-year bond) at around
0%. It restated that it expects interest rates to
remain at their current levels or even lower.
Although it left its asset purchase program
unchanged, it extended by one year the deadline
for loan disbursements under its Fund
Provisioning Measure to Stimulate Bank Lending.

13


-----

In the main emerging economies, given the increase
in inflation and the risks they face for price formation,
a large number of central banks have continued to
raise their reference rates. Since Mexico’s previous
monetary policy decision, the central banks of Brazil,
Chile, Peru, Colombia, Hungary, Poland, the Czech
Republic, Russia and South Africa, among others,
have raised their interest rates. Turkey's central bank
left its interest rate unchanged at its last meeting,
after having lowered it on several previous
occasions. The People’s Bank of China announced a
decrease in its reference rate.

In the context described above, since Mexico's
previous monetary policy decision, international
financial markets performed favorably in the second
half of December and exhibited high volatility and
greater risk aversion in mid-January. In particular,
after showing a positive performance towards the
end of December, the stock markets of most of the
main advanced economies exhibited significant falls
at the beginning of January that have been partially
reversed (Chart 5). Stock indices of emerging
economies overall performed positively (Chart 6).
Financial conditions tightened throughout the period
due to expectations of a faster withdrawal of
monetary stimulus in some advanced economies in
response to inflationary pressures. As for

government bond interest rates in the main advanced
economies, both short- and long-term interest rates
increased. Likewise, long-term interest rates in
emerging economies rose. In foreign exchange
markets, the dollar strengthened moderately against
most currencies of advanced economies during
January, although it recently reversed this trend. The
currencies of emerging economies generally

exhibited a moderate bias towards appreciation.
Finally, moderate capital outflows to fixed-income
markets were observed in most emerging economies
except for some countries such as China, which
registered significant inflows to equity markets.


1/ The MSCI Emerging Markets Index consists of 24 countries. 2/ DXY: a
weighted average estimated by the Intercontinental Exchange (ICE) of the
nominal exchange rate of the main six currencies operated globally with the
following weights: EUR 57.6%, JPY: 13.6%, GBP: 11.9%, CAD: 9.1%, SEK:
4.2%, and CHF: 3.6%. 3/ J.P. Morgan index is constructed with the weighted
average by the nominal exchange rate of emerging economies’ currencies
with the following weights: TRY: 8.3%, RUB: 8.3%, HUF: 8.3%, ZAR: 8.3%,
BRL: 11.1%, MXN: 11.1%, CLP: 11.1%, CNH: 11.1%, INR: 11.1% and
SGD: 11.1%.
Source: Bloomberg and ICE.

**Chart 6**

**Selected Emerging Economies: Financial Assets**

**Performance since December 13, 2021**

Percent, basis points Percent, basis points

**2-year** **10-year**

**Equity**
**Region** **Country** **Currencies** **interest** **interest** **CDS**

**markets**

**rates** **rates**

**Mexico** **2.14%** **3.13%** **54** **29** **-1**

**Brazil** **7.19%** **4.57%** **78** **77** **-9**

**Latin**

**Chile** **3.59%** **5.91%** **52** **36** **-10**

**America**

**Colombia** **-1.07%** **13.25%** **82** **79** **8**

**Peru** **4.89%** **10.74%** **30** **18** **-3**

**Russia** **-3.45%** **-2.06%** **94** **89** **94**

**Poland** **2.35%** **0.95%** **85** **83** **-6**

**Emerging**

**Turkey** **2.51%** **-4.72%** **-28** **125** **13**

**Europe**

**Czech Republic** **4.98%** **1.96%** **107** **78** **1**

**Hungary** **3.93%** **4.60%** **66** **66** **4**

**China** **0.09%** **-8.68%** **-37** **-18** **5**

**Malaysia** **1.02%** **1.16%** **8** **12** **5**

**India** **1.22%** **2.19%** **39** **51** **7**

**Asia**

**Philippines** **-1.41%** **3.63%** **20** **3** **12**

**Thailand** **0.62%** **2.58%** **-2** **13** **-1**

**Indonesia** **-0.10%** **0.67%** **22** **13** **8**

**Africa** **South Africa** **4.41%** **5.27%** **28** **-23** **-10**

Note: Interest rates correspond to swap rates at the specified terms, except
for Hungary, where government securities with 3-year (instead of 2-year)
maturities were used as a reference. For the Philippines, a 2-year swap rate
is used.
Source: Bloomberg.

**A.2. Current situation of the Mexican economy**

**A.2.1. Mexican markets**

In the international context described above, in
domestic financial markets, the exchange rate
appreciated and interest rates rose (Chart 7).


**Chart 5**

**Change in Selected Financial Indicators from**

**December 10, 2021** **to February 3, 2022**

Percent; basis points Percentage, basis points


35%

30%

25%

20%

15%

10%

5%

0%


105

90

75

60

45

30

15

0


-5%

-10%

-15%


-15

-30

-45


14


-----

**Chart 7**

**Mexican Markets’ Performance**

Percent, MXN/USD and index


9.0

8.0

7.0

6.0

5.0

4.0

3.0

2.0

1.0

0.0


4.5

4.0

3.5

3.0

2.5

2.0

1.5

1.0

0.5

0.0


22.5

22.0

21.5

21.0

20.5

20.0

19.5

19.0


56,000

54,000

52,000

50,000

48,000

46,000

44,000

42,000

40,000


M Bond Inflation-indexed bonds

Range in year Range since last monetary policy decision 13-Dec-21 02-Feb-22


Range in year Range since last monetary policy decision 13-Dec-21 02-Feb-22


Source: Prepared by Banco de México.

The Mexican peso fluctuated in a range of 93 cents,
between 20.30 and 21.23 pesos per dollar, ending
the period with an appreciation of 2.14% (Chart 8).
This occurred in a context in which both spot and
future trading conditions improved with respect to the
previous period.

**Chart 8**

**Mexican Peso Exchange Rate with Moving**

**Averages**

MXN/USD


place in an environment in which trading conditions
improved during the period covering the monetary
policy decision.

Regarding expectations for the trajectory of the
monetary policy reference rate, information implied
by the Interbank Equilibrium Interest Rate (TIIE, for
its Spanish acronym) swap curve incorporates an
accumulated increase of around 78 basis points for
the February and March 2022 meetings, while for the
end of 2022 it points to a reference rate close to
7.62% (Chart 11). Most forecasters surveyed by
Citibanamex anticipate the interest rate to increase
by 50 basis points to 6.00% in the February decision,
while for the end of 2022 a rate of 6.75% is expected.

**Chart 9**

**Nominal Yield Curve of Government Securities**

Percent, basis points


22.00

21.50


Trading range during the period


21.00

20.50


20.00

19.50


2021 20222022

Source: Prepared by Banco de México.

Interest rates of government securities exhibited a
flattening dynamic (Chart 9), with increases of up to
69 basis points in shorter-term bonds and of up to 21
basis points in longer-term ones. The yield curve of
real interest rate instruments showed a similar
dynamic, with increases of up to 118 basis points for
the short term and of 23 basis points for the long
term. In this context, compensation for inflation and
inflation risk premia implicit in spreads between
nominal and real rates of market instruments showed
mixed movements, although most terms were above
400 basis points (Chart 10). These movements took


Note: The chart does not include bonds maturing in December 2021 and
June 2022. CETES with similar maturities are considered.
Source: PIP.

15


-----

**Chart 10**

**Compensation for Inflation and Inflationary Risk**

**Implicit in Government Securities’ Interest Rate**

Basis points

550

525

500

475

450

425

400

375

350

325

300 3-year

10-year

275 20-year

250 30-year

3-year average

225 10-year average

200 20-year average

30-year average

175

150

J                   M                   S                   J

2021                                                         2022

Source: PIP.

**Chart 11**

**Banco de México Overnight Interbank Rate**

**Implied in the TIIE IRS Curve**

Percent

8.50

Banxico overnight rate (reference rate)

8.25 Implied overnight interest rate in funding TIIE futures contracts
8.00 Implied overnight interest rate in the government bond yield curve
7.75 Implied interest rate in TIIE swaps for 02/02/22
7.50 Implied interest rate in TIIE swaps for 12/16/21
7.25
7.00
6.75
6.50
6.25
6.00
5.75
5.50
5.25
5.00
4.75
4.50
4.25
4.00
3.75

J   M    M   J     S    N    J M   M    J    S    N

2021                       2022

Source: Prepared by Banco de México with Bloomberg data.

**A.2.2. Economic activity in Mexico**

According to Mexico's GDP flash estimate published
by INEGI, during the fourth quarter of 2021 economic
activity contracted slightly (Chart 12), maintaining a
heterogeneous behavior across its sectors. This, in
an environment in which high uncertainty regarding
the global evolution of the pandemic as well as
disruptions in global supply chains, prevailed.

5 Refers to the value of merchandise exports in current dollars.
This value differs from that reported for goods exports in Mexico's


Regarding external demand, in the fourth quarter of
2021, the value of manufacturing exports rebounded,
reflecting the dynamism of non-automotive exports
and an incipient recovery in the automotive sector
(Chart 13).[5] By destination, manufacturing exports to
the United States continued trending upwards, while
those to the rest of the world exhibited a lower
dynamism.

**Chart 12**

**Gross Domestic Product**

Quarterly percentage change, s.a.

6

13.77

4

2

0

-2

-4

-17.78

-6 Q-IV 1/

I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV

2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021

s. a. / Seasonally adjusted figures.
1/ The figure for the fourth quarter of 2021 refers to the timely estimate of
quarterly GDP published by INEGI.
Source: Mexico’s System on National Accounts (SCNM, for its Spanish
acronym), INEGI.

**Chart 13**

**Total Manufacturing Exports**

Indices 2013 = 100, s.a.

180 16/12/2021

Total 15/12/2021

160 Automotive 14/12/2021

Non-automotive 13/12/2021

140 10/12/2021

09/12/2021

120 08/12/2021

07/12/2021

100

06/12/2021

80 03/12/2021

02/12/2021

60 01/12/2021

30/11/2021

40

20

December

0

J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O D

2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021

s. a. / Seasonally adjusted series and trend series based on data in nominal
US dollars. The former is represented by a solid line and the latter by a
dotted line.
Source: Prepared by Banco de México with data from the Tax
Administration Service (SAT, for its Spanish acronym), the Ministry of the
Economy (SE, for its Spanish acronym), Banco de México, the National
Institute of Statistics and Geography (INEGI, for its Spanish acronym).
Mexico’s Merchandise Trade Balance, and the National System of
Statistical and Geographical Information (SNIEG, for its Spanish acronym),
Information of national interest.

System of National Accounts, since the latter represents value
added, measured in constant pesos.

16


-----

According to its monthly indicator, at the beginning of
the fourth quarter of 2021, private consumption
maintained a moderate upward trajectory, although
still below the level observed in February 2020. As
for its components, consumption of imported goods
reactivated, that of domestic goods continued to
show some sluggishness, and that of services
continued to recover gradually. After the fall
registered in September, at the beginning of the last
quarter of 2021, gross fixed investment remained
weak. This reflected setbacks in construction
investment spending and a relative stagnation of the
machinery and equipment component.

On the production side, during the last quarter of
2021, economic activity as a whole continued to
exhibit weakness, although preliminary information
suggests some reactivation in the last two months of
2021 (Chart 14). Industrial activity registered modest
growth, primarily due to the performance of
manufacturing, while construction exhibited

weakness (Chart 15). Meanwhile, tertiary activities
maintained a heterogeneous behavior across
sectors. Particularly, in the October-November
bimester, positive contributions to growth were
observed in transportation and mass media

information services, and in temporary lodging, food
and beverage preparation services. In contrast,
financial and real estate services, government
activities, and commerce made a negative

contribution to growth. Professional, corporate and
business support services continued to contribute
negatively to the quarterly variation of tertiary
activities.


s. a. / Seasonally adjusted and trend series. The former is represented by
a solid line and the latter by a dotted line.
1/ Figures for September 2021.
2/ Figures for October 2021, Monthly Indicator of Industrial Activity.
Source: Mexico’s System of National Accounts (SCNM, for its Spanish
acronym), INEGI.

**Chart 15**

**Industrial Activity[1/]**

Indices 2013 = 100, s. a.

130

120

110

100

90

Total

80 Manufacturing (49.7%)

Construction (23.3%)

70

Utilities (4.7%)

60


**Chart 14**

**Global Indicator of Economic Activity**

Indices 2013 = 100, s. e.


120

115

110

105

100

95

Total

90 Secondary activities

Tertiary activities

85 Primary activities

80

75 October

November

70

J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O N

2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021


140

130

120

110

100

90

80

70

60

50

40


50


November


J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O N

2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021

s. a. / Seasonally adjusted and trend series. The former is represented by a
solid line and the latter by a dotted line.
1/ Figures in parenthesis correspond to their share in the total in 2013.
Source: Mexico’s System of National Accounts (SCNM, for its Spanish
acronym), INEGI.

Regarding the economy's cyclical position, slack
conditions remained significantly ample during the
fourth quarter (Chart 16). At the end of 2021, various
labor market indicators registered a mixed

performance. Particularly, the labor force

participation rate and the employment-to-working
age population ratio increased for the third
consecutive month, while the national and urban
unemployment rates increased at the margin,
remaining at levels above those registered in
February 2020 (Chart 17). At the beginning of 2022,
the creation of IMSS-insured jobs continued
increasing with seasonally adjusted figures. Finally,
in November, unit labor costs in the manufacturing
sector registered two consecutive declines at the

17


-----

margin, although they remained above the level
reported prior to the health emergency (Chart 18).

**Chart 16**

**Output Gap Estimates[1/]**

**Excluding Oil Industry[4/ ]**

Potential output percentages, s. a.

12

8

4

0

-4

-8

-12

-16 Global Economic Activity Indicator 2/

Gross Domestic Product 2/

-20 95% confidence interval 3/


**Chart 18**

**Productivity and Unit Labor Costs in the**

**Manufacturing Sector[1/]**
Indices 2013 = 100, s. a.


170

Unit labor costs

160

Productivity

150

140

130

120

110

100

90

80 November

J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S N

2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021


-24


December


J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S

2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021

s. a. / Calculations based on seasonally adjusted figures.
1/ Output gap estimated with a tail-corrected Hodrick-Prescott filter; see
Banco de México (2009), “Inflation Report, April-June 2009”, p.74.
2/ GDP figures up to Q4 2021, and IGAE figures up to December 2021.
3/ Output gap confidence interval calculated with a method of unobserved
components.
4/ Excludes both oil and gas extraction, support services for mining, and
petroleum and coal products’ manufacturing. Source: Prepared by Banco
de México with INEGI data.

**Chart 17**

**National and Urban Unemployment Rates**

Percent, s. a.

8.5

National unemployment rate

8.0

7.5 Urban unemployment rate

7.0

6.5

6.0

5.5

5.0

4.5

4.0

3.5

3.0

2.5 December

JA J O JA J O JA J O JA J O JA J O JA J O JA J O JA J O JA J O JA J O JA J O JA J O JA J O JA J  OD

2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021


s.a./ Seasonally adjusted series and trend series. The former is represented
by a solid line and the latter by a dotted line.
Source: Prepared by Banco de México with data from ENOE, ETOE (from
April to June 2020), and ENOE new edition (ENOEN) from July to date.


s. a. / Seasonally adjusted and trend series. The former is represented by a
solid line and the latter by a dotted line.
1/ Productivity based on hours worked.
Source: Prepared by Banco de México with seasonally adjusted data of the
Monthly Manufacturing Industry Survey and industrial activity indicators of
Mexico’s System of National Accounts (Sistema de Cuentas Nacionales de
México, SCNM), INEGI.

In December 2021, domestic financing to companies
continued moderating its contraction in real terms at
an annual rate. This was observed for both largesized companies, which registered an increase in
their credit balances at the margin, and for smallsized companies, whose portfolio has tended to
expand over the last six months. Corporate credit
demand continued to recover, while lending
conditions remained relatively stable in 2021, and
therefore remain tight. Meanwhile, during the fourth
quarter of 2021, net corporate debt issuance in the
domestic market showed low dynamism. In terms of
credit to households, the housing portfolio continued
to increase, although at a slower pace in the last
quarter of last year compared to the rest of that year.
At the same time, outstanding consumer bank loan
portfolio reduced its contraction at an annual rate for
the ninth consecutive month. The sustained
dynamism of payroll loans and the increase in the
balance of the credit card portfolio since September
2021 stand out. This, in a context in which household
demand for credit has gradually recovered. As for
household lending conditions, they remained stable
in both housing and consumer portfolios in general,
after having loosened in the payroll and credit card
segments in previous quarters.

Interest rates on bank credit to firms have followed
the dynamics of the bank funding rate. At the end of
2021, corporate credit intermediation margins,
except for issuers, returned to levels similar to those
observed before the pandemic. At the same time,
housing loan interest rates remained at levels around
their historic lows. Meanwhile, in October 2021,

18


-----

credit card and personal loan interest rates
registered a similar level to that observed during the
third quarter of that year. Thus, consumer credit
intermediation margins remained at levels higher
than those observed before the pandemic. As for
portfolio quality, the corporate loan delinquency rate
declined in December and remained at low levels.
Mortgage loan delinquency decreased for the fourth
consecutive month and remained at low levels.
Finally, consumer portfolio delinquency rates

continued trending downwards, achieving levels
lower than those recorded prior to the onset of the
pandemic; nevertheless, they remain at high levels.

**A.2.3. Development of inflation and inflation**
**outlook**

Between November 2021 and January 2022, annual
headline inflation went from 7.37 to 7.07% (Chart 19
and Table 1). This result is explained by a reduction
of 70 basis points in the contribution of the non-core
component to headline inflation that was partially
offset by an increase of 40 basis points in the core
component’s contribution.

**Chart 19**

**Consumer Price Index**

Annual percentage change

13

12 CPI

11 Core

10

Non-core

9

8

7

6

5

4

3

2

1

0

-1


-2

-3 January

J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J

2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022


Source: Banco de México and INEGI.

Annual core inflation continued rising, pressured by
higher merchandise and services inflation. After
having increased in every month of 2021, core
inflation rose again in January 2022, accumulating 14
consecutive months of increases. In particular,
between November 2021 and January 2022, this
indicator rose from 5.67 to 6.21%. Annual

merchandise inflation increased from 7.24 to 7.86%
in the referred dates (Chart 20), pressured by the
slow resumption of distribution channels, the
increase in production costs, and the reallocation of
spending to merchandise in the context of the
pandemic. These effects appear to have extended
themselves with the emergence of the new variant of


the COVID-19 virus. In turn, during the referred
periods, annual food merchandise inflation was 7.59
and 8.76%, respectively, while that of non-food
merchandise was 6.86 and 6.88%, in the same order
(Chart 21). Annual services inflation rose from 3.92
to 4.35% in the same period, driven by the reopening
of service activities and the increased demand they
face, which had been contained for several months,
and which has also been favored by progress in the
vaccination campaigns. In this regard, between
November 2021 and January 2022, the annual
variation of services other than education and
housing registered levels of 5.60 and 6.23%,
respectively.

**Chart 20**

**Merchandise and Services Core Price Sub-index**

Annual percentage change

9

Merchandise

8

Services

7

6

5

4

3

2

1

January

0

J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J

2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022

Source: Banco de México and INEGI.

**Chart 21**

**Merchandise Core Price Sub-index**

Annual percentage change

8

7

6

5

4

3

2

1

Food, beverages and tobacco Non-food merchandise January

0

J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J

2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022


Source: Banco de México and INEGI.

Between November 2021 and January 2022, annual
non-core inflation fell from 12.61 to 9.68% (Chart 22
and Table 1). This result reflected the fall from 15.41
to 6.75% in annual energy inflation during the same
period. This was mainly due to the reduction in the
annual variation of L.P. gas prices, which went from
23.97 to -3.15%, and, to a lesser extent, in gasoline
prices, which registered levels of 15.35 and 10.20%
during the referred period. Annual agricultural and

19


-----

livestock product inflation rose from 14.36 to 15.32%,
driven by higher annual variations in the prices of
both fruits and vegetables and livestock products.

**Chart 22**

**Non-core Price Sub-index**

Annual percentage change

25

20

15

10

5

0

Non-core

-5 Agricultural and livestock products

Energy and government-authorized prices

-10


-15


January


J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J

2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022

Source: Banco de México and INEGI.

As for inflation expectations drawn from Banco de
México’s Survey among Private Sector Forecasters,
between November and January, the median for
headline inflation for the end of 2022 increased from
4.03 to 4.27%, while that for the core component
went from 3.83 to 4.29%. At the same time, the
median of headline inflation expectations for the end


of 2023 was adjusted from 3.60 to 3.76%, while that
for core inflation increased from 3.55 to 3.60%. On
the other hand, the median of headline inflation
expectations for the medium term decreased slightly
from 3.68 to 3.64%, while that for core inflation
remained at 3.60%. Those corresponding to longterm expectations remained around 3.50%. Finally,
compensation for inflation and inflationary risk
registered volatility and remains at high levels.
Expectations implicit in market instruments

continued trending upwards, while the inflation risk
premium remains at high levels.

The annual variations of headline and core inflation
are expected to converge to the 3% target towards
the end of the forecast horizon. These projections are
subject to risks. On the upside: i) external inflationary
pressures; ii) cost-related pressures; iii) persistence
of core inflation at high levels; iv) exchange rate
depreciation; and v) increases in both agricultural
and livestock product and energy prices. On the
downside: i) a greater-than-expected effect from the
negative output gap; ii) social distancing measures;
and iii) exchange rate appreciation. The balance of
risks for the trajectory of inflation within the forecast
horizon remains biased to the upside.
.


**Table 1**

**Consumer Price Index and Components**

Annual percentage change

**Item** **November 2021** **December 2021** **January 2022**

**CPI** **7.37** **7.36** **7.07**

**SubyacenteCore** **5.67** **5.94** **6.21**

**Merchandise** **7.24** **7.40** **7.86**

Food, beverages and tobacco 7.59 8.11 8.76

Non-food merchandise 6.86 6.61 6.88

**Services** **3.92** **4.30** **4.35**

Housing 2.46 2.54 2.61

Education (tuitions) 2.09 2.09 2.73

Other services 5.60 6.35 6.23

**No SubyacenteNon-core** **12.61** **11.74** **9.68**

**Agricultural and livestock products** **14.36** **15.78** **15.32**

Fruits and vegetablesFruits abd vegetables 17.80 21.73 18.44

Livestock productsLivestock 11.44 11.11 12.87

**Energy and government-authorized prices Energéticos y Tarifas Aut. por Gobierno** **11.26** **8.68** **5.56**

Energy productsEnergy 15.41 11.50 6.75

Government-authorized pricesTarifas Autorizadas por Gobierno 1.97 2.30 2.74

Source: INEGI.


20


-----

-----

-----

