-----

-----

**FOREWARNING**
This document is provided for the reader’s convenience
only. The translation from the official Spanish version was
made by Banco de México’s staff. Discrepancies may arise
between the original document in Spanish and its English
translation. For this reason, the original Spanish version is
the only official document.


**1. PLACE, DATE AND PARTICIPANTS**

**1.1. Place: Meeting held by virtual means.**

**1.2. Date of Governing Board meeting: September**
28, 2022.

**1.3. Participants:**

Victoria Rodríguez, Governor.
Galia Borja, Deputy Governor.
Irene Espinosa, Deputy Governor.
Gerardo Esquivel, Deputy Governor.
Jonathan Heath, Deputy Governor.
Rogelio Eduardo Ramírez, Secretary of Finance and
Public Credit.
Gabriel Yorio, Undersecretary of Finance and Public
Credit.
Elías Villanueva, Secretary of the Governing Board.

Prior to this meeting, preliminary work by Banco de
México’s staff analyzing the economic and financial
environment as well as the developments in inflation
and the determinants and outlook for inflation, was
conducted and presented to the Governing Board
(see Annex).

**2. ANALYSIS AND RATIONALE BEHIND THE**
**GOVERNING BOARD’S VOTING**

**_International environment_**

**Most members stated that timely indicators**
**suggest that world economic activity continued**
**decelerating during the third quarter.** **They**
**indicated that it has been affected by the adverse**
**effects of the military conflict, and** **one member**
added the impact of the tightening of financial
conditions. **However, most members highlighted**
**that labor markets in** **various economies**

**continued showing strength.** **Some members**
underlined the recovery in labor participation rates
and job creation in the United States. One member
mentioned that, however, real wages in almost all
advanced economies have started to register real
negative variations, which anticipates future

adjustments in private consumption. **Another**

member added that high inflation has eroded the
increase in nominal wages and highlighted that the


current juncture has affected consumer confidence.
**Most members underlined that global growth**
**forecasts** **have** **been** **revised** **downwards,**

**especially for 2023.** **One member added that**
expectations of a recession have increased. Another
member considered that the Chinese economy
seems to have regained some dynamism.

Nevertheless, **some members pointed out that its**
growth expectations have been revised downwards.

**Among risks to the global economy, most**
**members highlighted those associated with the**
**pandemic, the intensification of geopolitical**
**tensions, and greater adjustments in monetary**
**and financial conditions.** **One member added the**
energy crisis that may arise in Europe, as well as the
possible effects of the decline in housing prices in
advanced economies. Another member considered
as additional risks: i) the increasing private debt that
could lead to conditions of financial instability; ii) the
high fiscal deficits, particularly in systemically
important economies that implemented substantial
stimulus packages during the pandemic; and iii) that
the vulnerabilities in the real estate sector in China,
in a context of weak economic activity, lead to credit
default events, with amplifying effects to the rest of
the world. Finally, he/she noted that the balance of
risks for global economic activity remains

considerably deteriorated.

**Most members pointed out that global inflation**
**continued increasing.** **This occurred in an**
**environment where imbalances between demand**
**and supply in several markets, and still high**
**levels of food and energy prices, persist.** **Some**
members noted that in most economies, inflation
remains above their respective central bank targets.
**Most members highlighted that core inflation**
**continues increasing. Some members pointed out**
that in the United States, headline inflation declined
in August, while core inflation increased. **One**
member stated that in the euro area headline and
core inflation increased in August, while in the major
emerging economies headline inflation remained at
high levels and core inflation continued increasing.

**All members underlined the decline in the**
**international prices of some commodities,**
**especially** **energy-related ones, albeit with**

**volatility. They pointed out that disruptions in**
**supply chains have also moderated. Most**
**members added that, in** **some** **countries,**

**pressures on headline inflation have started to**
**diminish.** **One member indicated that price-related**
pressures have decreased due to the effects of the
favorable dynamics of the pandemic and to the

1


-----

restrictive stance adopted by various governments
and central banks, which has led to a moderation of
global spending. He/she considered that inflation
expectations drawn from surveys and those implicit
in market instruments have started to decrease at the
margin in different countries. Some members stated
that there is still uncertainty regarding whether world
inflation has already reached its peak and whether its
decline will coincide with central banks’ forecasts.

**Most members mentioned that a large number of**
**central banks have continued raising their**
**reference rates, some of them in a greater**
**magnitude than expected. They mentioned that**
**said institutions have maintained a restrictive**
**tone, reaffirming their commitment to price**
**stability. Regarding the Federal Reserve, all**
**members stated that, in its latest monetary policy**
**decision, it raised the target range for the federal**
**funds rate by 75 basis points for a third**
**consecutive** **time** **and** **anticipated** **future**

**adjustments. Most members highlighted that the**
**latest forecasts by said institution suggest**
**further increases of 125 basis points for this year**
**which would place the reference rate at 4.4%, and**
**at 4.6% for the end of 2023. One member stated**
that the chairman of that institution expressed that
future increases in the rates will continue to depend
on incoming economic data. Most members
**mentioned that the European Central Bank also**
**raised its reference rate by 75 basis points.** **One**
member underlined that other central banks have
started to decouple from the Federal Reserve,
responding to their domestic conditions. He/she
pointed out that China and Japan continue
implementing accommodative policy stances, while
Chile and Brazil appear to have already reached the
end of their hiking cycles.

**Most members mentioned that expectations of a**
**faster monetary tightening worldwide and of**
**reference rates at elevated levels for a prolonged**
**period prevail.** **One member mentioned that**
monetary authorities have generally acknowledged
that inflationary pressures will be more severe and
longer-lasting than expected. He/she underlined that
they also anticipate a delay in the convergence of
inflation to their targets toward the end of 2023 and
2024. He/she added that said authorities have
expressed that ex-ante real interest rates could
exceed the neutral range for some time and attain
levels above those previously estimated. He/she
noted that central banks have indicated that, if
necessary, they will make greater sacrifices in terms
of growth and employment.


**Most members stated that financial conditions**
**remained tight and that international financial**
**markets exhibited volatility. They mentioned that**
**the above have been affected by an outlook of**
**more restrictive monetary policies in the main**
**advanced economies and by a lower global**
**growth outlook. They underlined that interest**
**rates registered widespread and significant**
**increases worldwide. They pointed out that stock**
**markets exhibited a negative performance. They**
**mentioned that the dollar continued gaining**
**strength, reaching its highest level in 20 years.**
**One member highlighted that this could imply a**
greater pass-through of external inflation to domestic
inflation, a higher cost of debt service for debt
denominated in that currency, and larger capital
outflows in emerging economies. He/she added that
the latter has been observed recently, particularly in
fixed income instruments. **Another** member

underlined that the pound sterling, the euro, and the
yen reached their lowest levels in decades. **Some**
members mentioned that the currencies of emerging
economies exhibited a negative behavior, in a
context of higher risk aversion. **Some members**
highlighted that different central banks had to
intervene in their foreign exchange markets. **One**
member mentioned that risk premia in emerging
economies also increased. Another member pointed
out that an environment of high uncertainty is
foreseen to continue for the rest of the year.

**_Economic activity in Mexico_**

**Most members expect growth of economic**
**activity during the third quarter of 2022 to slow**
**down with respect to that observed in the first**
**half of the year. However, they pointed out that**
**after having remained weak in May and June,**
**economic activity recovered in July. One member**
stated that said result was supported by the three
main economic sectors. Nevertheless, he/she
warned that almost 35% of sectoral activity remains
below pre-pandemic levels. Another member added
that economic activity still has not been able to
surpass the level reached in April, and that, if timely
figures for August are confirmed, economic activity
will have remained on a flat trajectory for four
consecutive months. Some members noted that the
economy is expected to continue recovering
gradually, although at a lower rate, and facing a
complex global economic environment that

maintains the balance of risks for growth biased to
the downside.

**On the supply side, most members stated that**
**industrial** **production** **continued** **recovering,**

2


-----

**supported by the sound performance of the**
**manufacturing sector.** **One member indicated that**
industrial activity has expanded for five consecutive
months. Some members considered said expansion
has been heterogeneous across its sectors, showing
a lack of dynamism in the mining and construction
sectors. **Most members highlighted the slight**
**recovery of services in July, nevertheless they**
**underlined that these remain weak.** **Some**
members mentioned that they continue showing a
differentiated behavior.

**On the demand side, most members pointed out**
**that** **consumption** **continued** **recovering,**

**supported by the high levels of remittances and**
**of the real wage bill.** **Some members stated that**
during the second quarter the monthly indicator of
private consumption increased 1.2%, although it
decelerated in May and June. **One member**
underlined that consumption has barely recovered its
pre-pandemic level and continues showing a certain
lag with respect to its trend. **Another member**
highlighted the positive trend of consumption of
imported goods. **However, most members noted**
**that different consumption determinants, such**
**as consumer confidence and real average**
**income, among others, deteriorated at the**
**margin. Some members noted that this suggests a**
possible deceleration of private consumption. **Most**
**members mentioned that investment continued**
**recovering. One member pointed out that this**
recovery has occurred with a high monthly variability.
**Most members observed that the component of**
**machinery and equipment has improved at the**
**margin,** **while** **investment** **in** **construction**

**continues to lack dynamism. One member pointed**
out that spending on transportation equipment
improved. Another member indicated that during the
May-June period, total investment interrupted its
growth, in the components of machinery and
equipment and of construction. As for the external
**sector, most members underlined the positive**
**performance of exports.** **Some members pointed**
out that automotive exports expanded in August,
while the rest of manufacturing exports declined at
the margin. One member noted that an improvement
was observed in both the oil trade balance and the
total trade balance. Another member added that the
value of manufacturing exports has remained high,
due to increases in both their volume and prices. One
member warned that there are signals of a reduction
in the growth rate of non-automotive exports, partly
associated with expectations of a global slowdown.

**All members mentioned that different labor**
**market indicators have continued to improve,**


although **some members pointed out that the**
recovery remains incomplete. **Most members**
**highlighted** **that** **in** **July** **the** **extended**

**unemployment rate and the labor participation**
**rate registered levels similar to those prior to the**
**pandemic.** **One member added that in August the**
number of IMSS-insured jobs continued trending
upwards. However, another member mentioned that
there is still a deficit in formal job creation, and
around 32 million workers remain in the informal
sector. **Some members highlighted that in August**
contractual wage revisions in the private sector and
those of IMSS-insured workers continued trending
upwards, with adjustments close to 7 and 12%,
respectively. One member considered that, although
the implementation of pending adjustments in wages
is good news, the global indicator of labor
productivity has accumulated eight consecutive
quarters of contraction and is at levels previously
observed in 2009, and that for this reason unit labor
costs have increased considerably. **Another**

member stated that the National Survey of
Occupation and Employment (ENOE, for its acronym
in Spanish), which includes both formal and informal
workers, suggests that wages have not increased
significantly in real terms. In contrast, he/she pointed
out that inflation might be having a greater incidence
on certain sectors, which would be associated with a
heterogeneous recovery. He/she pointed out that
wage revisions have concentrated in the subgroup of
formal IMSS-insured workers, where the sectors of
construction, agriculture and business-support

services stand out. In contrast, he/she stated that
real wages in other sectors are lagging behind.
He/she mentioned that recent studies which
decompose wage dynamics of IMSS-insured

workers by type of worker, suggest that wage
increases can be largely attributed to the 2021 labor
outsourcing reform. He/she deemed it important to
assess if such increases will be observed in the
future once the effects of said reform dissipate.

**Most members pointed out that slack conditions**
**in the economy are expected to continue**
**decreasing.** **One member warned that, on the**
demand side, the negative output gap could be
inexistent or even positive if potential GDP turns out
to be lower than estimated, or if the negative effects
of the labor outsourcing reform are excluded.
**Another member argued that economic activity**
continues showing considerable slack, given that in
the second quarter of the year, GDP remained well
below its medium-term trajectory and slightly below
its pre-pandemic level.

3


-----

**_Inflation in Mexico_**

**All members emphasized the high inflation**
**levels. Most members indicated that in the first**
**fortnight of September headline and core**
**inflation registered annual rates of 8.76 and**
**8.27%, respectively. They stated that both**
**headline and core inflation continue trending**
**upwards.** **One member stated that such upward**
trajectory has been observed for over 20 months for
headline inflation, and for over 18 months for core
inflation. **Some members mentioned that inflation**
has repeatedly been at higher-than-expected levels
since early 2021. **One member pointed out that**
headline inflation does not show signs of reaching its
peak. Nonetheless, **another member stated that**
pressures at the margin on monthly inflation have
trended downwards since March. **One member**
added that both headline and core inflation remain at
levels unseen in two decades. **Another member**
mentioned that even CPI items with more price
rigidity register inflation levels above 4%, which
indicates generalized pressures. **Most members**
**stated that the high levels of inflation in Mexico**
**are partly attributed to a global phenomenon.**
**They indicated that although less disruptions**
**and** **decreases** **in** **the** **international** **price**

**references of some commodities have been**
**observed, there are still imbalances between**
**supply and demand in different markets.** **Some**
members pointed out that production costs remain
affected by increases in various input prices. **One**
member mentioned that world inflation, particularly in
the United States, needs to show a change of trend
for inflation in Mexico to begin decreasing. However,
he/she warned that this would not be sufficient, given
that increasing pressures are also being faced at a
domestic level.

**Most members mentioned that core inflation**
**continued registering high levels. One member**
pointed out that this was observed in practically all of
its components. Another member noted that, at the
margin, there were lower pressures on monthly core
inflation, particularly in food merchandise and
services. **Some** members highlighted that

merchandise inflation is at double-digit levels. Most
**members pointed out that food merchandise**
**inflation reached 13.27% in the first half of**
**September. One member pointed out that this figure**
is nearly double the one registered a year ago, and
that its annual increase in August was more
pronounced than that of previous months. He/she
added that this reflects the high levels of international
food commodity prices. Another member mentioned
that food merchandise prices have been increasing


at double-digit rates for months. He/she added that
in addition to negatively affecting the CPI and the
purchasing power of lower-income households, this
situation is worrying because consumers perceive
these increases as the level of inflation in the
economy in general. Some members pointed out that
non-food merchandise inflation continues facing
pressures. **Some members noted that it has**
consolidated at very high levels and **one member**
warned that it has trended upwards this year. Most
**members mentioned that services inflation has**
**followed** **an** **upward** **trend.** **One** member

highlighted that it is at very high levels. **Some**
members pointed out that this is due to the inflation
in tourism and food services. One member added the
inflation in education services as a cause. **Another**
member deemed that services prices are responding
to pressures on input costs and to an increase in
demand due to greater mobility.

**All members noted that non-core inflation**
**remains at high levels. Some members mentioned**
that this is mainly explained by the prices of
agricultural and livestock products. **One member**
highlighted that the non-core component remains at
high levels despite government efforts to contain
energy inflation. He/she added that it is not expected
to decrease easily. Another member mentioned that
this component registered monthly rates in line with
its historical average for three consecutive months.
He/she added that this favorable behavior was
observed in energy and in agriculture and livestock
products. **One member highlighted that inflation of**
agricultural and livestock products reached double
digits. He/she pointed out that despite the decrease
in international references, energy prices in Mexico
have not declined proportionally. However, another
member mentioned that energy prices registered
relatively low annual inflation levels.

**Most members stated that expectations for**
**headline and core inflation for 2022 and 2023**
**rose again. Some members pointed out that this has**
been in line with the observed increase in inflation.
**Most members indicated that medium-term**
**expectations increased slightly at the margin and**
**pointed** **out** **that** **long-term** **expectations**

**remained stable, although above the target.**
However, **some members highlighted that their**
distribution shows a greater dispersion. Regarding
expectations for core inflation, **one member stated**
that long-term ones decreased at the margin. In this
context, **another member mentioned that although**
medium- and long-term inflation expectations have
begun to stabilize, they are still at high levels.
**Regarding expectations drawn from market**

4


-----

**instruments, most members noted that these**
**have continued to deteriorate. Some members**
mentioned that those related to the long-term remain
slightly above 3%. **Some members noted that**
breakeven inflation registered generalized increases
in all maturities.

**Most members stated that, in view of greater-**
**than-anticipated inflationary shocks and an**
**outlook for their effects lasting longer than**
**anticipated, forecasts for headline and core**
**inflation were revised upwards for the entire**
**forecast horizon. They pointed out that, in the**
**current** **complex** **environment,** **inflation** **is**

**foreseen to converge to the 3% target in the third**
**quarter of 2024. One** member mentioned that
pointwise convergence is in line with the time frame
in which monetary policy operates and coincides with
the anticipated convergence of inflation in several
economies. However, he/she noted that the fact that
inflationary shocks could worsen or that new
pressures could materialize cannot be ruled out.
**Another member highlighted that convergence to**
the target will take time because lower levels of
external inflation do not automatically translate into a
decline in domestic inflation, and because of the lag
with which the restrictive stance will have an impact.
He/she stated that convergence will be fragile given
the continuous emergence of unanticipated shocks.
He/she mentioned that convergence will be difficult
to achieve, as it implies that by the second half of
2023 non-core inflation reaches levels far below what
is usually observed. He/she indicated that, in addition
to the fact that it has not followed a downward trend,
it has a very strong seasonality, and it is volatile.
Likewise, he/she pointed out that there is a
divergence for the end of 2023 between our forecasts
and analyst expectations, which calls into question
the credibility of the trajectory presented, and could
contribute to the deterioration of medium- and longterm expectations.

**Among upward risks to inflation, most members**
**mentioned the persistence of core inflation at**
**high** **levels** **and** **the** **external** **inflationary**

**pressures associated with the pandemic and the**
**geopolitical conflict. One member considered that**
international reference prices of various commodities
have shown a strong correlation with domestic prices
and have generated an important pass-through onto
domestic inflation, and for that reason it may be a risk
if such pass-through shows an asymmetric effect
onto the decline in inflation as the price of these
commodities declines. Therefore, he/she stated that,
looking ahead, the process of convergence could
face significant challenges. As for wage revisions,


**another member estimated that these could intensify**
due to additional increases in the minimum wage,
which could rise by more than 20% in the next two
years. One member highlighted that the high levels
of inflation seem to have started to affect wage
revisions, which could imply the risk of a price-wage
spiral. **Another member pointed out that salaries,**
including those of both formal and informal workers,
have not increased significantly in real terms, and
therefore it is difficult to argue that there are
generalized wage pressures. **One member added**
the risk of an exchange rate depreciation in light of
prospects of tighter global financial conditions.
**Another member added that the economy faces**
increasing domestic pressures. He/she noted that
the output gap could be smaller than currently
estimated and pointed out that services prices have
increased considerably, even though they are
generally non-tradable. He/she added that weatherrelated factors could exert upward pressure on
prices. He/she stated that various risks are taking
place in an environment of low competitiveness in
multiple sectors, which could favor price increases.
**One member mentioned two risks to public finances**
that could exert pressure on monetary policy. First,
that the growth levels foreseen in the 2023 Economic
Package do not materialize. Second, that a larger
fiscal deficit with greater levels of public spending are
observed. Regarding downward risks, **another**
member highlighted a greater-than-anticipated

slowdown in world economic activity, as well as a
reduction in the effects of the pandemic and the
military conflict on production and distribution chains.
**In this context, most members mentioned that**
**the balance of risks for the trajectory of inflation**
**within the forecast horizon remains biased**
**significantly to the upside.**

**_Macrofinancial environment_**

**Most members pointed out that domestic**
**financial markets reflected the global dynamics**
**of lower risk appetite and a generalized strength**
**of the US dollar. They stated that the stock**
**market** **registered** **negative** **movements.**

**However, they pointed out that the peso**
**remained stable. They noted a favorable behavior**
**compared to the currencies of most emerging**
**economies. One member noted that this positive**
result was also observed with respect to the
currencies of advanced economies. **Another**

member stated that the peso has been more volatile
in recent days due to external factors. **Some**
members highlighted that the sound macroeconomic
fundamentals have contributed to the relatively
favorable performance of domestic financial markets,

5


-----

particularly of the foreign exchange market. **One**
member added that exchange rate stability has not
only prevented further capital outflows, but also
reduced inflationary pressures stemming from
imported goods. **Another member indicated that**
fiscal discipline has also contributed to preserve the
credit ratings of public debt. He/she noted that capital
flows to the debt market by non-residents have been
negatively affected by the global component, and
positively by the idiosyncratic factor. He/she stated
that this explains the better performance of Mexican
debt securities relative to those of other emerging
economies. **One member pondered that monetary**
policy actions implemented by Banco de México
have led to an attractive volatility-adjusted interest
rate spread relative to the United States.

**Most members highlighted that interest rates of**
**government bonds increased throughout the**
**entire yield curve. Some members pointed out that**
short-term interest rates increased close to 120 basis
points. One member added that medium- and longterm interest rates increased by up to 110 basis
points. **Some members highlighted that the yield**
curve of real interest rate instruments also increased
in all its maturities. Some members considered that
this implies a tightening of financial conditions and
reflects expectations of a more restrictive monetary
policy stance. **One member pointed out that the**
sovereign default premia rose significantly.

**One member highlighted that credit to the productive**
sector continued recovering. He/she added that
despite an environment of higher interest rates,
domestic financing to firms increased in July due to
the gradual improvement in credit from commercial
banks. He/she added that consumer credit continues
increasing and that banks’ loan portfolio delinquency
rates continue declining. Another member

considered that, although it improved at the margin,
credit to the productive sectors remained weak and
below its pre-pandemic level and its long-term trend.

**_Monetary policy_**

**The Governing Board evaluated the magnitude**
**and diversity of the shocks that have affected**
**inflation and its determinants, along with the**
**evolution of medium- and long-term inflation**
**expectations and the price formation process. It**
**also considered the increasing challenges for**
**monetary policy stemming from the ongoing**
**tightening of global financial conditions, the**
**environment of significant uncertainty, the**
**inflationary pressures accumulated as a result of**
**the pandemic and the geopolitical conflict, as**
**well as the possibility of greater effects on**


**inflation. Based on these considerations, and**
**with the presence of all its members, the Board**
**decided unanimously to raise the target for the**
**overnight interbank interest rate by 75 basis**
**points to 9.25%. The Board added that with this**
**action, the monetary policy stance adjusts to the**
**trajectory required for inflation to converge to its**
**3% target within the forecast horizon.**

**The Board will thoroughly monitor inflationary**
**pressures as well as all factors that have an**
**incidence on the foreseen path for inflation and**
**its expectations. This, in order to set a policy rate**
**that is consistent at all times with both the**
**orderly and sustained convergence of headline**
**inflation to the 3% target within the time frame in**
**which monetary policy operates as well as with**
**an adequate adjustment of the economy and**
**financial markets. The Board will assess the**
**magnitude of the upward adjustments in the**
**reference rate for its next policy decisions based**
**on the prevailing conditions.**

**One** **member stated that the environment for**
conducting monetary policy has become more
complicated, in view of inflationary pressures that still
show no clear signs of dissipating, and tighter
international financial conditions. He/she argued that
since June of last year, throughout the entire
inflationary episode associated with the pandemic
and the military conflict in Ukraine, Banco de México
has increased the reference rate in a timely and
decisive manner, including increases of 75 basis
points in the latest decisions. He/she highlighted that
this reflects the commitment to the central bank’s
primary mandate. As for the ex-ante real interest
rate, he/she mentioned that it is now around the
upper bound of the range estimated as neutral, and
should be brought into clearly restrictive territory.
He/she pointed out that a 75 basis-point increase
would achieve this objective and would reflect the
central bank's commitment to its primary mandate, in
a context of significant inflationary pressures. He/she
stated that such reinforcement is also necessary to
anchor inflation expectations, mainly longer-term
ones. He/she underlined two challenges. First, that
although adjustments in medium- and long-term
inflation expectations during the year have been
moderate, it is essential to act decisively to avoid an
unanchoring process. He/she warned that, if this
process were to materialize, it would affect price
formation and significantly jeopardize the

convergence of inflation to its target. Second, that
monetary policy actions contributed to an orderly
adjustment of financial markets, including the foreign
exchange market, and prevented an impact on long
6


-----

term expectations. However, he/she warned that
episodes of greater risk aversion and exchange rate
volatility cannot be ruled out, and thus a prudent
monetary policy is required to avoid possible
negative effects on financial markets. He/she added
that, looking ahead, the hiking cycle must continue
and pointed out that the magnitude of subsequent
increases should be discussed based on the
evolution of inflation and its determinants. He/she
highlighted that inflationary episodes have a
regressive impact, affecting lower-income

households the most, since they have less access to
the formal financial system and, consequently, have
fewer alternatives to protect themselves from
generalized price increases. He/she recalled that
food prices have risen in greater magnitude,
intensifying the regressive effects, since lowerincome households tend to allocate a greater
proportion of their spending to these products.
He/she noted that it is essential for the central bank
to prevent high inflation from becoming entrenched,
as it would have persistent adverse repercussions on
poverty, income distribution and, in general, on the
well-being of Mexican families. He/she stated that
this is why it is key for the Board to explicitly manifest
its commitment to achieving the central bank’s
primary mandate.

**Another member pointed out that, since the**
previous monetary policy decision, inflationary
pressures, the factors that influence the forecasted
trajectory for inflation, as well as its expectations,
have deteriorated. He/she stated that additional
factors are added to the deteriorated inflationary
environment, at a global and local level, including a
juncture of lower liquidity, high exchange rate
volatility, greater risk aversion, as well as a
deterioration in economic activity, and the possibility
of new shocks stemming from the continuation or
escalation of geopolitical conflicts. In his/her opinion,
this environment implies that it will be necessary to
continue increasing the reference rate, and that it
should remain in a more restrictive level throughout
the entire horizon in which monetary policy operates.
He/she added that this would contribute to mitigate
the deterioration of the price formation process and
stop inflationary expectations from increasing,
allowing inflation to converge to the target. He/she
pointed out that although the unanchoring process
seems to have started, adjustments at the margin in
long-term expectations could indicate that pressures
are somewhat contained. He/she considered it
convenient to maintain the pace of monetary
tightening that has been implemented given that,
since the beginning of the hiking cycle, taking into
consideration a 75 basis-point increase in the current


decision, 525 basis points of increases would have
been accumulated and the ex-ante real interest rate
would finally be brought to restrictive territory. He/she
added that a 75 basis-point increase would be
consistent with the expected trajectory of inflation
and would allow it to converge to the 3% target within
the forecast horizon. However, he/she underlined
that more adverse global conditions, in an
environment of greater uncertainty, could lead the
Governing Board to consider modifying the pace of
adjustment. He/she warned that no scenario can be
ruled out, and therefore it is fundamental to clearly
communicate that: i) the reference rate will continue
increasing; ii) the magnitude of the increases will
depend on the conditions prevailing at the time of
each decision; and iii) it will be necessary for the
monetary policy stance to remain restrictive within
the forecast horizon, to guarantee the convergence
of inflation to the target.

**One member considered it necessary to adjust the**
monetary policy stance in light of the inflation levels
and to avoid second-round effects. He/she

underlined that it is essential to continue adopting a
restrictive monetary policy stance. He/she mentioned
that with an increase of 75 basis points, the target
rate would decidedly lay in restrictive territory and
that it is time to evaluate up to when and to what
extent the policy stance will be tightened, and what
will be the response to additional hikes by the
Federal Reserve. He/she stated that the terminal rate
of the cycle would need to be determined based on
the ex-ante real interest rate rather than on the
nominal interest rate. He/she stated that the
maximum level for the ex-ante real interest rate in
recent years was 4.4%, reached in 2018. Thus,
he/she estimated that a possible terminal level of
such rate in this cycle could be between 4.5 and 5%.
He/she added that such level would have a
significant restrictive effect on economic activity and
an impact on economic agents' expectations. He/she
mentioned that, given the level of inflation

expectations, said real interest rate level would be
reached with a nominal interest rate of between 9.75
and 10%, and thus a higher rate would be
unnecessarily restrictive. He/she warned that this
would imply having excessively high levels of real
interest rates in the short term that might turn out to
be even higher in the future, to the extent that the
monetary policy stance affects inflation expectations.
He/she considered it desirable for the hiking cycle to
conclude by the end of 2022 and that the restrictive
monetary policy stance is maintained throughout
2023 in order to allow monetary policy to operate.
He/she pointed out that it is imperative to consider
the lag with which monetary policy works and avoid

7


-----

an excessive tightening. He/she indicated that the
restrictive policy would have just begun affecting
credit, consumption and investment, and noted that
the effect of this stance, along with the decline in
international prices of commodities, makes it
possible to foresee that inflationary pressures will
begin to diminish. He/she warned that, if ending 2022
with an ex-ante real interest rate close to 5% is to be
achieved, the pace of adjustments would need to be
reduced, regardless of what the Federal Reserve
may do. He/she expressed that decoupling from the
pace of said institution’s interest rate hikes could be
feasible as of the next policy decision since: i) Banco
de México began its hiking cycle earlier and,
considering the proposed hike, it would accumulate
525 basis points of increases; ii) hikes of 150 basis
points in the federal funds rate are anticipated and
Banco de México requires a smaller adjustment; iii)
Mexico's ex-ante real interest rate is in restrictive
territory, unlike that of the United States; iv) Mexico
does not face demand-related or labor market
pressures; v) the interest rate spread relative to the
United States is close to historical highs and far
above the spread calculated with the estimated
neutral interest rates for both countries; and vi)
Mexico maintains solid macroeconomic

fundamentals.

**Another member highlighted the importance of**
having a restrictive monetary policy stance

consistent with a complex inflationary landscape.
He/she pointed out that the conditions are not
suitable for slowing the pace of interest rate
increases and that it could even be debated whether
such pace should be accelerated. Although an
increase of 100 basis points would send a strong
signal and contribute to contain the deterioration of
expectations, it is not advisable since: i) it would lead
to an unnecessary increase in the relative stance; ii)
an increase that is greater-than that anticipated by
the consensus of analysts and market operators
would generate uncertainty about future

adjustments; iii) there would be the risk of reaching a
very high terminal rate, with a pace of adjustment
difficult to maintain that would require subsequent
reductions, for which there would be no conditions in
the coming months; and iv) it would be difficult to
justify a strategy of front loading, bringing forward the
interest rate hikes, given the uncertainty about the
terminal level of the interest rate. He/she stated that
although a significantly restrictive absolute monetary
stance would not eliminate the inflation outbreak, it
would prevent second-round effects from taking
place and the risk of expectations becoming
unanchored. He/she added that an increase of 75
basis points is barely enough to bring the ex-ante real


interest rate further into restrictive territory, and thus
any fears about reaching an excessively restrictive
monetary policy stance, which affects the rate of
growth of economic activity, may be ruled out.
He/she highlighted that cyclical conditions become a
secondary priority until inflation is brought under
control. He/she argued that with the aforementioned
adjustment, the ex-ante real interest rate would be at
the maximum level reached during the restrictive
cycles of 2008 and 2019. He/she added that in view
of a more complex inflationary outlook, the terminal
real interest rate should be higher, even more so than
that anticipated by markets, and at a level near 6%,
as his/her own models anticipate. Moreover, he/she
argued that it is not possible to implement a hike
lower than that of the Federal Reserve not because
an automatic rule is followed, but because: i)
synchronizing inflationary pressures between both
economies demands a similar tightening; ii) a solid
relative stance is necessary given expectations of
additional increases by the Federal Reserve; iii) a
premature decoupling could generate exchange rate
volatility and be perceived as a sign of complacency;
and iv) an interest rate spread of at least 600 basis
points should be maintained at least until the end of
the year to support the good performance of the
Mexican peso in view of the appreciation of the dollar
and the higher volatility. He/she stated that it should
be communicated that it is very likely that the same
pace of adjustment will continue in the next decision,
adding that higher increases should not be ruled out
if the inflationary outlook deteriorates even further.
He/she pointed out that it must be highlighted that the
magnitude of the increases will depend on the latest
information, especially regarding observed inflation
and its expectations, as well as forward-looking
inflation indicators, such as producer prices and
international price benchmarks for commodities.
He/she emphasized that in order to avoid higher
costs in the future, the commitment to the
constitutional mandate must be strengthened until
the inflation trend has moved past its inflection point,
inflation expectations have stabilized, and inflation
forecasts are no longer revised upwards.

**One member stated that, in line with the monetary**
policy regime, the stance should be adjusted so that
the central bank inflation forecast reflects a more
neutral and symmetric balance of risks. He/she
stated that during this hiking cycle, Banco de México
has acted in a committed manner, with timely and
gradual increases in the reference rate, as well as
robust and forceful hikes when conditions have so
required. He/she argued that a restrictive monetary
stance has already been achieved. He/she added
that, although medium- and long-term inflation

8


-----

expectations have started to stabilize, they are still at
high levels and within them they exhibit a bimodal
distribution between 3.5 and 4%, which represents a
significant challenge for monetary policy. He/she
considered it necessary to maintain such

expectations anchored. He/she pointed out that by
increasing the pace of adjustments of the monetary
policy rate, the ex-ante real interest rate was raised
beyond the range estimated as neutral. He/she noted
that an increase of 75 basis points would strengthen
the absolute monetary stance and ensure that the
nominal interest rate lies above the level of observed
inflation, which is a necessary condition to achieve
its convergence to the target. He/she emphasized
that the nominal interest rate would also be above the
expected levels of inflation within the forecast
horizon, which is consistent with a downward
trajectory of inflation. Regarding the relative
monetary stance, he/she stated that inflation
expectations in the United States have declined
faster than in Mexico, and thus the ex-ante real
interest rate spread between both countries has
narrowed. He/she highlighted that the greater
monetary tightening in the United States and the
intensification of geopolitical tensions led to an
increase in risk aversion and to greater volatility.
He/she argued that the proposed interest rate
increase would provide certainty that markets and
the financial system will adjust in an orderly manner
and avoid affecting the economy's price formation
process. He/she stated that, looking ahead, each
decision must be carefully calibrated, determining the
appropriate monetary stance to guarantee price
stability and ensure the convergence of inflation to
the target. He/she underlined that all available
information must be considered when determining
the monetary policy stance.

**3. MONETARY POLICY DECISION**

The Governing Board evaluated the magnitude and
diversity of the shocks that have affected inflation
and its determinants, along with the evolution of
medium- and long-term inflation expectations and the
price formation process. It also considered the
increasing challenges for monetary policy stemming
from the ongoing tightening of global financial
conditions, the environment of significant

uncertainty, the inflationary pressures accumulated
as a result of the pandemic and the geopolitical
conflict, as well as the possibility of greater effects on
inflation. Based on these considerations, and with the
presence of all its members, it decided unanimously
to raise the target for the overnight interbank interest


rate by 75 basis points to 9.25%. With this action, the
monetary policy stance adjusts to the trajectory
required for inflation to converge to its 3% target
within the forecast horizon.

The Board will thoroughly monitor inflationary
pressures as well as all factors that have an
incidence on the foreseen path for inflation and its
expectations. This, in order to set a policy rate that is
consistent at all times, with both the orderly and
sustained convergence of headline inflation to the
3% target within the time frame in which monetary
policy operates as well as with an adequate
adjustment of the economy and financial markets.
The Board will assess the magnitude of the upward
adjustments in the reference rate for its next policy
decisions based on the prevailing conditions.

**4. VOTING**

Victoria Rodríguez, Galia Borja, Irene Espinosa,
Gerardo Esquivel and Jonathan Heath voted in favor
of increasing the target for the overnight interbank
interest rate by 75 basis points to 9.25%.

**5. DISSENTING OPINION/ VOTE**

**Opinion. Irene Espinosa**

The main reason behind my dissenting opinion
regarding the monetary policy statement is that, in
view of the deteriorating outlook for inflation and
financial conditions, the significant correction in our
inflation forecasts, and a balance of risks biased
significantly to the upside, I consider it appropriate to
provide an explicit guide that allows an alignment of
expectations on the future path of the reference rate
within the horizon in which monetary policy operates.
As I have mentioned on previous occasions,
communication is a key aspect of monetary policy.
Following this premise, I believe that, in addition to
mentioning that the reference rate will continue to be
adjusted upwards, and that the magnitude of said
adjustments will be evaluated by the Governing
Board based on the conditions prevailing at the time
each policy decision is made, on this ocassion, the
monetary policy statement should mention explicitly
and clearly that, in order to converge to the 3% target,
the monetary policy stance must remain restrictive
during the entire forecast horizon. Although a high
level of uncertainty prevails, providing a guide on the
future stance of monetary policy is necessary to
enable the formation of expectations consistent with
inflation’s convergence to the target.

9


-----

**ANNEX**

The information in this Annex was prepared for this
meeting by the staff of Banco de México’s
Directorate General of Economic Research and
Directorate General of Central Bank Operations. It
does not necessarily reflect the considerations of the
members of the Governing Board as to the monetary
policy decision.

**A.1. External conditions**

**A.1.1. World economic activity**

Timely indicators suggest that global economic
activity has continued decelerating during the third
quarter of 2022 due to the negative economic effects
of Russia's invasion of Ukraine, a slower-thananticipated recovery of economic activity in China,
and the tightening of global financial conditions due
to a more accelerated withdrawal of monetary
stimulus. This weakening has occurred in different
regions and sectors (Chart 1).

World inflation continued increasing in an

environment in which imbalances between supply
and demand in various markets and elevated prices
of energy and food persist, although some
commodities’ price adjustments have moderated in
recent readings. In this context, a large number of
central banks continued raising their reference rates,
some of them in greater magnitude than expected,
while expectations of a faster monetary tightening at
a global level and of reference rates at high levels for
a prolonged period continued. Global financial
conditions remained tight and the dollar continued
gaining strength.

Among the most important global risks are those
associated with the COVID-19 pandemic, the
persistence of inflationary pressures, the

intensification of geopolitical tensions, and further
adjustments in economic, monetary and financial
conditions.


**Global: Purchasing Managers’ Index:**

**Production Component**

Diffusion index, s. a.

65

60

55

50

45

40

35 Manufacturing

Manufacturing (excl. China)

30 Services

Services (excl. China)

25 August

20

2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022

s. a. / Seasonally adjusted figures.
Source: IHS Markit.

In the United States, available indicators suggest a
moderate GDP growth in the third quarter of the year
(Chart 2), after having contracted in the previous two
quarters. Although economic activity in the third
quarter has been supported by net exports, some
timely indicators have weakened compared to a few
months ago, especially those related to the real
estate sector. Although private consumption’s
contribution is expected to remain positive, it has lost
dynamism due to lower real household income and
tighter financial conditions.

Industrial production continued expanding at a
moderate pace at the beginning of the third quarter,
growing 0.2% on average at a seasonally adjusted
monthly rate in July and August. This growth was
driven by the continued expansion of manufacturing
production, supported by consumer durables and
equipment, although the latter registered a

slowdown at the margin. Meanwhile, mining
production was driven by a rebound in oil and gas
drilling and extraction in July, before stalling in
August, while gas generation for domestic

consumption and electricity decreased in both
months. The manufacturing Purchasing Managers'
Index (PMI) points to slight growth during the third
quarter, curbed by a moderate demand and
persistent disruptions in supply chains.

10

|Chart 1 Global: Purchasing Managers’ Index: Production Component  Diffusion index, s. a.|Col2|
|---|---|
|||
|Manufacturing Manufacturing (excl. China) Services Services (excl. China)|August|


-----

**Chart 2**

**US Real GDP and Components**

Quarterly percentage rate and contribution in

percentage points, s. a.


3.0

2.5

2.0

1.5

1.0

0.5

0.0

-0.5

-1.0

-1.5

-2.0


50


Private consumption expenditures
Residential investment 45
Nonresidential investment
Change in private inventories 40
Net exports
Government consumption expendituresTotal 35

30

25

20

15

10

5

0


a. e./ Seasonally adjusted figures.
Note: The shaded area refers to forecasts of GDPNow of September 2022.
Source: BEA and GDPNow (Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta).

The US labor market continued showing signs of
tightening. Non-farm payrolls continued their robust
pace of job creation, increasing by 315 thousand
new jobs during August, after having grown by 526
thousand jobs in July. The unemployment rate
reached its lowest level in more than 50 years, 3.5%
in July, before rising to 3.7% in August, largely
reflecting an increase in labor participation. Several
indicators show that wage growth remains high, thus
providing signals of a tight labor market.

In the euro area, available indicators suggest that
economic activity moderated during the third quarter,
after having expanded at a seasonally adjusted
quarterly rate of 0.8% in the previous quarter.[1] This
reflects that, despite the higher levels of tourism,
consumption and production have been affected, on
the one hand, by the military conflict in Ukraine,
particularly through its impact on gas supply,
inflation, and consumer and business confidence,
and, on the other, by the withdrawal of monetary
stimulus in the region. The unemployment rate
declined from 6.7% in June to 6.6% in July.
Purchasing managers' indices point to a contraction
in manufacturing and services in light of disruptions
stemming from the military conflict in Ukraine, and a
deteriorating demand in light of high inflation.

1 Expressed as a seasonally adjusted annualized quarterly rate,
the change in euro area GDP was 3.1% in the second quarter.
2 Expressed as a seasonally adjusted annualized quarterly rate,
the change in the United Kingdom's GDP was -0.3% in the second
quarter of 2022.


In the United Kingdom, timely indicators suggest
that, after contracting 0.1% during the second
quarter at a seasonally adjusted quarterly rate,
economic activity would have weakened further in
the third quarter.[2] This, largely due to the impact of
high energy costs on real household income and
inflation. In this context, the new government of that
country announced a package of measures,
including, among others, fiscal support aimed at
reducing taxes and energy bills for households and
companies in order to boost economic growth and
contain inflation. The package involves the largest
tax cuts since 1972, and therefore the

announcement triggered expectations of a

deterioration in the fiscal accounts and the balance
of payments, leading to episodes of risk aversion.

In Japan, available information suggests that
economic activity, after having registered a

seasonally adjusted quarterly growth of 0.9% during
the second quarter of 2022, moderated its pace of
growth in the third quarter.[3] This slowdown would be
associated with the persistent negative impact of the
pandemic on private consumption, mainly of
services and durable goods, and the slower growth
of some of its main trading partners. In this
environment, the unemployment rate remained in
July at 2.6% for the third consecutive month.
Purchasing managers' indices suggest a moderation
in manufacturing activity and in services due to the
aforementioned factors.

In the main emerging economies, available

indicators suggest a heterogeneous performance
across countries and regions during the third quarter
of 2022. In Emerging Asia, a rebound in economic
activity is expected, after the contraction observed
during the previous quarter. In China, although
economic activity showed a recovery following the
lifting of restrictions imposed to contain COVID-19
contagions, the growth outlook for the third quarter
has been revised downwards in view of the
deterioration of the real estate sector and the effects
of further restrictions to contain COVID-19. In
Emerging Europe, available indicators suggest a
slower pace of growth in most economies in the third
quarter, with a forecast that Russia's economy is
expected to contract again. In Latin America, its main
economies are foreseen to perform

3 Expressed as a seasonally adjusted annualized quarterly rate,
the change in Japan's GDP was 3.5% in the second quarter of
2022.

11


-----

heterogeneously. Chile is expected to significantly
contract during the third quarter, as consumption and
investment have been affected by the volatility in
copper prices, while other economies such as
Mexico and Brazil are expected to continue
recovering gradually.

Since México’s previous monetary policy decision,
international commodity prices, in general, trended
downwards, with episodes of volatility. Oil prices
declined during most of the period due to concerns
about a slowdown in world economic activity and the
resulting lower demand for energy and the significant
appreciation of the dollar. Although at the end of
August and the beginning of September, prices
registered some increases, due partly to the decision
of the Organization of Petroleum Exporting

Countries and other producers (OPEC+) to cut their
production targets for October, prices subsequently
resumed their downward trend, temporarily settling
at below 80 dollars per barrel, in an environment in
which the risk of an economic slowdown persists.
Meanwhile, natural gas reference prices in Europe
increased significantly at the end of August due to
the announcement of the interruption of Russian gas
supplies to the region through the Nord Stream 1
pipeline, although they subsequently decreased as
the region increased its inventory levels and
announced a plan to reduce demand for energy in
the region. In the US market, natural gas prices
increased during most of August, driven by greater
demand due to higher temperatures, before
declining at the beginning of September due to a
sharp increase in production and forecasts of lower
consumption. The price quotations of most industrial
metals trended upwards during August in view of
prospects of lower production and the risk that some
industrial metal producers in Europe could be
affected by the lack of energy in the region.
Nevertheless, they have recently been subject to
downward pressures again due to weaker demand
from China and concerns about lower growth of
world economic activity. The prices of most grains
have increased, mainly in recent weeks, in view of
the possible reestablishment of blockades on grain
exports from Ukraine, the impact on European crops
due to unusually high temperatures in the region,
and concerns regarding a lower supply of grains
worldwide.


**A.1.2. Monetary policy and international financial**
**markets**

Inflation continued increasing and remained at its
highest levels in decades in several of the world’s
major economies. This has continued to reflect the
price increases in a greater number of items, in an
environment where imbalances between the

recovery of demand and supply in various markets
persists. The high levels of food and energy prices
continued contributing to the above, although price
pressures on some energy and commodity prices,
along with disruptions in global supply chains, have
somewhat moderated.

In a large number of major advanced economies,
headline inflation continued increasing, remaining
significantly above their central banks' targets for a
prolonged period (Chart 3). Although in some cases
lower energy prices have reduced pressures on
headline inflation, the latter remains at high levels,
while core inflation has continued rising. In the
United States, although inflation measured by the
consumer price index continued declining

moderately, it still remains at high levels, going from
an annual rate of 8.5% in July to 8.3% in August,
mainly reflecting a reduction in energy inflation,
which was partially offset by an increase in food
inflation. Meanwhile, after remaining unchanged in
the previous month, annual core inflation in that
country increased in August from 5.9% to 6.3%.
Analysts’ short-term inflation expectations for the
main advanced economies remained at high levels,
although those for the longer term derived from
surveys have declined moderately in some cases.
Longer-term expectations derived from financial
instruments increased moderately in some of these
economies.

12


-----

**Chart 3**

**Selected Advanced Economies:**

**Headline Inflation**

Annual percentage change

10 United States PCE 1/

9 United States CPI

8 Japan 2/

Euro area

7

United Kingdom

6

Canada

5

4

3

2

1

0

-1

-2 August

July

-3

-4

2005 2009 2013 2017 2021

1/ The personal consumption expenditure deflator is used.
2/ Excludes fresh food. This series does not exclude the effect of the
increase in the consumption tax in May 2014 and October 2019 nor the
effect of the free daycare and preschool program in October 2019.
Source: Bureau of Economic Analysis, Bureau of Labor Statistics, Eurostat,
Bank of Japan, Statistics Canada, Office of National Statistics.

In a large number of the main emerging economies,
headline inflation continued increasing and remained
significantly above their central banks' targets,
although in several of them it declined in the more
recent readings. The rise in headline inflation in
some countries has continued to be driven, in
general, by the persistently high energy and food
prices, as well as by higher core inflation generated
by pressures on the prices of other goods and
services. Although in some cases pressures on
headline inflation have been reduced due to a
moderation in the prices of certain commodities,
inflation remains at high levels.

In this context of high inflation and tightening labor
markets in some of the major advanced economies,
the central banks of most of these economies have
continued raising their reference rates, some of them
by a greater magnitude than expected. Noteworthy
were the larger-than-anticipated 100 basis point
increase in the case of Sweden, and the 75 basis
point increases by the Federal Reserve, the
European Central Bank, the Bank of Canada, and
the Swiss Central Bank, which, in the latter case, led
it to end its period of negative interest rates.
Regarding their asset purchase programs, most
central banks continued gradually reducing their
securities holdings, with the Bank of England
announcing that it would begin selling UK

government bonds from its Asset Purchase Facility
(APF) shortly after its September meeting, although
the start date for these sales was delayed by a month
following the disruptions in the fixed income market


caused by the release of the new government's fiscal
stimulus package. Looking ahead, expectations
drawn from financial instruments foresee higher
levels of interest rates than previously expected for
the end of 2022 and 2023 in most of the major
advanced economies, being particularly noteworthy
the upward revision for the United Kingdom (Chart
4).

**Chart 4**

**Reference Rates and Trajectories**

**Implied in OIS Curves[1/]**

Percent

|Col1|― European Central Bank ― OIS implicit trajectory 2 --- OIS implicit trajectory 0|deposit ra 3 Sep 202 5 Aug 202|te 2 2|Col5|Col6|Forecasts|Col8|Col9|Col10|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|||||||||||


1/ OIS: Fixed floating interest rate swap where the fixed interest rate is
associated to the effective overnight reference rate.
2/ For the observed reference rate of the US, the average interest rate of
the target range of the federal funds rate (3.00% - 3.25%) is used.
Source: Banco de México with data from Bloomberg,

Among the recent monetary policy decisions of the
main advanced economies’ central banks, the
following stand out:

i) At its September meeting, the Federal Reserve

raised the target range for the federal funds rate
by 75 basis points for the third consecutive time,
placing it between 3.00 and 3.25%. The Fed
reiterated that it anticipates that successive
increases in the target range will be appropriate,
that the Federal Open Market Committee
(FOMC) is strongly committed to returning
inflation to its 2% target and that, in assessing the
monetary policy stance, the Committee will
continue monitoring the implications of new data
for the economic outlook. The chairman of said
institution announced again that, as the monetary
policy stance tightens, it will probably be
appropriate to reduce the pace of increases and
that they will continue to take decisions meeting
by meeting; that is, without providing any specific
guidance. He pointed out that the Committee is
determined to reach a significantly restrictive
stance and remain there until they are confident
that inflation is declining. Regarding the Federal
Reserve's balance sheet, the Federal Open

13


7% **――― Bank of Japan US Federal Reserve 2/ Bank of England** End of 2021 End of 2022 End of 2023

6% **― European Central Bank deposit rate**

**― OIS implicit trajectory 23 Sep 2022**

5% **--- OIS implicit trajectory 05 Aug 2022**

4%

3%

2%

1%

0%

-1%

2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 2024


End of
2024


-----

Market Committee (FOMC) reiterated that it will
continue to reduce its holdings of Treasury
securities, agency debt, and agency mortgagebacked securities as outlined in the Plans for
Reducing the Size of the Federal Reserve's
Balance Sheet released in May. The chairman
stated that the possible sale of mortgage-backed
assets is not something they are considering at
this moment nor in the near future. Regarding the
update of its economic projections, the

Committee's median headline inflation

expectations were revised upwards for 2022 from
5.2% in June to 5.4% in September, for 2023 from
2.6% to 2.8%, and for 2024 from 2.2% to 2.3%.
For core inflation, medians were revised upwards
from 4.3% to 4.5% for 2022, and from 2.7% to
3.1% for 2023, while for 2024 they remained
unchanged at 2.3%. Median growth expectations
were revised significantly downwards in 2022 to
0.2%, 1.2% in 2023, and 1.7% in 2024, while
unemployment expectations were revised

upwards for all years from an estimated level of
3.8% in 2022 to 4.4% in 2023 and 2024. As for
reference interest rate expectations, median
rates increased from June to September from a
forecast of 3.4 to 4.4% for 2022, from 3.8 to 4.6%
for 2023, and from 3.4 to 3.9% for 2024, while
long-term rates were left unchanged. In this
context, the expected trajectory for the implied
federal funds rate in financial instruments shows
an upward adjustment during the reported period,
reflecting, based on the latest available

information, a level of the reference rate for the
end of 2022 of around 3.9%, lower than that
expected based on the median of the

Committee's September expectations of 4.4%.
For the end of 2023, the implied rate is around
4.4%, below the median of the Committee's
expectations of 4.6%.

ii) At its September meeting, the European Central

Bank increased its refinancing, key lending and
key deposit rates by 75 basis points to 1.25, 1.50
and 0.75%, respectively. It reiterated that the
Governing Council expects to raise interest rates
further at its next meetings. It also noted that it will
periodically assess its policy path and that future
monetary policy rate decisions will continue to be
driven by data and follow a meeting-by-meeting
approach, that is, without following a predetermined path. Regarding the Asset Purchase
Program (APP), it reaffirmed the Governing
Council's plans for the reinvestment of principal
payments on maturing securities. In the case of
its Pandemic Emergency Purchase Program
(PEPP), it also confirmed its plans to reinvest


principal payments on maturing securities, as well
as its intention to continue reinvesting with
flexibility to offset risks to the transmission
mechanism related to the pandemic. The Council
mentioned that the Transmission Protection
Instrument (TPI) is available to counter unjustified
or disorderly market dynamics that constitute a
serious threat to monetary policy transmission in
all euro area countries.

iii) In its September meeting, the Bank of Japan kept

its reference rate unchanged at -0.1% and the 10year interest rate target around zero, restating
that it expects interest rates to remain at their
current levels or even lower. Said central bank
reiterated the guidelines for its yield curve control
strategy, as well as for the purchase of assets
other than government bonds. It added that it will
gradually remove the Special Funds-Supplying
Operations to Facilitate Financing in Response to
the Novel Coronavirus by the end of 2022 or
March 2023, depending on the type of loan.
However, it announced that, in order to support
financing, mainly for small and medium-sized
enterprises, and with the objective of meeting a
wider range of needs, the bank will not set a
maximum limit on the supply of funds under the
Funds-Supplying Operations against Pooled
Collateral, for which various types of guarantees
are accepted.

In the main emerging economies, most central banks
continued raising their reference rates, in some
cases, such as Hungary and Chile, significantly, by
100 basis points or more. Meanwhile, Brazil's central
bank, despite leaving its interest rate unchanged in
September, indicated that it will not hesitate to
resume the restrictive cycle if the disinflationary
process does not proceed as expected. The central
banks of Turkey, China and Russia lowered their
interest rates, with the Turkish case of two 100 basis
point cuts standing out.

In the environment described above, international
financial markets registered greater risk aversion
since Mexico’s previous monetary policy decision,
particularly in recent dates, as well as tighter
financial conditions due to a significant increase in
interest rates and the strengthening of the dollar.
(Chart 5). In this regard, equity markets in most of
the major advanced and emerging economies
declined. In foreign exchange markets, the US dollar
continued displaying strength, reaching its highest
level in more than 20 years. It is noteworthy that the
currencies of certain major advanced economies

14


-----

registered their lowest levels in decades and that, in
this context, the Bank of Japan intervened in the
foreign exchange market for the first time since 1998
to support the yen. Most emerging economies'
currencies depreciated against the dollar. Interest
rates on both short- and long-term government
bonds in most major advanced economies rose in a
context of persistently high levels of inflation and an
accelerated withdrawal of monetary stimulus (Chart
6). In the United Kingdom, 10-year government bond
yields reached their highest level since 2008 and the
pound sterling depreciated sharply due to market
volatility resulting from the government's

announcement of a package of measures to promote
growth and contain inflation, which led to concerns
regarding the likely increase in the country's public
debt. In light of risks to the financial system’s
stability, the Bank of England announced that it will
make temporary purchases of long-term government
bonds. In emerging economies, interest rates
increased in most cases (Chart 7). In this context,
since Mexico’s previous monetary policy decision,
emerging economies registered capital outflows
from both fixed income and equity markets.


96

2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022

Financial Conditions Index - United States
Financial Conditions Index - Global
Financial Conditions Index for Eurozone 2/
Financial Conditions Index for United Kingdom

1/ The financial conditions index is constructed considering the effect of five
variables on economic activity: the reference interest rate, the 10-year
government bond, the spread of investment-grade bonds over the
government debt bond with equivalent maturity, the ratio of a stock index
with 10-year average earnings per share and the trade-weighted exchange
rate. Emerging economies include Brazil, Chile, China, Czech Republic,
Hungary, India, Indonesia, Israel, Malaysia, Mexico, Philippines, Poland,
Romania, South Korea, South Africa, Thailand, and Turkey. The global
sample includes G10 countries and emerging economies.
2/ In the case of emerging economies, the financial conditions index
considers the CDS as the credit spread component and includes the debtweighted exchange rate. The vertical black line indicates the last scheduled
meeting of Banco de México's Monetary Policy Committee.
Source: Prepared by Banco de México with Bloomberg and Goldman
Sachs data.


**Chart 5**


**Chart 6**

**Change in Selected Financial Indicators from**

**August 5, 2022 to September 23, 2022**

Percent; basis points Percentage, basis points


28%

24%

20%

16%

12%

8%

4%

0%


-4%

-8%

-12%

-16%


350

300

250

200

150

100

50

0


-50

-100

-150

-200


1/ The MSCI Emerging Markets Index includes 24 countries.
2/ DXY: a weighted average estimated by the Intercontinental Exchange
(ICE) of the nominal exchange rate of the main six currencies operated
globally with the following weights: EUR 57.6%, JPY: 13.6%, GBP: 11.9%,
CAD: 9.1%, SEK: 4.2%, and CHF: 3.6%.
Source: Bloomberg and ICE.

15


-----

**Chart 7**

**Selected Emerging Economies: Financial**

**Assets Performance since August 8, 2022**

Percent, basis points Percent, basis points

**2-year** **10-year**

**Equity**
**Region** **Country** **Currencies** **interest** **interest** **CDS**

**markets**

**rates** **rates**

**Mexico** **-0.40%** **-4.14%** **115** **105** **41**

**Brazil** **-2.92%** **3.06%** **-103** **-19** **20**

**Latin**

**Chile** **-8.38%** **-1.01%** **16** **-2** **18**

**America**

**Colombia** **-3.04%** **-13.19%** **72** **36** **61**

**Peru** **0.27%** **-4.93%** **9** **43** **35**

**Russia** **5.95%** **-6.85%** **71** **68** **N.D.**

**Poland** **-7.08%** **-14.40%** **29** **135** **17**

**Emerging**

**Turkey** **-2.88%** **16.05%** **-602** **-516** **85**

**Europe**

**Czech Republic** **-6.34%** **-6.82%** **-11** **150** **-5**

**Hungary** **-9.15%** **-12.84%** **169** **142** **45**

**China** **-6.09%** **-5.74%** **-3** **-5** **27**

**Malaysia** **-3.25%** **-5.55%** **22** **45** **42**

**India** **-2.48%** **-2.90%** **65** **1** **3**

**Asia**

**Philippines** **-5.31%** **-2.72%** **58** **43** **38**

**Thailand** **-5.91%** **0.77%** **12** **69** **17**

**Indonesia** **-1.68%** **0.57%** **43** **23** **60**

**Africa** **South Africa** **-8.20%** **-10.60%** **43** **66** **71**

Note: An upward adjustment indicates currency appreciation. Interest rates
correspond to swap rates at th3 specified terms, except for Hungary, where
government securities with 3-year maturities were used as a reference. For
the Philippines, a 2-year swap rate was used, and for Russia, a 2-year and
3-year swap rate was used.
Source: Bloomberg.

**A.2. Current situation of the Mexican economy**

**A.2.1. Mexican markets**

In the international context described above, in
domestic financial markets, the Mexican peso
remained relatively stable against the US dollar since
Mexico’s previous monetary policy decision, while
longer-term interest rates registered upward

movements, in line with those observed in global
yield curves (Chart 8). This was generated by a
sentiment of renewed risk aversion stemming from a
faster adjustment in the Federal Reserve's expected
path for monetary policy and higher-than-anticipated
inflation readings worldwide.


**Chart 8**

**Mexican Markets’ Performance**

Percent, MXN/USD and index


10.5

10.0

9.5

9.0

8.5

8.0

7.5

7.0


5.0

4.5


21.8

21.3


4.0

3.5


20.8

20.3


3.0

2.5


59,000

57,000

55,000

53,000

51,000

49,000

47,000

45,000

43,000


19.8

19.3


M-bond


2.0

Inflation-indexed bonds


Range in year Range since previous monetary policy 08-Aug-22 23-Sep-22

decision

Source: Prepared by Banco de México.

The Mexican peso fluctuated in a range of 47 cents,
between 19.83 and 20.30 pesos per dollar, ending
the reference period with a depreciation of 0.40%
(Chart 9). This occurred in a context in which both
spot and future trading conditions remained stable.

**Chart 9**

**Mexican Peso Exchange Rate with Moving**

**Averages**
MXN/USD


Range in year Range since previous monetary policy 08-Aug-22 23-Sep-22


2020 2021 2022

Source: Prepared by Banco de México.


16


-----

Interest rates on government securities exhibited a
negative behavior (Chart 10), with increases of up to
123 basis points in the short-term nodes of the yield
curve, and of up to 110 basis points in the mediumand long-term nodes. Similarly, the yield curve for
real rate instruments registered increases of up 72
basis points in the short term and of between 47 and
61 basis points in the medium and long term. In this
context, breakeven inflation registered generalized
increases, which averaged 44 basis points in all
maturities (Chart 11). These movements took place
in an environment in which trading conditions
deteriorated with respect to the previous period.

**Chart 10**

**Nominal Yield Curve of Government Securities**

Percent, basis points

11.00 130

10.50 120

10.00 110

9.50 100

9.00 90

8.50 80

8.00 70

7.50 60

7.00 50

August 8, 2022
September 23, 2022
Change (August 8, 2022 to September 23, 2022)

Trading range over the period

Source: PIP

Source: PIP.


**Chart 11**

**Breakeven Inflation and Inflation Risk**

**Implied in Government Securities’ Yields**

Basis points

600
575
550
525
500
475
450
425
400
375
350
325
300 3-year
275 10-year

20-year

250 30-year
225 3-year average
200 10-year average

20-year average

175 30-year average
150

J     M M      J      S      N      J     M     M      J      S

2021                                   2022

Source: PIP.

Regarding expectations for the monetary policy
reference rate, the information implicit in the interest
rate swap curve incorporates an increase of 81 basis
points for the September decision, while for the end
of 2022 it points to a rate close to 10.52% (Chart 12).
Most analysts surveyed by Citibanamex anticipate
that the reference rate will be raised 75 basis points
up to a level of 9.25% in September’s decision, while
for the end of 2022 they anticipate a rate of 10.00%.

**Chart 12**

**Interbank Funding Rate Implied in TIIE Swaps**

Percent

12.50


2021                2022                2023

Source: Prepared by Banco de México with Bloomberg data.

17


-----

**A.2.2. Economic activity in Mexico**

Economic activity in Mexico continued recovering
during the second quarter (Chart 13). The pace of
growth for economic activity is expected to slow
down during the third quarter with respect to the first
half of the year. This, in a context in which high
uncertainty regarding both the behavior of inflation
and the future evolution of the pandemic persists.

As for external demand, in August, the value of
automotive exports increased, while that of the rest
of manufacturing exports contracted at the margin
(Chart 14).[4] By destination, manufacturing exports to
both the United States and the rest of the world
increased.

**Chart 13**

**Gross Domestic Product**

Quarterly percentage change, s. a.

6


**Chart 14**

**Total Manufacturing Exports**

Indices 2013 = 100, s. a.


200

180

160

140

120

100

80

60

40


A J A


4

2


0

-2


-4

-6


Q-II


2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022

s. a. / Seasonally adjusted figures.
Source: Mexico’s System on National Accounts (SCNM, for its Spanish
acronym), INEGI.

4 Refers to the value of merchandise exports in current dollars.
This value differs from that reported for goods’ exports in Mexico’s


2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022

s. a. / Seasonally adjusted series and trend series based on data in nominal
US dollars. The former is represented by a solid line and the latter by a
dotted line
Source: Prepared by Banco de México with data from the Tax
Administration Service (SAT, for its Spanish acronym), the Ministry of the
Economy (SE, for its Spanish acronym), Banco de México, the National
Institute of Statistics and Geography (INEGI, for its Spanish acronym).
Mexico’s Merchandise Trade Balance, and the National System of
Statistical and Geographical Information (SNIEG, for its Spanish acronym),
Information of national interest.

On the domestic demand side, according to its
monthly indicator, private consumption has slowed
down. Although in June consumption of imported
goods maintained its dynamism, that of domestic
goods and services remains sluggish. In June, gross
fixed investment reversed part of the decline shown
in the previous month, maintaining a slight recovery.
Machinery and equipment reversed most of the fall
observed in May, while investment in construction
continued showing some weakness, despite the
improvement observed in that month.

On the production side, industrial activity continued
reactivating in July (Chart 15), driven by

manufacturing, while both construction and mining
remained weak (Chart 16). Tertiary activities
reactivated, although maintaining heterogeneity
across its sectors. In particular, those that registered
growth were leisure and other services; public
administration; commerce; educational and health
services; accommodation and food services. In
contrast, those that decreased were transportation
and mass media information services; financial and
real estate services, and professional, corporate and
business support services.


System of National Accounts, since the latter represents value
added, measured in constant pesos.

18


-----

**Chart 15**

**Global Indicator of Economic Activity**

Indices 2013 = 100, s. a.


120

115

110

105

100

95 Total IGAE

90 Industrial production

Services IGAE

85

Agricultural and livestock

80 products IGAE

75

July

70

J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J

2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022


140

130

120

110

100

90

80

70

60

50

40


12

8

4

0

-4

-8

-12

-16

-20

-24


**Chart 17**

**Output Gap Estimates [1/]**

**Excluding Oil Industry [4/ ]**

Potential output percentages, s. a.


Q-II
July


s. a. / Seasonally adjusted and trend series. The former is represented by
a solid line and the latter by a dotted line.
Source: Mexico’s System of National Accounts (SCNM, for its Spanish
acronym), INEGI

**Chart 16**

**Industrial Activity [1/]**

Indices 2013 = 100, s. a.

130

120

110

100

90

Total

Mining (22.3%)

80

Manufacturing (49.7%)

70 Construction (23.3%)

Utilities (4.7%)

July

60

J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J

2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022

s. a. / Seasonally adjusted and trend series. The former is represented by
a solid line and the latter by a dotted line.
1/ Figures in parenthesis correspond to their share in the total in 2013.
Source: Mexico’s System of National Accounts (SCNM, for its Spanish
acronym), INEGI.

Regarding the cyclical position of the economy, slack
conditions continued decreasing during the second
quarter of 2022 (Chart 17) and are anticipated to
continue doing so during the third quarter. In July and
August, the national and urban unemployment rate
remained at relatively low levels (Chart 18). This took
place in a context in which both the labor
participation rate and the employment rate among
the working age population registered a level similar
to that of the previous quarter. Based on seasonally
adjusted figures, net creation of IMSS-insured jobs
continued trending upwards between July and
August. Finally, in July, unit labor costs in the
manufacturing sector more than reversed the
increase observed in June, largely reflecting a
rebound in labor productivity (Chart 19).


J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J MJ

2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022

s. a. / Calculations based on seasonally adjusted figures.
1/ Output gap estimated with a tail-corrected Hodrick-Prescott filter; see
Banco de México (2009), “Inflation Report, April-June 2009”, p.74.
2/ GDP figures up to the first quarter of 2022 and IGAE up to June 2022.
3/ Output gap confidence interval calculated with a method of unobserved
components.
4/ Excludes both oil and gas extraction, support services for mining, and
petroleum and coal products’ manufacturing.
Source: Prepared by Banco de México with INEGI data.

**Chart 18**

**National and Urban Unemployment Rates**

Percent, s. a.

8.0

National unemployment rate

7.5

Urban unemployment rate

7.0

6.5

6.0

5.5

5.0

4.5

4.0

3.5

3.0

August

2.5

JA JO JA JO JA JO JA JO JA JO JA JO JA JO JA JO JA JO JA JO JA JO JA JO JA JO JA JO JAJA

2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022

s. a. / Seasonally adjusted and trend series. The former is represented by
a solid line and the latter by a dotted line.
Source: Prepared by Banco de México with data from ENOE, ETOE (from
April to June 2020), and ENOE new edition (ENOE[N]) from July to date.

19


-----

**Chart 19**

**Productivity and Unit Labor Costs in the**

**Manufacturing Sector [1/]**

Indices 2013 = 100, s. a.


130

120

110

100

90

80


July


previous month and are generally at levels lower
than those observed prior to the pandemic. Interest
rates on mortgage credits increased in July, after
having remained at levels around their historic lows
since August 2020. In April 2022, credit card interest
rates increased in relation to those observed in
February, while those of payroll credit registered
similar levels. Regarding portfolio quality, in June
2022, corporate and housing loan delinquency rates
were similar to those of the previous month and
continued at low levels. Finally, consumer portfolio
delinquency rates declined, thus remaining at levels
lower than those registered prior to the onset of the
pandemic.

**A.2.3. Development of inflation and inflation**
**outlook**

Between July and the first half of September 2022,
annual headline inflation increased from 8.15 to
8.76% (Chart 20 and Table 1), still continuing to be
affected by the shocks associated with the COVID19 pandemic and the military conflict between
Russia and Ukraine.

**Chart 20**

**Consumer Price Index**

Annual percentage change

14

13 CPI

12 Core

11

10 Non-core

9

8

7

6

5

4

3

2

1

0

-1

-2

-3 F1 Sep.

J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S

2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022

Source: Banco de México and INEGI.

Annual core inflation increased from 7.65 to 8.27%
between July and the first half of September 2022
(Chart 21). Within it, in said dates, annual
merchandise inflation rose from 10.07 to 10.75%,
reflecting the pressures affecting production costs
driven by disruptions in production and supply
chains, as well as the high prices of inputs, although
both factors have started to somewhat improve. In
particular, food merchandise inflation increased from
12.09 to 13.27%, still reflecting the high food
commodity prices, while non-food merchandise
prices also continued to experience pressures,
increasing from 7.83 to 7.94% (Chart 22). Annual
services inflation went from 4.90 to 5.43% during the

20


J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J MJ

2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022

s. a. / Seasonally adjusted and trend series. The former is represented by
a solid line and the latter by a dotted line.
1/ Productivity based on hours worked.
Source: Prepared by Banco de México with seasonally adjusted data of the
Monthly Manufacturing Industry Survey and industrial activity indicators of
Mexico’s System of National Accounts (Sistema de Cuentas Nacionales de
_México, SCNM), INEGI._

In July 2022, domestic financing to firms registered
a positive real annual variation for the first time since
May 2020. Within it, bank credit to firms continued
recovering gradually, exhibiting a positive real
annual variation for the third consecutive month, thus
accumulating three quarters of increases in its
balance. This, in a context in which corporate credit
demand continued recovering, while lending

conditions remained tight compared to those that
prevailed at the beginning of the pandemic, although
these have been easing for smaller firms since the
second half of 2021. Net corporate debt issuance in
the domestic market increased in July, although it
continued registering the negative flows

accumulated during the year. As for credit to
households, commercial bank housing portfolios
maintained their pace of growth. In turn, outstanding
bank consumer credit continued increasing in real
annual terms, mainly as a result of the sustained
dynamism of payroll credit and credit card portfolios,
and more recently, of the personal credit portfolio.
This has taken place in a context in which household
demand for credit has continued increasing.
Mortgage lending conditions remained stable, while
consumer credit conditions eased during the second
quarter of the year.

In July, interest rates on bank credit to firms were at
levels above those observed prior to the pandemic.
Corporate credit intermediation margins did not
show significant changes with respect to the


-----

same period, driven by greater operating costs and
higher demand. Annual inflation of services other
than education and housing rose from 6.87 to 7.64%,
driven by higher annual variations in the prices of
food and transportation services. Likewise, the
annual inflation of education increased from 3.27 to
4.49%, reaching levels similar to those observed
prior to the pandemic, while that of housing, which
increased from 3.02 to 3.11%, is already at levels
above those of February 2020.

**Chart 21**

**Merchandise and Services Core Price Sub-index**

Annual percentage change

12

Merchandise

11

Services

10

9

8

7

6

5

4

3

2

1

F1 Sep.

0

J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S

2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022

Source: Banco de México and INEGI.

**Chart 22**

**Merchandise Core Price Sub-index**

Annual percentage change

14

12

10

8

6

4

2

Food, beverages and tobacco Non-food merchandise F1 Sep.

0

J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S

2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022


Between July and the first half of September 2022,
annual non-core inflation increased from 9.65 to
10.22% (Chart 23 and Table 1). Within it, annual
inflation of agricultural and livestock products went
from 16.05 to 15.23% in the aforementioned dates,
still affected by the high prices that continued to be
observed for its production inputs, such as grains
and fertilizers Annual energy inflation rose from 4.68
to 6.64% during the same period.

**Chart 23**

**Non-core Price Sub-index**

Annual percentage change

25

20

15

10

5

0

Non-core

-5 Agricultural and livestock products

Energy and government-authorized prices

-10


J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S

2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022

Source: Banco de México and INEGI.

Regarding inflation expectations from the survey
conducted by Banco de México among private sector
specialists, between July and August the median for
headline inflation for the end of 2022 increased from
7.80 to 8.13%, while that for core inflation rose from
7.08 a 7.67%. The median of headline inflation
expectations for the end of 2023 was revised from
4.50 to 4.66%, while that for core inflation increased
from 4.31 to 4.44%. The median of headline inflation
expectations for the medium term was adjusted
slightly from 3.82 to 3.85%, while that for core
inflation was adjusted from 3.83 to 3.80%. The
median of headline inflation expectations for the long
term (5 to 8 years) remained at 3.60% and for core
inflation decreased from 3.57 to 3.50%. Finally,
compensation for inflation and inflationary risk
increased and remains at high levels. This was due
to increases in both expectations implied by market
instruments and the inflation risk premium, which
remains at high levels.

21


-15


F1 Sep.


Source: Banco de México and INEGI.


-----

Inflation is foreseen to converge to the 3% target in
the third quarter of 2024. These projections are
subject to risks. On the upside: i) persistence of core
inflation at high levels; ii) external inflationary
pressures associated with the pandemic; iii) greater
pressures on agricultural and livestock product
prices and on energy prices due to the ongoing
geopolitical conflict; iv) exchange rate depreciation;
and v) cost-related pressures. On the downside: i) a
greater-than-anticipated slowdown in world


economic activity; ii) a decline in the intensity of the
geopolitical conflict; iii) a better functioning of supply
chains; iv) a greater-than-expected effect from the
negative output gap; and v) a larger-than-anticipated
effect from the Policy Program to Fight Inflation and
High Prices (PACIC, for its acronym in Spanish). The
balance of risks for the trajectory of inflation within
the forecast horizon remains biased significantly to
the upside.


**Table 1**

**Consumer Price Index and Components**

Annual percentage change

**1st fortnight Sep.**

**Item** **July 2022** **August 2022**
**2022**

**CPI** **8.15** **8.70** **8.76**

**SubyacenteCore** **7.65** **8.05** **8.27**

**Merchandise** **10.07** **10.55** **10.75**

Food, beverages and tobacco 12.09 12.94 13.27

Non-food merchandise 7.83 7.90 7.94

**Services** **4.90** **5.19** **5.43**

Housing 3.02 3.12 3.11

Education (tuitions) 3.27 3.68 4.49

Other services 6.87 7.31 7.64

**No SubyacenteNon-core** **9.65** **10.65** **10.22**

**Agricultural and livestock products** **16.05** **14.90** **15.23**

Fruits and vegetablesFruits abd vegetables 16.16 15.18 14.68

Livestock productsLivestock 15.96 14.68 15.71

**Energy and government-authorized prices Energéticos y Tarifas Aut. por Gobierno** **4.76** **7.25** **6.20**

Energy productsEnergy 4.68 8.14 6.64

Government-authorized pricesTarifas Autorizadas por Gobierno 4.95 5.19 5.16

Source: INEGI.


22


-----

-----

-----

