-----

-----

**FOREWARNING**
This document is provided for the reader’s convenience
only. The translation from the official Spanish version was
made by Banco de México’s staff. Discrepancies may arise
between the original document in Spanish and its English
translation. For this reason, the original Spanish version is
the only official document.


**1. PLACE, DATE AND PARTICIPANTS**

**1.1. Place: Meeting held by virtual means.**

**1.2. Date of Governing Board meeting:** May 11,
2022.

**1.3. Participants:**

Victoria Rodríguez, Governor.
Galia Borja, Deputy Governor.
Irene Espinosa, Deputy Governor.
Gerardo Esquivel, Deputy Governor.
Jonathan Heath, Deputy Governor.
Rogelio Eduardo Ramírez, Secretary of Finance and
Public Credit.
Gabriel Yorio, Undersecretary of Finance and Public
Credit.
Elías Villanueva, Secretary of the Governing Board.

Prior to this meeting, preliminary work by Banco de
México’s staff analyzing the economic and financial
environment as well as the developments in inflation
and the determinants and outlook for inflation, was
conducted and presented to the Governing Board
(see Annex).

**2. ANALYSIS AND RATIONALE BEHIND THE**
**GOVERNING BOARD’S VOTING**

**_International environment_**

**Most members stated that, during the first**
**quarter of the year, global economic activity grew**
**at a lower-than-anticipated rate. They considered**
**that the lower dynamism was mainly caused by**
**disruptions in supply chains, partly as a result of**
**recent mobility restrictions in China, and by the**
**economic repercussions resulting from the**
**geopolitical** **conflict** **between** **Russia** **and**

**Ukraine. One member added the lower economic**
stimuli compared to the previous year. He/she stated
that the degree of heterogeneity in the recovery
between advanced and emerging economies has
increased. He/she indicated that the United States,
despite undergoing a slowdown, shows a strong
domestic demand, with a favorable performance in
industrial production. He/she noted that some


indicators related to supply chains, such as lead
times and backorders, have shown some

improvement at the margin, although there is still
limited certainty about a definite solution to
bottlenecks.

**In this context, most members pointed out that**
**the outlook for global economic growth has**
**recently been revised downwards. One member**
indicated that a significant moderation in economic
activity is expected in the euro area, the United
Kingdom, China, and the United States, as well as
greater negative effects in emerging economies and
in commodity-importing economies. Some members
considered that the main global risks are those
associated with the pandemic, longer-lasting

inflationary pressures, worsening geopolitical

tensions, and a further tightening of monetary and
financial conditions. **One member warned that the**
high levels of public and private debt reduce the
global economy's room for maneuver against new
shocks. Another member stated that the balance of
risks for global economic growth is biased to the
downside and subject to unusually high uncertainty.

**All members highlighted the impact of the**
**geopolitical conflict on world inflation. Most**
**members noted that the latter continued being**
**pressured by bottlenecks in production, the**
**recovery of demand, and the high levels of food**
**and energy prices. They noted that, in some**
**cases, inflation reached its highest level in**
**decades. One member pointed out that the conflict**
has involved disruptions in global trade that have
reduced the supply of various commodities, with
several countries implementing export restrictions on
certain food products. **Another member stated that**
its effect on commodity prices is detrimental to
households' incomes, undermines investors'

confidence, and increases uncertainty in general.
He/she noted that the pressures derived from the
conflict have mainly affected price dynamics in the
euro area, while in the United States there has been
additional pressure from the services and housing
sectors. Meanwhile, one member noted that various
indicators reflect that the supply constraints
attributable to the pandemic have started to ease.
Among these, he/she mentioned the New York
Federal Reserve's Global Supply Chain Pressure
Index and the recent stability in sea freight rates.
**Some members highlighted that, in the United**
States, inflation, as measured by the personal
consumption expenditure deflator, increased to 6.6%
in March. **One member pointed out that most price**
sub-indices registered inflation close to 4%.
Meanwhile, **another** member highlighted the

1


-----

pressures associated with energy and food

components.

**Most members stated that in most economies,**
**inflation** **expectations** **have** **been** **revised**

**upwards for 2022 and 2023, and that these are**
**above the target of their respective central banks.**
**One member** emphasized that this may represent an
obstacle to the convergence of inflation to their
respective targets. **Another member noted that**
futures’ curves suggest that commodity prices will
remain on an upward trend. He/she pointed out the
deterioration of short- and medium-term inflation
expectations in a context of a solid recovery in labor
markets.

**Most members stated that a large number of**
**central banks continued raising their reference**
**rates. All members mentioned that in its latest**
**monetary policy decision, the Federal Reserve**
**raised the target range for the federal funds rate**
**by 50 basis points and anticipated future**
**adjustments. Most members pointed out that,**
**starting in June, said central bank will begin**
**reducing its balance sheet. One member stated**
that, if the pace of adjustments anticipated by
markets materializes, in 2023 the United States
would have a rate above the level estimated as
neutral. **Another member indicated that given**
expectations of a further monetary tightening, shortterm interest rates in the United States increased,
with a flattening of the yield curve. Regarding
emerging economies, one member mentioned that,
although they have started to reduce the stimulus,
the pace of normalization has been heterogeneous
due to differences in economic recovery and inflation
dynamics. He/she noted that Chile and Brazil, which
have undergone a stronger economic recovery, have
had to rapidly implement tighter monetary policy
stances than their peers, while Mexico has made
more moderate adjustments because it provided less
monetary stimulus during the pandemic. **Another**
member noted that, given the elevated inflation levels
and the risk of expectations becoming unanchored,
emerging economies central banks’ decision to
accelerate monetary tightening reflects their priority
to control inflation. Looking ahead, most members
**highlighted expectations of a faster withdrawal of**
**monetary stimulus worldwide.**

**Most members noted that global financial**
**conditions tightened further, with an increase in**
**interest rates, a stronger US dollar and declines**
**in stock market indexes, in a context of higher**
**volatility and risk aversion. One member pointed**
out that this was partly the result of a faster


normalization of the monetary policy stance in the
United States. He/she added that the latter, together
with the uncertainty associated with the military
conflict, was reflected in an increase in practically all
nodes of the US yield curve and in a correction of
more than 11% in its main stock market index.
**Another member stated that the dollar appreciated**
reaching levels unseen since 2003, which contrasts
with the historical depreciation of counterparty
currencies, and was accompanied by an increase in
implied volatility of currency options. As for financial
markets of emerging economies, he/she mentioned
that there were capital outflows in fixed-income
markets and inflows in equity markets. One member
stated that default risk premia have increased
moderately in these economies, as a result of higher
funding costs worldwide and lower risk appetite.
He/she indicated that looking ahead, emerging
markets will continue to be affected by the outlook for
their inflation and economic growth, as well as by
advanced economies’ monetary policy. **Another**
member pointed out that the outlook of a faster
tightening by the Federal Reserve implies risks for
global financial markets, which could affect to a
greater extent those economies with insufficiently
sound macroeconomic fundamentals. **One member**
stated that episodes of volatility in US Treasury and
mortgage-backed securities’ markets cannot be
ruled out, with possible contagion effects on the rest
of the financial system. Another member mentioned
that, looking ahead, due to the potential risks that this
unprecedented adjustment may imply, close

attention must be given to the possible impact on the
price formation process and on the stability of the
financial system.

**_Economic activity in Mexico_**

**Most** **members** **stated** **that** **preliminary**

**information suggests that economic activity**
**rebounded in the first quarter of 2022, driven by**
**both secondary and tertiary activities. Some**
members mentioned that said reactivation took place
in a complex environment, where factors such as the
rise in infections caused by the Omicron variant, the
persistence of some disruptions in global supply
chains, and the military conflict between Russia and
Ukraine, stood out. **One member pointed out that**
economic activity grew 0.9% during the first quarter,
after having registered variations of -0.7 and 0.0% in
the two previous quarters. **Another member noted**
that Mexico's economic recovery is still incomplete.

**On the supply side, most members noted that**
**industrial** **production** **continued** **recovering,**

**supported by the favorable performance of the**

2


-----

**manufacturing sector.** **One member added that**
mining also contributed to the recovery, while
construction has shown little dynamism. **Some**
members pointed out that the automotive sector still
remains somewhat affected. However, one member
mentioned that the technical shutdowns of some car
makers are becoming fewer and more plant-specific,
which has allowed light vehicle production to perform
better than last year. **Most members noted that**
**there was a reactivation in the services sector**
**albeit with heterogeneity. One member pointed out**
that this sector has recovered as a result of the
reopening of activities and the increase in mobility.
However, he/she stated that there are still
opportunities for growth in some services such as
lodging, food preparation and leisure. **Another**
member recalled that the primary sector fell at the
margin.

**On the demand side, most members highlighted**
**that consumption has shown a significant**
**recovery, exceeding its pre-pandemic levels in**
**February. Some members noted that there is still a**
differentiated recovery among consumption

components. **One** member underlined that

consumption of goods is at relatively high levels,
while consumption of services still needs to close the
gap that was opened due to the health emergency.
**Another member said that a recovery has been**
observed, particularly in consumer non-durable
goods. **Most members noted that various**
**indicators of the determinants of consumption**
**remain at high levels.** However, **one member**
highlighted that these have decelerated at the
margin, and thus that it will be important to continue
monitoring their evolution. **Meanwhile,** **most**

**members underlined that investment continues**
**showing a lack of dynamism, mainly due to the**
**construction sector’s poor performance.** **One**
member highlighted that the deterioration of
investment precedes the beginning of the adjustment
in the reference rate. **Another member pointed out**
that, although gross fixed investment rebounded in
January, it declined again in February. One member
pointed out that investment in machinery and
equipment has registered significant growth in recent
months. **Regarding the foreign sector, most**
**members noted the good performance of**
**exports. Some members highlighted the dynamism**
of non-automotive manufacturing exports. **One**
member pointed out that their growth is due to an
increase in both the price and volume of exports.
**Another member highlighted the ongoing recovery**
of automotive exports.


**Regarding the labor market, most members**
**highlighted the progress observed in several**
**indicators, although negative effects persist.**
**They stated that both unemployment and**
**underemployment** **rates** **remained** **on** **a**

**downward trend during March. One member**
added that national and urban unemployment rates
decreased to 3.5 and 4.4%, respectively, nearing
their pre-pandemic levels. He/she pointed out that
the above was observed in a context in which the
labor participation rate decreased slightly during the
first quarter of the year and the employment rate
among the working age population registered levels
similar to those observed at the end of 2021.
**Another member mentioned that IMSS-insured jobs**
continued increasing and that job posting rates
remain on a positive trend. He/she stated that the
favorable performance of employment indicators has
contributed to slightly reduce labor market slack,
although total employment still remains significantly
below its pre-pandemic trajectory. **One member**
mentioned that nominal wage revisions for IMSSinsured workers reached a double-digit annual
increase, the highest in more than two decades.
He/she added that wage revisions in the private
sector reached a historical rate of 8.2%. Meanwhile,
**another** member highlighted that women’s

participation rate, in particular, continues showing a
lag with respect to that observed prior to the
pandemic.

**Most** **members** **agreed** **that** **ample** **slack**

**conditions remain, although they narrowed in**
**relation to the previous quarter. Some** members
mentioned that economic slack continues showing
differences among sectors. One member indicated
that while in other emerging economies GDP is
already above its pre-pandemic level, in Mexico it is
still below that level and significantly below the level
it would have reached had it continued on its prepandemic trajectory. He/she noted that this means
there is still room for further economic growth in
2022. Meanwhile, another member mentioned that it
is complicated to measure the level of economic
slack in the current environment.

**Most members highlighted that the environment**
**remains uncertain.** **One member stated that the**
global economic slowdown this year, particularly in
the United States, would be the greatest risk for an
economic contraction in Mexico. **Another member**
mentioned that, although the pandemic has

diminished notably in the country, the risks to growth
have increased due to the uncertainty caused by the
conflict in Eastern Europe and its effects on the
global economy. He/she considered that the balance

3


-----

of risks to growth remains biased to the downside. In
this context, one member pointed out that the growth
outlook for 2022 and 2023 has deteriorated due to
forecasts of lower domestic oil production, as well as
a weaker performance of industrial activity in the
United States.

**_Inflation in Mexico_**

**Most members indicated that in April headline**
**and core inflation registered annual rates of 7.68**
**and 7.22%, respectively. They noted that this has**
**been their highest level since January 2001.**
**Some members pointed out that this was the result**
of the behavior of the core component, while they
added that it was partially offset by a reduction in the
non-core one. **Most members stated that the**
**pressures associated with the geopolitical**
**conflict have been added to the shocks that have**
**affected** **inflation** **throughout** **the** **health**

**emergency.** **Some members pointed out that the**
conflict has pushed commodity prices further
upwards. **Some members highlighted that the**
adverse effects have been more evident on livestock
products and on food merchandise. **One member**
underlined the large weight of said products in the
consumer basket. Another member forewarned that
the disruptions in supply chains have extended the
imbalances between supply and demand. **One**
member stated that shocks on inflation are part of a
global phenomenon and that incipient signals of
mitigation in global and local supply restrictions have
already started to be observed. **Most members**
**mentioned that inflationary pressures have been**
**generalized and persistent. Some members**
pointed out that 43% of the CPI items registered
annualized seasonally-adjusted monthly increases
above 10%. **One member added that 82% of cities**
registered an annual inflation of between 7 and 10%.

**Some members mentioned that the behavior of core**
inflation mainly responded to the increase in food and
non-food merchandise prices. **One member noted**
that core inflation has been increasing for over a
year. **Another member added that its annualized**
monthly rate has followed an upward trend, shifting
from 3% in January 2021 to 8.56% in April 2022.
He/she underlined that said increase indicates that
domestic consumption recovery has been added to
external inflationary pressures. One member pointed
out that merchandise inflation has reflected

disruptions in production and distribution chains, as
well as the increase in international energy and food
prices. He/she added that annual inflation of food and
non-food merchandise registered high levels in April.
**Some members stated that services inflation has**


increased as a result of greater mobility and the
recovery of demand for services. **One member**
mentioned the higher operating costs of businesses
and higher energy and food prices, and pointed out
their impact on transportation and food service
prices.

**Some members mentioned that, despite its decline**
in April, non-core inflation remains at high levels.
**Some members noted that its reduction has been**
favored by the fossil fuels price policies. **One**
member stated that the favorable performance of the
non-core component is attributed to the lower
inflation of agricultural and livestock products, which
was partially offset by a higher inflation of energy
products. However, **another member noted that**
inflation of agricultural and livestock products
remains at high levels, as a result of the additional
price increases of inputs such as fertilizers and
grains.

**All members stated that inflation expectations for**
**2022 and 2023 have increased considerably. One**
member added that headline inflation expectations
for the end of 2022 are at 6.75%, having registered a
250-basis point increase so far this year. He/she
added that said expectations have been revised
more rapidly than during other inflationary episodes.
**Some members underlined that expectations for the**
end of 2023 are above the upper limit of the variability
interval. **Some members pointed out that inflation**
expectations for the next 12 months are at levels
close to 5%. One member forewarned that they had
not reached those levels since 2009. **Another**
member highlighted that they have increased by 64
basis points since February.

**Most** **members** **noted** **that** **medium-term**

**expectations have increased. They noted that**
**long-term** **expectations** **have** **been** **revised**

**marginally, to a level of 3.55%. They underlined**
**that they had not reached said level since they**
**began to be measured.** **One member stated that**
this represents a warning of the risk of them
becoming unanchored. **Another member argued**
that long-term expectations have remained stable,
although at levels above the target. Some members
noted that expectations measured by compensation
for inflation and inflationary risk of 10-year bonds
remain at high levels. **One member added that**
inflation expectations drawn from market instruments
have increased and that the inflation risk premium
registered its highest level in April, although it
remains at levels similar to those observed during
other stress periods. **Another member pointed out**
that inflation expectations drawn from market

4


-----

instruments for the 6- to 10-year average remain at
3.14%.

**Most members stated that, in view of greater-**
**than-anticipated** **pressures** **on** **inflation,**

**forecasts for headline and core inflation were**
**revised upwards up to the second and the third**
**quarters** **of** **2023,** **respectively,** **although**

**convergence to the 3% target during the first**
**quarter of 2024 is maintained. One member**
highlighted that the upward revision took place even
after incorporating the impact of the Policy Program
to Fight Inflation and High Prices. Another member
noted that, considering the recent dynamics of core
inflation, it can be inferred that it is about to reach its
peak and that it could soon begin a downward trend.
**One member underlined that, so far, there have been**
eleven consecutive monetary policy decisions in
which the central bank has revised the inflation
forecast upwards, either for a particular time frame or
for the entire forecast horizon. He/she highlighted
that this is not exclusive to the central bank’s
projections. He/she pointed out that monetary
authorities in other countries and market analysts
have also adjusted their forecasts to the upside,
which reflects the high degree of uncertainty that has
prevailed. **Another** member stated that the

convergence of inflation to its target faces significant
risks.

**Among upward risks to inflation, all members**
**mentioned the greater pressures on agricultural**
**and livestock product prices and energy prices,**
**due to the geopolitical conflict. Most members**
**mentioned the persistence of core inflation at**
**high levels and external inflationary pressures**
**associated with the pandemic. Some members**
added the cost-related pressures associated with
wage revisions, which could be passed through to
consumer prices. One member added an exchange
rate depreciation, due to possible bouts of volatility in
international financial markets. He/she mentioned
that, although the military conflict has already started
to exert pressure on inflation, the scope, duration and
magnitude of possible shocks derived from it are still
unknown. He/she also indicated that there is no
certainty as to the time required to regularize supply
chains. **Another member pointed out the possible**
continuation of droughts, which would affect
agricultural products’ prices. He/she considered that
the pressures caused by the conflict in Ukraine could
potentially affect the formation of inflation

expectations due to their greater effect on
households and families. **One member stated that,**
although the shock to commodity prices associated
with the military conflict poses a significant risk,


historically it tends to be solved through higher
supply when global markets operate adequately.
**Another** member warned about domestic

inflationary pressures. He/she stated that uncertainty
in measuring economic slack makes it difficult to
anticipate possible price pressures in certain sectors
that are recovering. One member pointed out that a
high and persistent inflation could contaminate the
price formation process. He/she added that different
indicators, such as the upward revision in analysts
and markets’ expectations, and minimum wage
revisions that exceed labor productivity growth,
suggest that this is already happening. He/she added
that the fact that inflation has not stopped
accelerating and is affecting an increasing number of
goods and services is a cause for concern.

Regarding downside risks to inflation, **some**
members mentioned a better functioning of supply
chains, as a result of the control of the pandemic.
**One member added: i) a decline in the intensity of**
the military conflict; ii) that, given the slack conditions
in the economy, cost-related pressures and hiring
conditions do not exert pressure on prices; and iii) a
higher-than-expected effect of the Policy Program to
Fight Inflation and High Prices. **Some members**
considered that said program will have moderate
effects on inflation. **One member stated that the**
different measures included in the program go in the
right direction as they seek to improve conditions on
the supply side, and that they have the potential to
affect the price formation process and inflation
expectations. He/she estimated that the program
could contribute to reduce inflationary pressures at
the margin. On the other hand, he/she argued that a
number of factors point to a moderation of world
inflation in 2022, such as less expansionary policy
stances by most governments and central banks
worldwide, as well as signs of a mitigation of
pressures on supply chains.

**Most members stated that the balance of risks for**
**the trajectory of inflation within the forecast**
**horizon remains biased to the upside and has**
**continued deteriorating. One member pointed out**
that this is due to the possibility that the effects of the
geopolitical conflict are greater or longer-lasting than
previously estimated. Some members highlighted an
environment of greater uncertainty for inflation.

**_Macrofinancial environment_**

**Regarding domestic financial markets, most**
**members highlighted that the exchange rate**
**remained relatively stable. They underlined the**
**performance of the Mexican peso despite the**
**strength of the US dollar and tighter financial**

5


-----

**conditions. They emphasized that the Mexican**
**peso remains the second currency with the**
**highest volatility-adjusted interest rate spread**
**relative to the United States. Some members**
considered that the favorable performance of the
currency is attributed to the sound macroeconomic
fundamentals, such as fiscal discipline and a prudent
monetary policy. **One member added that it is also**
due to the moderate deficit in the current account.
He/she stated that, from a medium-term perspective,
the performance and the relative low volatility of the
Mexican peso sets it apart from other emerging
economy currencies. **Another member pointed out**
that, in this favorable context, analysts kept their
exchange rate outlook practically unchanged.

**Most members mentioned that interest rates**
**increased in line with global trends. Some**
members noted that practically all nodes of the yield
curve increased, with up to 100 basis points
increments in the longer-term ones. Meanwhile, one
member stated that the real yield curve also
registered generalized increases, albeit of a lower
magnitude, given the greater demand for instruments
that offer protection against inflation. He/she
mentioned that there was an outflow of M-Bonos held
by foreign investors and an inflow of resources
channeled to Udibonos seeking to mitigate the risk of
higher inflation. Some members pointed out that the
stock market fell by 11%. **One member mentioned**
that default premia increased by over 40 basis points.
Regarding the evolution of credit, **another member**
stated that commercial banks’ financing to

businesses continued performing poorly. He/she
mentioned that, while businesses’ demand for credit
has started to reactivate, lending standards have
somewhat deteriorated, as a reflection of supplyrelated constraints. Some members warned that the
Federal Reserve’s monetary policy stance

represents a significant challenge as well for the
stability of the financial system. **One member**
indicated that, if the risk of the Federal Reserve
undergoing a faster tightening cycle materializes, the
Mexican peso will follow a more depreciated
trajectory. Another member warned that Mexico, like
other economies facing high risks and with a high
degree of financial and commercial integration to the
external sector, must maintain a solid

macroeconomic policy stance at all times.

**_Monetary policy_**

**The Governing Board evaluated the magnitude**
**and diversity of the shocks that have affected**
**inflation and its determinants, along with the risk**
**of medium- and long-term inflation expectations**


**and price formation becoming contaminated.**
**Most members also considered the increasing**
**challenges posed by the ongoing tightening of**
**global monetary and financial conditions, the**
**environment of significant uncertainty, and**
**greater inflationary pressures associated with**
**the geopolitical conflict, the resurgence of**
**COVID-19 cases in China, and the possibility of**
**inflation being affected by additional pressures.**
**Based on these considerations, the majority**
**voted for raising the target for the overnight**
**interbank interest rate by 50 basis points to**
**7.00%. The Board highlighted that, with this**
**action, the monetary policy stance adjusts to the**
**trajectory required for inflation to converge to its**
**3% target within the forecast horizon.**

**The Governing Board stated that for the next**
**monetary policy decisions, it will monitor**
**inflationary pressures thoroughly as well as all**
**factors that have an incidence on the foreseen**
**path for inflation and its expectations. The latter,**
**in order to set a policy rate that is consistent at**
**all times with the orderly and sustained**
**convergence of headline inflation to the 3%**
**target within the time frame in which monetary**
**policy operates as well as with an adequate**
**adjustment of the economy and financial**
**markets. Most members added that, given the**
**growing complexity in the environment for**
**inflation and its expectations, taking more**
**forceful measures to attain the inflation target**
**may be considered.**

**One** **member pointed out that the strengthening of**
monetary policy contributes to: i) preventing secondround effects given the new supply-related shocks; ii)
maintaining financial stability, considering the
increase in the Federal Reserve’s federal funds rate;
and iii) helping the interest rate move closer to a level
considered as neutral. He/she warned that inflation is
high and thus it is critical to make adequate decisions
to lower it. He/she also stated that said actions
should be taken efficiently, with the least possible
costs for society. He/she listed the factors that should
be considered when defining an adequate trajectory
for the interest rate under the current upward cycle.
He/she pointed out that, above all, inflation is a global
phenomenon, and that for this reason inflation in
Mexico will decrease insofar as world inflation also
declines. He/she noted that the second factor is that
there was little monetary stimulus granted in 2020
and it began to be withdrawn in advance in 2021,
and, therefore, unlike other countries, Mexico does
not have a problem of excess demand. He/she
mentioned that the recovery could continue without

6


-----

generating further inflationary pressures, while the
monetary policy stance transitions to a neutral level.
He/she underlined that, at the beginning of 2022, the
ex-ante real interest rate was among the highest in
the world, which has already started to affect credit,
durable goods consumption, and investment. He/she
considered that the room to raise the policy rate
without affecting economic activity is rather limited.
Therefore, he/she stated that it is important to
continue the cycle of increases prudently and
avoiding an excessive tightening. He/she mentioned
that a third factor is that excessive monetary
tightening entails higher financial costs for the
economy as a whole. He/she warned that an
increase in default risk premia is already being
observed in emerging economies, which would
indicate the limits of a restrictive monetary policy in
consolidating macroeconomic stability. Finally,

he/she considered it not advisable to raise the
reference rate at a faster pace than the Federal
Reserve. He/she highlighted that the volatilityadjusted interest rate spread relative to the United
States is among the highest in emerging economies.
He/she pointed out that both economies are subject
to the same global shocks and that Mexico has
already made progress in normalizing its monetary
policy stance. In addition, Mexico did not adopt an
expansionary fiscal policy stance during the
pandemic. For all of the above, he/she stated that it
is unnecessary and even imprudent to adopt a pace
of rate increases above that of the Federal Reserve.
He/she mentioned that, looking ahead, conditions
might emerge to even start reducing such spread,
given the solid macroeconomic fundamentals, the
favorable evolution of the Mexican peso, and the
relative monetary policy stance.

**Another member highlighted that** headline inflation
is still at high levels and considered highly worrisome
that core inflation, the component that most reacts to
monetary policy actions, continues trending

upwards. He/she warned about: i) the Federal
Reserve's more restrictive monetary policy tightening
affecting price formation and financial system
stability; ii) uncertainty regarding the continuation of
the geopolitical conflict; and iii) mobility restrictions in
China and their impact on global supply chains.
He/she warned that although the reference rate has
increased by 250 basis points since the beginning of
the current cycle, the real ex-ante rate has increased
in a smaller proportion, and currently stands around
the lower limit of the neutral range. He/she
highlighted that, in past monetary cycles with nominal
interest rate levels similar to the current ones, the exante real interest rate increased in a similar
magnitude as the nominal interest rate and stood


slightly above the neutral interest rate. However,
he/she mentioned that, in the current cycle, the
reference rate increases have only been able to
compensate for the upward adjustment in inflation
expectations and have been less effective in making
the ex-ante real interest rate increase to at least its
neutral level. He/she underlined that even

considering the unprecedented context, in which the
duration and magnitude of the shocks are different
from other inflationary episodes, it is imperative to act
decisively to ensure that inflation returns to its target
within the forecast horizon. He/she emphasized the
importance of monetary policy operating with
predictability in order to influence an orderly
formation of expectations, and therefore the central
bank’s communication should clearly convey that it
will consider taking more forceful measures in the
next monetary policy decisions, and that it might be
necessary for the ex-ante real interest rate to reach
a level higher than the neutral rate. He/she also
pointed out that it is essential to consolidate a robust
approach that provides absolute certainty about the
central bank’s commitment to its constitutional
mandate, which mitigates the risk of possible
second-round effects on prices, while also ensures
the anchoring of inflation expectations to avoid
longer-term expectations from becoming

contaminated.

**One member** mentioned that despite accumulating
an increase of 250 basis points in the reference rate,
the real ex-ante short-term rate stands at 1.7%,
slightly below the lower threshold of the estimated
range for the neutral rate. He/she noted that if
inflation expectations for the next 12 months stand at
4.7% and the upper limit of the neutral range is
estimated to be 3.4% in real terms, the reference rate
would need to be above 8% and possibly at levels
above 9%. The challenge is to establish an ideal
trajectory, in terms of timing and pace of adjustment,
to be able to attain such level. He/she stated that,
since the adoption of the interbank interest rate as an
operational target in 2008, only in 9 out of 25
occasions, the target rate has been raised by 50
basis points, and never by 75 basis points, although
there has never been such a complex outlook for
inflation as the current one. He/she pointed out that
raising the rate by 75 basis points would send a
stronger message of commitment to the central
bank’s primary objective. This measure would further
dissipate any doubts regarding central bank
autonomy, and would restate the institution’s moral
obligation with the most vulnerable population.
Moreover, this would imply reaching the neutral zone
more rapidly, would help to offset the deterioration of
medium-term expectations, would have a greater

7


-----

effect on anchoring long-term expectations, and
would provide a stronger relative monetary policy
stance to face increases in risk aversion. However,
he/she noted that it would surprise both markets and
analysts, making it difficult to forecast the reference
rate’s trajectory and distorting the interpretation of
the reaction function. He/she added that such an
increase would suggest lower sensibility regarding
cyclical conditions in the economy. It could also mark
a new pace of adjustment, difficult to reduce in the
context of high inflation, a very restrictive cycle by the
Federal Reserve, and cycle of monetary adjustments
in Mexico that will last for quite some time. A faster
pace of adjustment might result in an excessively
high terminal rate for the sound development of the
economy and financial markets. Meanwhile, he/she
noted that a 50 basis-point increase is discounted by
markets and analysts, sends a message of
commitment to the primary mandate, and is
consistent with the narrative of gradual adjustments.
It also allows time to communicate the possibility of
increases in the pace of monetary tightening. He/she
added that, with this decision, the nominal rate curve
would maintain its current structure, confirming
markets’ expectations, while a 75 basis-point
increase would lead to a flattening of the yield curve.
He/she mentioned that the current spread of 600
basis points has so far favored the exchange rate.
However, he/she considered that an increase of 50
basis points could be perceived as an insufficient
increase in the ex-ante real interest rate in the short
term, given the lagged effect with which monetary
policy operates and the difficult inflationary context
currently faced. Furthermore, it does not provide the
relative monetary policy stance with additional space
to face a disruption in financial markets. This decision
also does not hasten the transition of the absolute
policy stance to a more restrictive range, given the
deterioration of inflation expectations. He/she
pointed out that the current decision should be
communicated with a more restrictive tone,

categorically signaling the willingness to act more
forcefully in the future if forecasts of convergence to
the target do not materialize.

**Another member stated that** since the previous
monetary policy decision, inflation has continued
accelerating. He/she pointed out that in addition to
further surprises and shocks, monetary policy
adjustments have been insufficient to counter the
deterioration of price formation and have had a
limited impact on the real interest rate, which remains
below the required level. He/she considered that
monetary policy has fallen "behind the curve" and
that, in the current situation, a 50 basis-point
increase is insufficient to guarantee the convergence


of inflation within the forecast horizon. Also, the key
role of monetary policy is to act decisively and in a
timely manner to curb inflationary inertia and avoid
more severe rate increases in the future, and for this
reason he/she pointed out that it is time to raise the
rate of adjustment of monetary policy by 75 basis
points. He/she stated that this action is consistent
with the commitment to make the necessary
adjustments to comply with the central bank’s
primary mandate. He/she added that given the high
uncertainty surrounding the ongoing various shocks,
the most prudent course of action is to act sooner
rather than later. He/she highlighted that the
expectation that markets have internalized about the
current and subsequent monetary policy decisions
should be assessed. He/she stated that although
most analysts expect an increase of 50 basis points,
three analysts consider the possibility of 75 basis
points, and expectations derived from market
instruments indicate a higher implicit rate by the end
of the year. He/she mentioned that a surprise on the
side of prudence -with a larger increase- is not
necessarily bad news, but shows a central bank
whose priority is to control inflation. He/she
mentioned that the decision should strengthen both
the exchange rate and the expectations channels.
He/she recalled that the latter is one of the most
important and that complacency in the face of the
observed adjustments warns about the possibility of
them starting to become unanchored, which would
imply high costs for society. He/she indicated that a
more rapid monetary tightening by the Federal
Reserve could affect the exchange rate and impose
challenges for monetary policy. Therefore, he/she
added that it is also essential to maintain conditions
for a resilient exchange rate. He/she argued that this
decision should validate the Governing Board’s
commitment to taking appropriate decisions and
should clearly communicate the deterioration of the
economic conditions.

**One member stated that monetary policy in Mexico**
faces a significantly complex environment. He/she
mentioned that given the social and economic costs
generated by inflation, which affect to a greater
extent the lower-income population, it is essential for
monetary policy to foster an environment of low and
stable inflation. He/she highlighted that the high
levels of inflation, the persistence of the effects of the
shocks derived from the pandemic, and the
difficulties arising from the military conflict in Ukraine,
imply an environment that poses a high risk of
contamination of the price formation process. He/she
recalled that inflation expectations continue

increasing, and although the output gap is estimated
to be wide, the labor market has continued

8


-----

recovering and various cost-related pressures are
observed. He/she added that the outlook for
international monetary and financial conditions faces
circumstances unseen in decades, which could have
a significant impact on domestic financial markets,
including the foreign exchange market. He/she
argued that it is thus essential to continue adjusting
the monetary policy stance in Mexico, in order for
inflation expectations to remain anchored and,
therefore, the price formation process to be
consistent with the primary objective. He/she added
that the central bank needs to consider more decisive
actions, because, if it does not take the necessary
measures, longer-term inflation expectations could
be affected by both the high levels of inflation and the
duration of the shocks that have affected them, as
well as by the continuous revisions to the forecasts.
He/she warned that an un-anchoring of expectations
must be avoided by taking forceful actions. He/she
stated that the willingness to make full use of the
tools to make inflation converge to its target should
be restated in the central bank’s communication.
He/she considered it necessary to acknowledge the
profound change in global economic and geopolitical
conditions, and that an appropriate monetary policy
stance could be significantly more astringent than in
other circumstances. He/she pointed out that
extraordinary conditions, such as those being faced,
may require extraordinary actions. He/she argued
that it is imperative to communicate the central
bank's determination to attain convergence of
inflation to the target within the forecast horizon, and
the willingness to redouble efforts if necessary. All of
the above will contribute to induce orderly conditions
in the foreign exchange and fixed income markets in
the prevailing environment of higher inflation at a
global level.

**3. MONETARY POLICY DECISION**

The Governing Board evaluated the magnitude and
diversity of the shocks that have affected inflation
and its determinants, along with the risk of mediumand long-term inflation expectations and price
formation becoming contaminated. It also considered
the increasing challenges posed by the ongoing
tightening of global monetary and financial

conditions, the environment of significant

uncertainty, and greater inflationary pressures
associated with the geopolitical conflict and with the
resurgence of COVID-19 cases in China, as well as
the possibility of inflation being affected by additional
pressures. Based on these considerations, the Board
decided by majority to raise the target for the
overnight interbank interest rate by 50 basis points to
7.00%. With this action, the monetary policy stance


adjusts to the trajectory required for inflation to
converge to its 3% target within the forecast horizon.

For the next monetary policy decisions, the
Governing Board will monitor thoroughly inflationary
pressures as well as all factors that have an
incidence on the foreseen path for inflation and its
expectations. The latter, in order to set a policy rate
that is consistent at all times with the trajectory
needed to facilitate the orderly and sustained
convergence of headline inflation to the 3% target
within the time frame in which monetary policy
operates as well as an adequate adjustment of the
economy and financial markets. Given the growing
complexity in the environment for inflation and its
expectations, taking more forceful measures to attain
the inflation target may be considered.

**4. VOTING**

Victoria Rodríguez, Galia Borja, Gerardo Esquivel,
and Jonathan Heath voted in favor of increasing the
target for the overnight interbank interest rate by 50
basis points to 7.00%. Irene Espinosa voted in favor
of increasing the target for the overnight interbank
interest rate by 75 basis points to 7.25%.

**5. DISSENTING OPINIONS/ VOTES**

**Vote. Irene Espinosa**

Given the intensification of inflationary pressures, our
forecasts for headline inflation have been revised
upwards for the next five quarters, thus accumulating
eleven consecutive decisions in which forecasts
have been adjusted to the upside for either part or
the entire forecast horizon. Long-term inflation
expectations have also been adjusted marginally
above 3.5% for the first time since they began to be
estimated. The faster-than-expected increase in
inflation has limited the effect of the monetary policy
adjustments implemented in recent months on the
real interest rate, which remains below the level
required to attain convergence to the 3% target. In
light of these results, an environment of greater
uncertainty, highly adverse external conditions, and
a balance of risks for inflation that has worsened and
is biased upwards, it is essential to act decisively,
forcefully, and in a timely manner. Increasing the
pace of monetary tightening to 75 basis points is
necessary to attain convergence to the target within
the forecast horizon and to reinforce credibility in the
central bank's commitment to its primary mandate of
maintaining price stability.

9


-----

**ANNEX**

The information in this Annex was prepared for this
meeting by the staff of Banco de México’s Directorate
General of Economic Research and Directorate
General of Central Bank Operations. It does not
necessarily reflect the considerations of the

members of the Governing Board as to the monetary
policy decision.

**A.1. External conditions**

**A.1.1. World economic activity**

During the first quarter of the year, global economic
activity grew at a lower-than-anticipated rate, due to
the resurgence of COVID-19 in some countries, the
persistence of disruptions in supply chains as a result
of the reimposition of mobility restrictions in some
regions of China, and the economic consequences
of the Russia-Ukraine conflict. Economic activity has
been affected heterogeneously across countries,
depending on the trade relationship with Russia and
Ukraine and the exposure of each country to the
increase in commodity prices, factors that have
intensified the divergences that had been occurring
due to the effects of the pandemic and the
disruptions in supply chains. The negative effects of
these new shocks have been reflected in a significant
decrease in Purchasing Managers' Indices,

particularly in countries such as Russia and China,
with the component of future production anticipating
a more generalized reduction across sectors and
countries (Chart 1).

World inflation continued increasing, pressured by
bottlenecks, the recovery of demand, and the high
food and energy prices. Thus, in most advanced and
emerging economies, inflation remained above their
respective central banks' targets. As a result, a large
number of central banks in emerging economies
continued raising their reference rates. The increase
in world inflation continues generating expectations
of a faster reduction of monetary stimulus worldwide.
Financial conditions tightened further, with interest
rates rising and the US dollar strengthening, in a
context of greater risk aversion.

Global risks include those associated with the
pandemic, longer-lasting inflationary pressures,

1 Expressed as a seasonally adjusted quarterly annualized rate,
US GDP grew at a rate of 6.9% during the fourth quarter of 2021
and -1.4% during the first quarter of 2022.


worsening geopolitical tensions, and further

tightening of monetary and financial conditions.

**Chart 1**

**Global: Purchasing Managers’ Index:**

**Production Component**

Diffusion index, s. a.

65

60

55

50

45

40

35 Manufacturing

Manufacturing (excl. China)

30 Services

Services (excl. China)

25 April

20

2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022

s. a. / Seasonally adjusted figures.
Source: IHS Markit.

In the United States, economic activity contracted
during the first quarter of the year at a seasonally
adjusted quarterly rate of 0.4%, after having grown at
a rate of 1.7% during the previous quarter (Chart 2).[1]
The fall in GDP reflects a negative contribution of
inventory investment, public spending and net
exports, the latter resulting from a sharp increase in
imports and a contraction in exports. This contrasts
with the greater dynamism of private sector domestic
demand, led by consumer expenditure, especially in
durable goods, and of non-residential investment,
particularly in machinery and equipment.

10

|Col1|Col2|
|---|---|
|Manufacturing Manufacturing (excl. China) Services Services (excl. China)|April|


-----

10

5

0

-5

-10

-15


0

|Chart 2 US Real GDP and Components Quarterly percentage rate and contribution in percentage points, s. a.|Col2|Col3|Col4|
|---|---|---|---|
|Private consumption expenditures Residential investment Nonresidential investment Change in private inventories Exports Imports Government consumption expenditures Total||||
|I II III IV 2019|I II III IV 2020|I II III IV 2021|I 2022|


s. a. / Seasonally adjusted figures.
Source: BEA.

US industrial production increased at a monthly rate
of 0.9% in March, after having grown in the same
magnitude during February. This recovery was
mainly explained by a 1.7% increase in mining due
to the increase in oil and gas extraction. The
generation of gas and electricity for domestic
consumption expanded at a monthly rate of 0.4% in
response to the higher demand for heating due to the
low temperatures registered. Regarding

manufacturing activity, it grew 0.9% in March, after
having increased 1.2% during February, although it
continues to be affected by bottlenecks and the
shortage of semiconductors. The manufacturing
Purchasing Managers' Index suggests that

expansion will persist, although it will continue to be
limited by disruptions in supply chains.

US labor market conditions continued improving in
March and April, thus remaining extremely tight. The
non-farm payroll increased by 428,000 jobs per
month on average, after having increased by
714,000 jobs in February, reflecting, primarily, the
growth of the sector of entertainment, recreation and art,
temporary accommodation and food preparation activities,
and, to a lesser extent, of professional, corporate and
business support services, education and health, and
manufacturing. The unemployment rate decreased
from 3.8% in February to 3.6% in April. In addition,
the demand for workers remains strong and,
although the labor participation rate has been
recovering, labor supply remains weak. The vacancy

2 In annualized terms, euro area GDP registered a quarter-onquarter seasonally adjusted variation of 1.2% during the fourth
quarter of 2021 and 0.8% during the first quarter of 2022.


rate remains high and wage growth continues at high
levels.

In the euro area, economic activity moderated its
pace of expansion slightly during the first quarter of
the year by growing at a seasonally adjusted
quarterly rate of 0.2%, after registering growth of
0.3% during the fourth quarter of 2021.[2] The weak
expansion in economic activity was the result of
restrictions to contain the infections caused by the
Omicron variant, the persistence of bottlenecks, the
upsurge in energy and food prices, and the impact on
trade and production derived from the military conflict
between Russia and Ukraine. The unemployment
rate decreased from 6.9% in February to 6.8% in
March. Purchasing Managers' Indices continue
pointing to a recovery in services in light of the easing
of restrictions to deal with the COVID-19 infections
and a slower pace of growth in manufacturing
activity, with a deterioration in the components of
production expectations stemming from the conflict
in Ukraine and disruptions in the supply chains
standing out.

In Japan, available information suggests that
economic activity contracted during the first quarter
of 2022, after having expanded at a seasonally
adjusted quarterly rate of 1.1% during the fourth
quarter of 2021.[3] This reflected a deterioration in
household spending in the face of the resurgence of
COVID-19 cases and lower mobility since the
beginning of 2022, although timely indicators suggest
a rebound in economic activity at the end of the
period following the lifting of mobility restrictions. In
this environment, the unemployment rate declined
from 2.7% in February to 2.6% in March. Purchasing
Managers' Indices suggest a rebound in services and
point to a slower pace of expansion in the
manufacturing sector due to the continued

disruptions in production chains.

In the main emerging economies, available indicators
suggest a slower pace of growth during the first
quarter of the year, although with a marked
heterogeneity across countries and regions,

depending on the evolution of the pandemic and the
exposure of each country to the effects on global
supply chains and the Russia-Ukraine conflict. In
Emerging Asia, available information indicates a
weakening of GDP growth in most economies. In
China, a slower pace of growth was registered during
the first quarter of 2022, decreasing from a

3 In annualized terms, the quarterly seasonally adjusted variation
of Japan’s GDP during the third quarter of 2021 was 4.6%.

11


-----

seasonally adjusted quarterly rate of 1.5% during the
fourth quarter of 2021 to 1.3% in the first quarter of
2022, reflecting the restrictions imposed on several
cities and provinces to contain the recent increase in
COVID-19 infections.[4] In Latin America, available
indicators point to a heterogeneous behavior, with
the possible weakening of economic activity in the
face of the lower mobility associated with the latest
wave of infections in countries such as Chile and the
gradual recovery in countries such as Brazil and
Mexico. In Emerging Europe, available indicators
suggest a moderation in the pace of recovery in
some countries, while a sharp contraction is
expected in Ukraine and Russia as a result of the
armed conflict and economic sanctions imposed on
Russia.

International commodity prices registered a mixed
behavior since Mexico's previous monetary policy
decision. After reaching in March their highest level
since 2008, oil prices decreased slightly due to the
coordinated release of strategic oil reserves by the
main advanced economies, the possibility of a new
nuclear agreement with Iran that would allow the
resumption of its oil exports, as well as the
moderation in oil demand due to the imposition of
lockdown measures in China in response to the
resurgence of COVID-19 cases. However, in recent
weeks, oil prices were subject to volatility in light of
the European Union's proposal to phase out Russian
oil imports over the next 6 months and the G-7's
commitment to gradually eliminate its dependence
on energy from Russia. Natural gas reference prices
registered a mixed behavior across regions,
increasing in the US market due to the low
temperatures and higher natural gas exports, and
decreasing in Europe during most of the period due
to the lower demand from China and improving
weather conditions. At the end of April, there were
episodes of volatility in European markets after
Russia interrupted gas supplies to Poland and
Bulgaria due to disagreements regarding the
payment currency, and again in the second week of
May, when natural gas shipments from Russia
through pipelines in Ukraine and Poland were
interrupted. Industrial metals prices generally

trended downwards due to concerns of a lower
demand from China resulting from its slower activity
due to the restrictions implemented to contain the
increase of COVID-19 cases. Grain prices also
decreased in early April due to the lower demand
from China, although in subsequent weeks most of
them increased again as a result of uncertainty

4 In annualized terms, China’s GDP growth was 4.0% in the fourth
quarter of 2021, and 4.8% in the first quarter of 2021.


regarding supply from Russia and Ukraine as the
armed conflict has extended.

**A.1.2. Monetary policy and international financial**
**markets**

Inflation continued increasing worldwide, reaching its
highest levels in four decades in some cases, driven
by a more generalized increase in prices, with those
of energy and foods standing out. This was due to
the recovery of demand and the persistence of
bottlenecks. The latter factor has been particularly
affected by the resurgence of COVID-19 cases in
China, the Russia-Ukraine conflict, and the sanctions
imposed on Russia. In turn, the invasion of Ukraine
has continued to exert pressure on commodity
prices.

In most major advanced economies, headline and
core inflation continued increasing, remaining above
their central banks' targets, except for Japan, whose
inflation remains at low levels (Chart 3). In particular,
in the United States, the personal consumption
expenditure deflator rose from an annual rate of 6.3%
in February to 6.6% in March, its highest level since
January 1982, reflecting an increase in energy and
food inflation. The core component decreased from
5.3 to 5.2% during the same period, due to a
reduction in services and merchandise inflation;
among the latter, the lower inflation of automotive
vehicles stands out. In this context, since Banco de
México's previous monetary policy decision, shortterm inflation expectations drawn from surveys
continued to increase significantly for these

economies, while long-term inflation expectations
drawn from financial instruments and surveys
remained relatively stable.

12


-----

**Chart 3**

**Selected Advanced Economies:**

**Headline Inflation**

Annual percentage change

9 United States PCE 1/

8 United States CPI

Japan 2/

7

Euro area 3/

6 United Kingdom

5 Canada

4

3

2

1

0

-1

March

-2 April

April

-3

-4

2005 2009 2013 2017 2021

1/ The personal consumption expenditure deflator is used.
2/ Excludes fresh food. This series does not exclude the effect of the
increase in the consumption tax in May 2014 and October 2019 nor the
effect of the free daycare and preschool program in October 2019.
3/ Preliminary figures for April.
Source: Bureau of Economic Analysis, Bureau of Labor Statistics, Eurostat,
Bank of Japan, Statistics Canada, Office of National Statistics.

Similarly, in most of the main emerging economies,
inflation continued rising, remaining above their
central banks' target, except for China. This higher
inflation has resulted mainly from increases in energy
and food prices that have escalated due to the
Russia-Ukraine conflict, the pressures on the prices
of other goods derived from imbalances between
demand and supply and the continued disruptions in
supply chains, as well as a gradual recovery in
service prices.

In this context of persistent inflationary pressures, the
central banks of most major advanced economies
have continued reducing their monetary stimulus,
with some even accelerating the process. In some
cases, such as Sweden and Australia, central banks
raised their monetary policy rates for the first time
since the beginning of the pandemic, while the US
Federal Reserve and the central banks of Canada,
Korea, England, Norway and New Zealand continued
raising their rates. With respect to their asset
purchase programs, some have launched or
announced a starting date for the gradual reduction
of certain assets, while others have concluded
purchases and are in the reinvestment stage or
continuing certain asset purchase programs. This,
together with the continued increase in world
inflation, has continued to generate expectations of a
faster reduction of monetary stimulus worldwide,
through further increases in interest rates and a
reduction in central banks' balance sheets. In
particular, expectations drawn from financial

instruments foresee a considerably faster pace of

|%|― US Federal Reserve 2/|Col3|Col4|Col5|Col6|Col7|Col8|Col9|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
||― Bank of England ― Bank of Japan ― European Central Bank depo ― OIS implicit trajectory May 6, --- OIS implicit trajectory Mar 17,|sit rate 2022 2022|||Forecasts||||
||||||||||
||||||||||
||||||||||
||||||||||
||||||||||
||||||||||
||||||||||


1/ OIS: Fixed floating interest rate swap where the fixed interest rate is
associated to the effective overnight reference rate.
2/ For the observed reference rate of the US, the average interest rate of
the target range of the federal funds rate (0.75% - 1%) is used.
Source: Banco de México with data from Bloomberg,

Among the recent monetary policy decisions in the
main advanced economies, the following stand out:

i) At its May meeting, the Federal Reserve raised

the target range for the federal funds rate by 50
basis points to 0.75-1.00% and anticipated
successive increases. In this regard, the
chairman pointed out that the Fed is in the
process of raising the policy rate expeditiously to
more normal levels and that, assuming that
economic and financial conditions evolve in line
with expectations, there is a generalized
perception in the Federal Open Market

Committee (FOMC) that additional 50 basis point
increases could be considered for the next two
meetings. Regarding the Federal Reserve's
balance sheet, the FOMC decided to begin
reducing its holdings of Treasury securities,
agency debt and mortgage-backed securities
beginning in June 1, through adjustments to the
reinvestment amounts of principal payments on
such securities, which will be reinvested to the
extent they exceed certain monthly limits outlined
in the Plans to Reduce the Size of the Federal
Reserve's Balance Sheet. Said limit will initially be
of USD 30 billion per month for Treasury
securities and USD 17.5 billion per month for
agency debt securities and mortgage-backed
securities. After three months this limit will

13


interest rate increases in most major advanced
economies than previously expected, with raises
anticipated over the next few years (Chart 4).

**Chart 4**

**Reference Rates and Trajectories**

**Implied in OIS Curves[1/]**

Percent


3.5% **― US Federal Reserve 2/**

**― Bank of England**

3.0% **― Bank of Japan**

**― European Central Bank deposit rate**
**― OIS implicit trajectory May 6, 2022**

2.5% **--- OIS implicit trajectory Mar 17, 2022**

2.0%

1.5%

1.0%

0.5%

0.0%

-0.5%

End of End of End of

-1.0% 2020 2021 2022

2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023


End of
2023


-----

increase to USD 60 billion and USD 35 billion per
month, respectively. In this context, the expected
trajectory for the federal funds rate implied in
financial instruments has been revised upwards
during the period and reflects, according to the
latest available information, a rise in the interest
rate at the end of 2022 to reach a level of 2.65%,
higher than the 1.9% set at its May meeting.

ii) At its March meeting, the European Central Bank

left its refinancing, key lending and key deposit
rates unchanged at 0.0, 0.25 and -0.5%,
respectively. In addition, it reiterated its future
guidance for interest rates and pointed out again
that any adjustment to interest rates will be
gradual and will take place sometime after the end
of net purchases under the Asset Purchase
Program (APP). Regarding the latter, it left
unchanged the pace of reduction of its purchases
for the coming months and highlighted that
incoming information reinforced the expectation
that purchases under said program should
conclude in the third quarter of this year, adding
that the Governing Council will maintain a
discretional, gradual and flexible conduction of
monetary policy. Regarding its Pandemic

Emergency Program (PEPP), it concluded its net
asset purchases at the end of March as it had
previously stated and reiterated that it intends to
reinvest the principal payments on maturing
securities at least until the end of 2024.

iii) At its January meeting, the Bank of Japan left its

reference rate unchanged at -0.1% and its longterm interest rate target (indexed to its 10-year
bond) at around 0%. It restated that it expects
interest rates to remain at their current levels or
even lower. As part of its curve control strategy, it
also clarified that it will offer to buy 10-year
government bonds at 0.25% every business day
through fixed-rate purchase operations, unless it
is highly likely that no bids are received.
Regarding its commercial paper and corporate
bond purchase program, it reiterated that it will
make these purchases at the same pace as
before the COVID-19 pandemic, so that its
outstanding amounts will gradually return to prepandemic levels.

Since Mexico’s previous monetary policy decision, a
large number of central banks of major emerging
economies, mostly from Latin America and Eastern
Europe, continued raising their reference rates,
including those of Chile, Colombia, Peru, Brazil,
Hungary, Czech Republic, Poland, and South Africa,
while those of Israel, India and Malaysia increased


their rate for the first time since the beginning of the
pandemic. It is worth noting that Russia's central
bank, after increasing its interest rate from 9.5% to
20.0% in February, surprised the market in April by
announcing two rate cuts of 300 basis points each,
taking it to a level of 14.0%. For its part, China's
central bank cut its reserve requirement ratio (RRR)
from 11.50 to 11.25% and announced other liquidity
provision measures for certain sectors affected by
the COVID-19 pandemic.

International financial markets registered a

significant increase in volatility and risk aversion,
particularly since the second half of April (Chart 5).
This occurred in a context in which mobility
restrictions were imposed in China due to the
resurgence of COVID-19 cases, the invasion of
Ukraine and the imposition of economic sanctions on
Russia continued, as well as high levels of inflation
and expectations of a faster reduction of monetary
stimulus in the main advanced economies. Financial
conditions tightened further during the period. In
particular, equity markets in most of the main
advanced and emerging economies performed
negatively due to the context described above. In
foreign exchange markets, the dollar strengthened
significantly against most of the currencies of
advanced and emerging economies, reaching its
highest levels in two decades, in an environment of
greater risk aversion and reduction of monetary
stimulus and expectations that the Federal Reserve
will withdraw the stimulus at a faster pace. In
contrast, the euro and yen depreciated significantly,
with the latter reaching its lowest level in around 20
years, due to the divergence between the Bank of
Japan's expansionary monetary policy and the
withdrawal of monetary stimulus by the central banks
of other advanced economies. The currencies of
emerging economies depreciated, although the
Russian ruble reversed the previous losses suffered
as a result of the beginning of the invasion of Ukraine
(Chart 6). Long-term government bond interest rates
increased in most major advanced and emerging
economies, with a significant rise in short-term rates
in some cases, reflecting the withdrawal of monetary
stimulus and the expectation that this process will
occur at a faster pace. In the case of the United
States, the above contributed to a temporary
inversion of the slope of the yield curve, measured by
the spread between 10-year and 2-year bond interest
rates, at the beginning of April, reaching negative
territory for the first time since 2019. Since Mexico’s
previous monetary policy decision, capital inflows to
emerging economies continued to show a

differentiated behavior by asset. In most cases,
inflows to equity markets, mainly to China, were

14


-----

observed, while in fixed income markets outflows
were observed from mid-April, with China standing
out as well, given expectations of a more
accommodative monetary policy in that country.

**Chart 5**

**Change in Selected Financial Indicators from**

**February 3, 2022 to May 6, 2022**

Percent; basis pointsPercentage, basis points


40%

30%


200

150


20%

10%


100

50


**A.2. Current situation of the Mexican economy**

**A.2.1. Mexican markets**

In the international context described above, in
domestic financial markets, the exchange rate
remained practically with no change in its quote
against the dollar, and interest rates rose across all
terms, in line with what was observed in other fixedincome markets at the global level, during a period
characterized by a slight increase in volatility (Chart
7).

**Chart 7**

**Mexican Markets’ Performance**

Percent, MXN/USD and index


4.5

4.0


59,000

57,000


47,000


0%

-10%


0

-50


9.5

9.0


3.5

3.0


55,000

53,000


-20%


-100


8.5

8.0


1/ The MSCI Emerging Markets Index consists of 24 countries.
2/ DXY: a weighted average estimated by the Intercontinental Exchange
(ICE) of the nominal exchange rate of the main six currencies operated
globally with the following weights: EUR 57.6%, JPY: 13.6%, GBP: 11.9%,
CAD: 9.1%, SEK: 4.2%, and CHF: 3.6%.
Source: Bloomberg and ICE.

**Chart 6**

**Selected Emerging Economies: Financial Assets**

**Performance since March 18, 2022**

Percent, basis points


7.5

7.0


2.5

2.0


21.5

21.3

21.1

20.9

20.7

20.5

20.3

20.1

19.9

19.7

19.5


51,000

49,000


M Bonds


Inflation-indexed bonds

Range since previous monetary policy Mar 18,22 May 6,22
decision


Range in year Range since previous monetary policy Mar 18,22 May 6,22


Note: An upward adjustment indicates currency appreciation. Interest rates
correspond to swap rates at the specified terms, except for Hungary, where
government securities with 3-year maturities were used as a reference. For
the Philippines, a 2-year swap rate was used, and for Russia, a 2-year and
3-year swap rate was used.
Source: Bloomberg.


Source: Prepared by Banco de México.

The Mexican peso fluctuated in a range of 85 cents,
between 19.79 and 20.64 pesos per dollar, ending
the period with a marginal depreciation of 0.04%
(Chart 8). This occurred in a context in which both
spot and future trading conditions showed limited
variations with respect to the previous period.

15


-----

**Chart 8**

**Mexican Peso Exchange Rate with Moving**

**Averages**

MXN/USD


25.50

Mexican peso

25.00

24.50 100-day moving average

24.00 50-day moving average

23.50

23.00

22.50

22.00

21.50

21.00

20.50

20.00

19.50

19.00

18.50

18.00

17.50

17.00

J   F  M  A  M  J   J  A  S  O  N  D  J   F  M  A  M  J   J  A  S  O  N  D  J  F M  A  M

2020 2021 2022

Source: Prepared by Banco de México.

Interest rates of government securities exhibited
upward adjustments, in line with the movements of
yield curves worldwide (Chart 9), with increases of up
to 73 basis points in the nodes for shorter-term
bonds, and of up to 102 basis points for longer-term
ones. The yield curve of real interest rate instruments
also showed a flattening dynamic, with adjustments
of up to 125 basis points for the short term and of up
to 38 basis points for the long term. In this context,
compensation for inflation and inflationary risk
implied in spreads between nominal and real interest
rates of market instruments displayed movements of
between -10 and 70 basis points for all terms (Chart
10). These adjustments took place in an environment
in which trading conditions improved during the
period covering the monetary policy decision.


**Chart 9**

**Nominal Yield Curve of Government Securities**

Percent, basis points

10.00 120

9.50

110

9.00 #¡REF!

100

8.50

90

8.00

7.50 80

7.00

70

6.50

60

6.00

50

5.50

5.00 40

Mar-18th 2022 May-6th 2022 Change (Mar-18th 2022 to May-6th 2022)

Trading range over the period

Source: PIP.
Note: The chart does not include bonds maturing in December 2021 and
June 2022. CETES with similar maturities are considered.

Regarding expectations for the trajectory of the
monetary policy reference rate, information implied
by the Interbank Equilibrium Interest Rate (TIIE, for
its Spanish acronym) swap curve incorporates an
increase of around 84 basis points between the May
and June 2022 meetings, while for the end of 2022 it
points to a reference rate close to 9.27% (Chart 11).
Most forecasters surveyed by Citibanamex anticipate
the interest rate to increase by 50 basis points to
7.00% in the May decision, while for the end of 2022
a rate of 8.50% is expected.

**Chart 10**

**Compensation for Inflation and Inflationary Risk**

**Implied in Government Securities’ Yields**

Basis points Basis points

550

525

500

475

450

425

400

375

350

325

300 3Y

10Y

275 20Y

250 30Y

3Y average

225 10Y average

200 20Y average

30Y average

175

150

J       M M        J        S       N        J       M       M

2021                                                         2022

Source: PIP.


16


-----

**Chart 11**

**Interbank Funding Rate Implied in TIIE Swaps**

Percent

10.75


6

4


**Chart 12**

**Gross Domestic Product**

Quarterly percentage change, s. a.


9.75

8.75


2


7.75

6.75


0

-2


5.75

4.75


-4


-6


3.75


J   M    M    J    S    N    J M   M    J    S    N


2021                       2022

Source: Prepared by Banco de México with Bloomberg data.

**A.2.2. Economic activity in Mexico**

After the weak performance observed in the last
quarter of 2021, according to Mexico's GDP flash
estimate published by INEGI, during the first quarter
of 2022, economic activity registered a reactivation
(Chart 12). However, an uncertain environment
prevails due to the persistence of some disruptions
in global supply chains, the conflict between Russia
and Ukraine, and the evolution of the pandemic
worldwide.

Regarding external demand, during the first quarter
of 2022, both the value of automotive and other
manufacturing exports continued increasing (Chart
13).[5] By destination, manufacturing exports to the
United States and the rest of the world maintained an
upward trend.


15/03/2022
14/03/2022

-4 11/03/2022

10/03/2022

-17.85

09/03/2022

-6 08/03/2022 Q-I

I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV I

2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 07/03/20222019 2020 2021 2022

s. a. / Seasonally adjusted figures. 04/03/2022
1/ The figure for the first quarter of 2022 refers to the timely estimate of 03/03/2022
quarterly GDP published by INEGI. 02/03/2022
Source: Mexico’s System on National Accounts (SCNM, for its Spanish
acronym), INEGI.


M


**Chart 13**

**Total Manufacturing Exports**

Indices 2013 = 100, s.a.


200

180


160

140


120

100


80

60


40


2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022

s. a. / Seasonally adjusted series and trend series based on data in nominal
US dollars. The former is represented by a solid line and the latter by a
dotted line
Source: Prepared by Banco de México with data from the Tax
Administration Service (SAT, for its Spanish acronym), the Ministry of the
Economy (SE, for its Spanish acronym), Banco de México, the National
Institute of Statistics and Geography (INEGI, for its Spanish acronym).
Mexico’s Merchandise Trade Balance, and the National System of
Statistical and Geographical Information (SNIEG, for its Spanish acronym),
Information of national interest.

On the domestic demand side, based on its monthly
indicator, in February 2022 private consumption
continued to recover, accumulating eight

consecutive months increasing at the margin and
placing it above the level registered in February


5 Refers to the value of merchandise exports in current dollars.
This value differs from that reported for goods exports in Mexico's


System of National Accounts, since the latter represents value
added, measured in constant pesos.

17


-----

2020. Consumption of goods showed dynamism,
while that of services continued to recover.
Meanwhile, in February, gross fixed investment
reversed part of the recovery registered in previous
months, remaining below the level prior to the health
emergency. Regarding its components, investment
spending on construction reversed the rebound
registered in January, while machinery and

equipment continued to expand.

On the production side, industrial production
continued reactivating during the first two months of
the year (Chart 14). This was mainly due to the
dynamism of the manufacturing sector (Chart 15),
despite the persistence of certain disruptions in
global supply chains. In contrast, construction
continued on a negative trajectory, while mining was
subject to volatility, with an important rebound in
January that was reversed in February. Tertiary
activities continued to recover during the JanuaryFebruary period, although with some heterogeneity
within them. The positive contributions of

transportation and mass media information services,
commerce, and financial and real estate services
stood out.

**Chart 14**

**Global Indicator of Economic Activity**

Indices 2013 = 100, s. a.

120 140

115 130

110 120

105 110

100 100

95 90

Total IGAE 1/

90 Industrial production 2/ 80

85 Services IGAE 1/ 70

80 Agricultural and livestock products IGAE 1/ 60

75 February 50

February

70 40

J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J F

2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022

s. a. / Seasonally adjusted and trend series. The former is represented by a
solid line and the latter by a dotted line.
Source: Mexico’s System of National Accounts (SCNM, for its Spanish
acronym), INEGI.


s. a. / Seasonally adjusted and trend series. The former is represented by a
solid line and the latter by a dotted line.
1/ Figures in parenthesis correspond to their share in the total in 2013.
Source: Mexico’s System of National Accounts (SCNM, for its Spanish
acronym), INEGI.

Regarding the cyclical position of the economy,
during the first quarter of 2022, slack conditions are
estimated to have narrowed with respect to the
previous quarter, although they remain considerably
ample (Chart 16). In February and March, several
labor market indicators improved, in a context of
lower COVID-19 infections. Particularly, the national
and, especially, the urban unemployment rates
decreased, reaching their lowest level since March
2020 at the end of the first quarter (Chart 17). This
took place in a context in which the labor participation
rate and, to a greater extent, the employment-to
working-age population-ratio increased. Meanwhile,
with seasonally adjusted figures, in March 2022, the
net creation of IMSS-insured jobs continued trending
upward. Finally, in February, unit labor cost in the
manufacturing sector increased at the margin, after
having fallen consecutively on four occasions (Chart
18).

18


**Chart 15**

**Industrial Activity[1/]**

Indices 2013 = 100, s. a.


130

120

110

100

90

Total

Mining (22.3%)

80

Manufacturing (49.7%)

70 Construction (23.3%)

Utilities (4.7%)

February

60

J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J F

2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022


-----

**Chart 16**

**Output Gap Estimates [1/]**

**Excluding Oil Industry [4/ ]**

Potential output percentages, s. a.


**Chart 18**

**Productivity and Unit Labor Costs in the**

**Manufacturing Sector [1/]**

Indices 2013 = 100, s. a.


12

8

4

0

-4

-8

-12

-16

-20

-24


March


130

Unit labor costs 158.8

Productivity

120

110

100

90

February

80

J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J F

2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022


J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M

2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022

s. a. / Calculations based on seasonally adjusted figures.
1/ Output gap estimated with a tail-corrected Hodrick-Prescott filter; see
Banco de México (2009), “Inflation Report, April-June 2009”, p.74.
2/ On-time GDP figures as of the first quarter of 2022 and implied IGAE as
of March 2022, congruent with such on-time figure.
3/ Output gap confidence interval calculated with a method of unobserved
components.
4/ Excludes both oil and gas extraction, support services for mining, and
petroleum and coal products’ manufacturing.
Source: Prepared by Banco de México with INEGI data.

**Chart 17**

**National and Urban Unemployment Rates**

Percent, s. a.

8.0

National unemployment rate

7.5

Urban unemployment rate

7.0

6.5

6.0

5.5

5.0

4.5

4.0

3.5

3.0

March

2.5

J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M

2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022

s.a. / Seasonally adjusted series and trend series. The former is
represented by a solid line and the latter by a dotted line.
Source: Prepared by Banco de México with data from ENOE, ETOE (from
April to June 2020), and ENOE new edition (ENOEN ) from July to date.


s. a. / Seasonally adjusted and trend series. The former is represented by a
solid line and the latter by a dotted line.
1/ Productivity based on hours worked.
Source: Prepared by Banco de México with seasonally adjusted data of the
Monthly Manufacturing Industry Survey and industrial activity indicators of
Mexico’s System of National Accounts (Sistema de Cuentas Nacionales de
México, SCNM), INEGI.

In March 2022, domestic financing to firms continued
to decrease at real annual rates, although at a slower
pace. Within it, bank credit to firms continued
decreasing at a real annual rate, albeit at a slower
pace since the third quarter of 2021. This, in a context
in which corporate credit demand continued to
recover, while lending conditions remained tight
compared to the beginning of the pandemic, although
these have been easing for smaller firms since the
second half of 2021. Net corporate debt issuance in
the domestic market was negative during the first
quarter of this year, and therefore continued showing
lack of dynamism. As for credit to households,
commercial bank housing portfolio regained some
dynamism compared to previous months. In turn,
outstanding bank consumer credit registered a
positive real annual variation for the third consecutive
month, mainly as a result of the sustained dynamism
of the payroll credit and credit card portfolios. This, in
a context in which household demand for credit has
been gradually recovering. Household lending
conditions remained stable, while consumer credit
conditions eased during the first quarter of the year.

Interest rates on bank credit to firms have followed
the dynamics of the overnight interbank interest rate.
During the first quarter of 2022, corporate credit
intermediation margins narrowed slightly, so that
they are generally at lower levels than those
observed prior to the pandemic. At the same time,
mortgage loan interest rates remained at levels
around their historical lows. Meanwhile, in December
2021, credit card interest rates registered levels
similar to those observed during the third quarter of

19


-----

that year, while personal credit rates increased. some cities in China and by the aforementioned
Thus, consumer credit intermediation margins conflict. In particular, the effects of this conflict on
continued at levels higher than those observed prior international food commodity prices have exerted
to the pandemic. Regarding portfolio quality, pressure on local food merchandise inflation, whose
corporate and housing loan delinquency rates annual inflation increased from 10.08 to 10.88%
remained at low levels in March 2022. Lastly, during the same period, while non-food merchandise
consumer portfolio delinquency rates remained at inflation rose from 7.17 to 7.61%. (Chart 21). During
lower levels than those registered prior to the onset the same period, annual inflation of services rose
of the pandemic, although they continue to be high. from 4.62 to 4.83%, as a result of the reopening of

their activities, the high demand that had been

**A.2.3. Development of inflation and inflation** contained, and the higher costs of inputs and
**outlook** operations due to the measures implemented to

comply with the health safety measures required to

Annual headline inflation increased from 7.45% in avoid contagions. Thus, annual inflation of services
March 2022 to 7.68% in April (Chart 19 and Table 1). other than education and housing increased from
This result is explained by an increase of 33 basis 6.60 to 7.01% on the aforementioned dates,
points in the core component’s contribution to reflecting also the increase in international prices of
headline inflation and a decrease of 10 basis points food and energy commodities that have pressured
in non-core component’s incidence. Thus, core the prices of transportation and food services.
inflation remained on an upward trend, while noncore inflation showed resistance to decline from high **Chart 20**
levels. **Merchandise and Services Core Price Sub-index**

Annual percentage change

**Chart 19** 10

Merchandise

**Consumer Price Index** 9

Annual percentage change 8 Services

14

13 CPI 7

12 Core

11 6

10 Non-core

9 5

8

4

7

6 3

5

4 2

3

2 1

April

1

0

0 J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J

-1 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022

-2 Source: Banco de México and INEGI.

April

-3

J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J

2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022

Source: Banco de México and INEGI.

Between March and April 2022, annual core inflation
increased from 6.78% to 7.22%. This component
continued to be significantly affected by various
shocks derived from the COVID-19 pandemic, in
addition to being affected by the increase in the
prices of raw materials, food and energy, associated
with the war conflict between Russia and Ukraine. In
the case of merchandise, annual inflation increased
from 8.69% to 9.33% on the aforementioned dates
(Chart 20), influenced by disruptions in production
and distribution chains, as well as by pressures on
production costs, which are probably also

intensifying as a result of measures to contain the
spread of the omicron variant of COVID-19 virus in

20


-----

12

10

8

6

4

2

0


**Chart 21**

**Merchandise Core Price Sub-index**

Annual percentage change

Food, beverages and tobacco Non-food merchandise April


J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J

2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022

Source: Banco de México and INEGI.

Annual non-core inflation went from 9.45 to 9.07%
between March and April 2022 (Chart 22 and Table
1). The annual inflation of agricultural and livestock
products fell from 16.12 to 14.36%, as a result of the
reduction from 20.35 to 15.84% in fruits and
vegetables inflation, while livestock products’

inflation rose from 12.96 to 13.21%. The high levels
of inflation of agricultural and livestock products and
their components reflect, in part, increases in the cost
of their inputs, especially fertilizers and grains.
Annual energy inflation registered 5.23 and 5.91%
during the same period.

**Chart 22**

**Non-core Price Sub-index**

Annual percentage change

25

20

15

10

5

0

Non-core

-5 Agricultural and livestock products

Energy and government-authorized prices

-10


Regarding inflation expectations from the survey
conducted by Banco de México among Private
Sector Forecasters, between February and April, the
median for headline inflation for the end of 2022
increased from 4.68 to 6.75%, while that for the core
component rose from 4.62 to 6.00%. At the same
time, the median of headline inflation expectations at
the end of 2023 was revised upwards from 3.80 to
4.13%, while that for core inflation was revised from
3.70 to 4.00%. The median of headline inflation
expectations for the medium term increased from
3.70 to 3.76%, while that for core inflation went from
3.60 to 3.70%. Long-term expectations remained at
around 3.50%. Finally, compensation for inflation and
inflationary risk increased and remains at high levels.
This was due to increases in both expectations
implied in market instruments and in the inflation risk
premium, which continues at high levels.

In view of greater-than-anticipated pressures on
inflation, the forecasts for headline and core inflation
were revised upwards, although convergence to the
3% target in the first quarter of 2024 is maintained.
These projections are subject to risks. On the upside:
i) persistence of core inflation at high levels; ii)
external inflationary pressures associated with the
pandemic; iii) greater pressures on agricultural and
livestock product prices and in energy prices due to
the ongoing geopolitical conflict; iv) exchange rate
depreciation; and v) cost-related pressures. On the
downside: i) a decline in the intensity of the war
conflict; ii) a better functioning of supply chains; iii) a
greater-than-expected effect from the negative
output gap; and iv) a larger-than-anticipated effect
from the Policy Program to Fight Inflation and High
Prices. The balance of risks for the trajectory of
inflation within the forecast horizon remains biased to
the upside and continues deteriorating.

21


-15 April

J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J

2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022

Source: Banco de México and INEGI.


-----

**Table 1**

**Consumer Price Index and Components**

Annual percentage change

**Item** **February 2022** **March 2022** **April 2022**

**CPI** **7.28** **7.45** **7.68**

**SubyacenteCore** **6.59** **6.78** **7.22**

**Merchandise** **8.34** **8.69** **9.33**

Food, beverages and tobacco 9.40 10.08 10.88

Non-food merchandise 7.18 7.17 7.61

**Services** **4.62** **4.62** **4.83**

Housing 2.72 2.72 2.76

Education (tuitions) 3.19 3.18 3.18

Other services 6.62 6.60 7.01

**No SubyacenteNon-core** **9.34** **9.45** **9.07**

**Agricultural and livestock products** **16.17** **16.12** **14.36**

Fruits and vegetablesFruits abd vegetables 19.60 20.35 15.84

Livestock productsLivestock 13.57 12.96 13.21

**Energy and government-authorized prices Energéticos y Tarifas Aut. por Gobierno** **4.48** **4.73** **5.18**

Energy productsEnergy 4.97 5.23 5.91

Government-authorized pricesTarifas Autorizadas por Gobierno 3.27 3.48 3.40

Source: INEGI.


-----

-----

-----

