-----

-----

**FOREWARNING**
This document is provided for the reader’s convenience
only. The translation from the official Spanish version was
made by Banco de México’s staff. Discrepancies may arise
between the original document in Spanish and its English
translation. For this reason, the original Spanish version is
the only official document.


**1. PLACE, DATE AND PARTICIPANTS**

**1.1. Place:** Meeting held by virtual means.

**1.2. Date of Governing Board meeting: March 23,**
2022.

**1.3. Participants:**

Victoria Rodríguez, Governor.
Galia Borja, Deputy Governor.
Irene Espinosa, Deputy Governor.
Gerardo Esquivel, Deputy Governor.
Jonathan Heath, Deputy Governor.
Rogelio Eduardo Ramírez, Secretary of Finance and
Public Credit.
Gabriel Yorio, Undersecretary of Finance and Public
Credit.
Elías Villanueva, Secretary of the Governing Board.

Prior to this meeting, preliminary work by Banco de
México’s staff analyzing the economic and financial
environment as well as the developments in inflation
and the determinants and outlook for inflation, was
conducted and presented to the Governing Board
(see Annex).

**2. ANALYSIS AND RATIONALE BEHIND THE**
**GOVERNING BOARD’S VOTING**

**_International environment_**

**Most members stated that available indicators**
**suggest a moderation in global economic activity**
**during the first quarter of the year. Some**
members noted that economic activity remains
affected by the pandemic. One member added that
supply restrictions and demand-related pressures
derived from the change in consumption patterns,
have been more persistent than anticipated. He/she
pointed out that back orders, delivery times and sea
freight costs remain higher than they were prior to the
pandemic. He/she added that, as control of the
pandemic improves, supply restrictions will decline
and inflationary pressures will ease, although he/she
also acknowledged that said process will be gradual
and is not exempt from facing interruptions. **Some**
members noted that mobility indicators have


recovered, particularly in emerging economies. One
member mentioned the improvement in indicators
related to manufacturing and services purchases,
which points to a lower intensity and duration of the
effects caused by the Omicron variant, compared
with previous waves of contagion.

**Most members pointed out that the Russia-**
**Ukraine conflict has generated an environment of**
**volatility** **and** **uncertainty,** **as** **well** **as** **a**

**deterioration in the outlook for growth at a global**
**level. One member mentioned that, measured**
through the foreign trade flows of these economies,
their direct ties and the destination of their products,
the impact could concentrate mostly in Eastern
Europe and euro area countries, as well as in China,
although he/she considered that, given the

importance of the economies involved, as suppliers
of metals and commodities and as producers of
fertilizers, global economic activity could be affected.
**Some members stated that the economic sanctions**
imposed on Russia could affect financial markets,
international trade, and supply chains. One member
mentioned as a risk factor an increase in the number
of infections in China and expectations of strong
lockdown measures. Some members noted that the
balance of risks for world economic growth is biased
to the downside and is subject to high uncertainty,
mainly for European economies.

**All members stated that the geopolitical conflict**
**intensified inflationary pressures worldwide.**
**Most members pointed out the important role**
**that the countries involved play in the supply and**
**trade** **of** **commodities,** **especially** **metals,**

**fertilizers and grains. In this regard, most**
**members mentioned that commodity prices**
**increased** **significantly.** **Some** members

considered that this pattern could continue until
2023. **One member pointed out that in view of the**
above, the convergence of inflation to their
respective central banks’ targets could take longer
than expected. He/she added that commodity prices
have surpassed those registered during the
pandemic and other stress episodes. However,
**some members** noted that said increases have
partially reversed recently. One member added that,
in the future, the conflict could lead to a
reconfiguration of global value chains, with ensuing
cost-related pressures.

**Most members mentioned that, in addition to the**
**above, world inflation continued increasing due**
**to pressures originated by bottlenecks and high**
**levels of food and energy prices.** **One member**
added that the reallocation of spending also


-----

continued exerting pressure on prices. **Another**
member highlighted the case of the United States,
where inflation in February reached its highest level
in 40 years. **One member mentioned that inflation**
expectations drawn from surveys and from market
instruments deteriorated once again. **Another**
member stated that, for advanced economies, shortterm inflation expectations continue increasing and
longer-term inflation expectations show increments
as well, although recently they have decreased
slightly. **Some** members considered that the
continuous rebound in headline and core inflation
could accelerate as a result of the adverse effects on
freight transport and the potential shortage of inputs
in the face of historically low inventories. **One**
member added that the inflationary environment
could worsen as a result of the lockdown measures
adopted in some regions of China. Another member
mentioned as factors that would contribute to reduce
world inflation, the lower number of infections and
higher vaccination rates, as well as lower monetary
and fiscal stimuli in systemically important

economies.

**Most** **members** **highlighted** **the** **less**

**accommodative monetary policy stances in**
**advanced economies.** **All members mentioned**
**that, in its latest monetary policy decision, the**
**Federal Reserve raised the target range for the**
**federal funds rate by 25 basis points and**
**announced that it expects to continue increasing**
**it in the remaining meetings of 2022. Some**
members pointed out that, recently, the chair of the
Federal Reserve expressed that its monetary policy
stance could be adjusted more aggressively. **One**
member mentioned that its asset purchase program
has concluded. **Another member added that it is**
expected to begin a gradual reduction of its balance
sheet in May. He/she highlighted that the United
States is experiencing strong economic growth and
faces a tight labor market, while inflation is
registering levels unseen in more than three
decades. **One** member mentioned that the Federal
Reserve announced the possibility of maintaining a
monetary policy stance slightly above its neutral rate
for 2022 and 2023. Some members stated that there
is still uncertainty over the rate and the magnitude of
said monetary cycle, which has been exacerbated by
changes in the environment caused by the
geopolitical conflict. **Some** members noted that a
large number of central banks in emerging market
economies continued increasing their reference
rates. **One member** stated that most of these
economies maintain real interest rates that are
negative or close to zero, while Mexico stands out for
its positive real interest rate.


**Most members noted that international financial**
**markets registered high volatility due to the**
**uncertainty associated with the armed conflict.**
**Some members** mentioned that financial conditions
tightened. One member added that said conflict has
exerted pressure to a larger extent on fixed-income
and commodity markets.

**Most members pointed out that, since the last**
**monetary policy decision, stock market indices**
**in advanced economies continued falling. Some**
members added that government bond interest rates
for different terms increased throughout the year, in
response to central banks’ tighter monetary policy
stances. **One** member stated the flattening of the
yield curve in the United States is associated with
further monetary tightening and to previsions of a
deceleration in economic growth. Another member
mentioned that, in recent days, risk appetite
increased, driven by the relatively optimistic tone of
the Federal Reserve regarding the expected
performance of the US economy. He/she added that,
in that context, stock market indices increased, which
offset the previous decreases. He/she stated that this
shows how the signals sent by central banks can be
equally or more relevant than the policy decisions
regarding the interest rate.

**Some members** underlined that financial markets in
emerging economies exhibited a mixed behavior.
They added that stock market indices performed
heterogeneously according to their geographical and
trade proximity to Russia. **One member** underlined
the fall in stock markets in Eastern Europe and the
better performance these registered in Latin
America. **Another** member highlighted the interest
rate increases, the appreciation of most Latin
American currencies, the outflows in fixed income
instruments, and the moderate inflows in equity
instruments. One member pointed out that the recent
increase in risk appetite benefited emerging
economies, especially those with a more favorable
economic growth outlook, which registered

appreciations in their currencies and increases in
their stock market indices. This, despite the Federal
Reserve’s interest rate increase.

**Most** **members** **mentioned** **that** **financial**

**conditions are foreseen to continue tightening as**
**a result of the interest rate increases stemming**
**from the normalization of the main central banks’**
**monetary policy stances and the geopolitical**
**turmoil.** **One member** added that the exclusion of
Russia from international payment systems, such as
SWIFT, and potential cyber-attacks as a form of
reprisal, could affect financial stability.


-----

**_Economic activity in Mexico_**

**Most** **members** **mentioned** **that** **available**

**indicators suggest that economic reactivation**
**could have resumed at the beginning of 2022.**
**One member stated that the Timely Indicator of**
Economic Activity (IOAE, for its acronym in Spanish)
suggests an annual increase in economic activity of
2.8% in February and of 3.5% for secondary
activities. **Nonetheless, most members pointed**
**out** **that** **the** **recovery** **remains** **gradual,**

**incomplete, and heterogeneous across sectors.**
**One member** pointed out that, in January, economic
activity in nearly 50% of sectors had still not returned
to pre-pandemic levels. Another member stated that
in the fourth quarter of 2021 economic activity was
3.3% below its level of the fourth quarter of 2019,
although it is anticipated to continue recovering
gradually.

**On the supply side, most members highlighted**
**that industrial production continued recovering**
**in** **January,** **as** **a** **result** **of** **growth** **in**

**manufacturing,** **particularly** **non-automotive**

**manufacturing, and an unusual rebound in**
**mining.** **Nonetheless, they underlined the lack of**
**vigor in construction, as well as in automobile**
**production and exports due to supply chain**
**problems. One** member added that in January
industrial activity registered four consecutive months
of growth and that manufacturing, excluding
transportation equipment, has remained on an
upward trajectory for several months. **Most**

**members** **stated** **that** **the** **services** **sector**

**continued registering weakness, with levels**
**lower than those prior to the pandemic, as well**
**as a heterogeneous behavior among subsectors.**
**They considered that the weakness in the**
**services sector partly reflects the impact of the**
**labor outsourcing reform.** **One member** pointed
out that this effect is of an accounting nature. He/she
pointed out that, apart from the effect of this reform,
most services have continued to recover. **Another**
member pointed out that the contraction in business
support services contributed to a reduction of 1.3
percentage points in GDP growth in 2021. He/she
indicated that weakness in the services sector and
heterogeneity among its components is expected to
persist. He/she highlighted that primary sector
activities rebounded significantly in December 2021.

**On the demand side, most members stated that**
**consumption continued recovering in December**
**2021.** **Some members** noted that it registered levels
similar to those observed prior to the pandemic. One
member mentioned that, although consumption of


services is lagging, consumption of non-durable
goods surpassed its pre-pandemic levels since early
2021 and has performed better than during the 2008
crisis. He/she stated that the above derives, among
other factors, from the favorable evolution of some
indicators, such as consumer confidence, the wage
bill, remittances, and social transfers. **Some**
members mentioned that various leading

consumption indicators improved in early 2022. Most
**members highlighted that investment remains**
**weak. One member** stated that it remains stagnant
at levels below those observed prior to the health
emergency. He/she added that public investment has
performed better than private investment, as it is 5%
above its pre-pandemic levels and is trending
upwards, which contrasts with the negative trend this
indicator had exhibited for over a decade. **Some**
members stated that exports contracted at the
margin in January. However, **one member stated**
that they remain at relatively high levels.

**Regarding the labor market, most members**
**highlighted the progress observed in different**
**indicators, although negative effects still persist.**
**They pointed out that unemployment and**
**underemployment rates declined in January. One**
member added that the labor informality rate also
decreased. **Some** members forewarned that this
improvement in indicators was partially a result of the
fall in labor participation, caused by the increase in
the number of infections. Consequently, **one**
member pointed out that unemployment and
underemployment rates have still not returned to
their pre-pandemic levels. **Another** member

highlighted the gender bias that has favored men in
the labor market recovery process. He/she stated
that, in January, said progress was based on male
formal employment, while a setback in female
employment was observed. He/she added that the
increase in economically inactive population is still
concentrated in women. Some members mentioned
that minimum wage increases have had an upward
effect on wage revisions of IMSS-insured workers.
**One member pointed out that this was the result of**
both mechanical and non-mechanical increases.
He/she added that said revisions averaged a
historically high annual increase of 9.5% in February.
He/she recalled that, when comparing January of this
year with previous years, there was a greater
proportion of salary increases for workers that are not
tied to the minimum wage, which confirms the
presence of certain wage-related pressures.

**Most** **members** **agreed** **that** **ample** **slack**

**conditions persist. However, they added that, in**
**the first quarter of 2022, these are foreseen to be**


-----

**lower than those registered during the previous**
**quarter. One member** delved into the fact that GDP
continues showing a negative gap of over 10% with
respect to the trend observed prior to the pandemic.
**Another member** anticipated that slack conditions
will gradually decrease, although they will still show
a considerable gap. **One member** mentioned that
uncertainty prevails regarding the traditional

estimation of the output gap and of potential GDP to
determine the degree of slack in the economy.

**Most** **members** **acknowledged** **that** **the**

**geopolitical turmoil between Russia and Ukraine**
**has generated a new source of uncertainty for the**
**Mexican economy. Some members** agreed that the
impact on Mexico's economic activity, either directly
or indirectly through the US economy, will be limited,
due to the geographic distance and the relatively
weak trade and financial ties with the countries in
conflict. One member considered that such impact is
uncertain. Another member pointed out the following
risks to Mexico's economic activity. On the downside:
i) a greater-than-expected persistence of the
pandemic; ii) prolongation or intensification of
bottleneck problems in supply chains, or higher costs
of inputs and production in various sectors of the
economy; iii) additional episodes of volatility in
international financial markets; and iv) lower-thanexpected or insufficient investment to support
economic recovery and long-term growth. On the
upside, he/she highlighted: i) a greater control of the
pandemic; ii) that national and international stimuli
continue to support consumption and investment; iii)
Mexico being an attractive destination for investment
in view of a reconfiguration of global production
processes within the framework of the USMCA; and
iv) the maintenance of global financial conditions to
enable a faster economic recovery. He/she

highlighted that some of the downside risks have
been accentuated by the conflict in Eastern Europe.
**Some members** mentioned that the balance of risks
for growth remains biased to the downside while one
member stated that it has deteriorated at the margin.

**_Inflation in Mexico_**

**Most members mentioned that during the first**
**fortnight of March, headline and core inflation**
**registered annual variations of 7.29 and 6.68%,**
**respectively. Some members noted that this was**
attributed to the performance of the core component,
which was partially offset by a marginal reduction in
the non-core component. **One member** noted that,
after two consecutive months in which monthly
headline inflation was close to its historical average,
it accelerated again in February. He/she added that


the annual rate is far above its target. **Some**
members expressed their concern about price
dynamics, which have followed a marked upward
trend for a long period. One member added that price
growth is accelerating even faster than in 2017,
which is most noticeable in the core component.
**Most members argued that inflation remains**
**under** **pressure** **mainly** **by** **global** **factors**

**associated with the pandemic. One member**
pointed out that this has been reflected mainly in the
merchandise component. Another member said that
these effects are largely transmitted through tradable
goods, including final goods, intermediate goods,
and raw materials. He/she highlighted that the annual
inflation of the National Producer Price Index (INPP,
for its Spanish acronym) of intermediate inputs
excluding oil reached a peak last December, that in
February it continued declining, and that its current
level is lower than the all-time high reached during
the inflationary episode of 2017. **One member**
highlighted that inflation is a generalized problem and
that inflationary pressures are not only imported, but
also domestic and are affecting non-tradable goods.
He/she stated that domestic pressures are the result
of idiosyncratic factors, such as public insecurity,
adverse weather conditions, lack of specific inputs
and wage pressures, in a context where there are
doubts about the traditional estimations of the output
gap and potential GDP. Another member noted that
in Mexico food products have a higher weight in the
CPI as compared to advanced and some emerging
economies, and thus increases in food prices at the
global level have generated a negative bias on
Mexico’s inflation. He/she highlighted that,

nevertheless, Mexico does not stand out for being
the country with the highest levels of headline
inflation among other countries that registered similar
levels of inflation prior to the pandemic. One member
pointed out that inflation of practically all CPI food
items is growing at annual rates higher than 4% and
around half of them are registering variations higher
than 10%.

**Most members mentioned that core inflation**
**shows generalized increases. Some** members
stated that this reflects the persistence of the shocks
that have affected it. One member pointed out that
this dynamic does not pertain to a specific group of
consumer goods and/or services, as it has affected
the entire consumer basket. **Some members noted**
that this component reached its highest rate since
2001. **One** member mentioned that it has

accumulated 15 consecutive months of increases.
**Another member** stated that it has grown
significantly above its historical pattern and is
influencing the upward trajectory followed by


-----

headline inflation. **Some members** noted that its
monthly variation accelerated in February. **One**
member noted that said variation was more than
double that observed for a month of February since
mid-2001. **Another** member noted that its

annualized monthly variation has followed an upward
trend, going from 3% in January 2021 to 8% in
February 2022. **One member pointed out that the**
merchandise component registered an annual
variation of more than 8% and that more than 80% of
the items that comprise it registered annualized
monthly increases of more than 5%. **Another**
member stated that food merchandise registered an
annualized monthly rate of 12% and non-food
merchandise a variation of 9%. One member pointed
out that within the food merchandise component,
significant price increases were observed in products
derived from soybeans, corn, wheat and cold meats,
while in the non-food merchandise component, price
pressures were registered in household cleaning
products, personal hygiene and health care products,
and in automobiles. **Another member** mentioned
that services registered an annualized monthly
inflation of 5%. **One member noted that services**
excluding education and housing registered an
annual rate of 6.6%. Another member stated that the
prices of food services, tourism and transportation
have been under pressure.

**The majority of the members mentioned that non-**
**core inflation continues** **being subject to**

**pressures. Some said that agricultural and livestock**
products’ inflation continues registering increases.
**Most members noted that energy inflation**
**decreased at the margin. Some members pointed**
out that gasoline prices have been contained by
fiscal stimuli. **One member added that various**
estimates suggest that, in the absence of such
stimuli, headline inflation would have been higher,
which reflects the magnitude of the shocks currently
being faced.

**All** **members** **mentioned** **that** **inflation**

**expectations for 2022 and 2023 increased again.**
**Some members noted that those for 2022 are above**
the upper limit of the variability interval while those
for 2023 are above the point target. **One member**
pointed out that almost all analysts surveyed by
Banco de México assign a minimal probability of
inflation returning to 4% this year. Another member
highlighted that most business agents interviewed by
Banco de México said that the prices of their inputs
have changed with a similar or greater frequency
than in the previous quarter, and that they hold their
12-month inflation expectations at twice the target
level. On the other hand, **one member pointed out**


that economic analysts' expectations for the next 12
months were revised slightly downwards. **Most**
**members** **mentioned** **that** **medium-term**

**expectations for headline inflation increased. All**
**members mentioned that long-term expectations**
**have remained stable at levels above the target.**
**One member noted that medium-term expectations**
are approaching the upper limit of the variability
interval. **Another member added these are both**
above their historical average, as well as above the
average observed in other inflationary episodes. One
member expressed his/her concern about the
upward trend that expectations for the next four years
have had since August of last year. Another member
said that, although long-term inflation expectations
remain anchored, the risks surrounding their
formation process should not be underestimated.
**One member warned that in recent months these**
expectations have already started to be revised
upwards. Most members noted that expectations
**drawn from market instruments have also**
**deteriorated. One member pointed out that**
expectations measured through compensation for
inflation and inflation risk in 10-year bonds reached a
historical high, and that the 10-year inflation risk
premium remains at levels similar to those registered
during other stress periods. Another member noted
that expectations from market instruments for the 6to 10-year average were close to 3.1%.

**All members stated that forecasts for headline**
**and core inflation were revised upwards. Most**
**members mentioned that convergence to the**
**point target has been delayed. One member**
highlighted that Banco de México's forecasts now
estimate inflation at 5.5% for the last quarter of 2022.
**Another member noted that, up to March 2022, there**
have been ten consecutive monetary policy

decisions in which inflation forecasts have been
revised upwards. He/she underlined that, during this
period, convergence to the target was deferred from
the second quarter of 2022 in December’s 2020
decision, to the first quarter of 2024 in the current
decision. He/she warned that the systematic
underestimation of inflation forecasts has generated
an inflationary inertia that has already affected
medium-term expectations and, if this continues,
could lead to a de-anchoring of long-term

expectations. **One member** noted that the factors
associated with the pandemic are expected to
continue having an influence on the inflation outlook
worldwide. **Another member** mentioned that the
current outlook is even more challenging as it is
optimistic to believe that the effect of the
accumulation of supply and demand shocks on
inflation will dissipate immediately. He/she added


-----

that inflation will likely remain at high levels for a long
period before decelerating. He/she highlighted that
the forecast decline in headline inflation assumes
that the core component registers moderate levels
and that non-core inflation decreases, which is
unlikely to materialize under the current conditions.

**Among upside risks to inflation, most members**
**highlighted the persistence of core inflation at**
**high levels, external inflationary pressures**
**associated with the pandemic, increases in**
**agricultural and livestock product prices and in**
**energy prices due to the recent geopolitical**
**conflict, and cost-related pressures. Some**
members added the possibility of an exchange rate
depreciation. One member pointed out that external
inflationary pressures have originated from logistical
problems, high sea freight costs, disruptions in global
value chains, and from changes in consumption
patterns. He/she added that these pressures are not
expected to be resolved soon. He/she noted that the
greater pressures on food prices have high social
costs and could affect household inflation

expectations, which would accelerate inflationary
dynamics even if other goods prices were to perform
better. **Another member mentioned that persistent**
supply and demand imbalances have also been due
to production rigidities. He/she noted the risk of
contractual wage revisions becoming contaminated
given the high levels of observed and expected
inflation, and in the presence of mechanical, aboveinflation wage revisions. He/she indicated that
greater unforeseen adjustments to the reference rate
in the United States could increase the risk of an
exchange rate depreciation. **One** member

considered that the risk of energy prices being
subject to pressures is limited due to the domestic
fuel price policy. He/she added that some estimates
show that, even if the aforementioned policy is
considered, increases in oil prices do not imply a
deterioration in public finances. Among downside
risks to inflation, **another member included: i) a**
decline in the intensity of the military conflict; ii) that
given the slack conditions, cost-related pressures
and wage revisions do not exert pressure on prices;
iii) that energy prices are lower than those
anticipated; and iv) an exchange rate appreciation.
**One member noted that the decline in annual**
inflation of INPP intermediate inputs excluding oil
could imply lower future pressures for core inflation.
**Most members stated that the balance of risks for**
**the trajectory of inflation over the forecast**
**horizon has deteriorated again and remains**
**biased to the upside. One member pointed out that**
this is due to the possibility that the effects of the
geopolitical conflict are greater than expected.


**Another member considered geopolitical tensions**
as a new source of uncertainty for inflation. **One**
member warned that the ongoing occurrence of
supply and demand shocks continues to deteriorate
the balance of risks.

**_Macrofinancial environment_**

**Most members highlighted that, in domestic**
**financial markets, the exchange rate appreciated**
**slightly albeit registering some episodes of**
**volatility,** **while** **interest** **rates** **increased**

**accordingly** **to** **global** **developments.** **One**

member pointed out that financial markets showed
greater resilience since the previous monetary policy
meeting. **Another member considered that they**
displayed a mixed performance. **One member** said
that, so far this year, the peso's performance
contrasts with that of other Latin American currencies
and the South African currency, which have
appreciated significantly. **Some members pointed**
out that increases were observed in practically all
nodes of the yield curve. **One member** stated that,
while nominal interest rates adjusted upwards up to
96 basis points, the real yield curve adjusted
between -30 and 33 basis points. Another member
pointed out that Mexico continues having a wide
volatility adjusted interest rate spread relative to the
United States. Some members noted that the stock
market registered increases. **One member** pointed
out that these were in line with other stock market
indices in the region. However, **another member**
noted that Mexico’s stock market performance was
surpassed by that of other Latin American
economies, which could reflect better economic
prospects and greater attractiveness for raising
capital in those countries. One member warned that
the escalation of the conflict between Russia and
Ukraine could add limited risks to the stability of
Mexico’s financial system. He/she stated that,
looking ahead, episodes of depreciation and high
volatility in financial markets are not ruled out due to
the environment of global uncertainty that persists.

**One member highlighted that consumer credit has**
recovered at a faster rate than during the 2008 crisis,
while financing to firms has reactivated more slowly.
**Another member pointed out that credit to**
individuals with business activity decreased around
35% with respect to the highest level recorded in the
first quarter of 2017. He/she added that credit to
Small- and Medium-sized enterprises (SMEs)
remains more than 10% below its pre-pandemic
levels, including in those sectors that did not
experience a recession, thus suggesting that the lack
of credit can be partially attributed to the supply side.


-----

He/she said that as long as credit to businesses
remains deteriorated, it will be very difficult to see a
substantial improvement in private investment. One
member pointed out that the lack of private
investment is due to a deterioration in the business
climate originated by external and idiosyncratic
internal factors that were present way before the
beginning of the tightening cycle, and therefore the
weakness of investment can hardly be attributed to
the adjustment of the monetary policy stance.
**Another member** highlighted that during January
2022 there was a decrease in the sources of financial
resources due to a reduction in investment funds’
balances, while the strong demand for highly liquid
instruments persisted. He/she added that markets
have still not incorporated the risk of possible
increases in the cost of corporate financing derived
from the balance sheet reduction by the Federal
Reserve.

**_Monetary policy_**

**The Governing Board evaluated the magnitude**
**and diversity of the shocks that have affected**
**inflation and the factors that determine it, along**
**with the risk of medium- and long-term inflation**
**expectations and price formation becoming**
**contaminated. Most members also considered**
**the challenges posed by the ongoing tightening**
**of global monetary and financial conditions, and**
**the environment of significant uncertainty and**
**greater inflationary pressures associated with**
**the** **geopolitical** **conflict.** **Based** **on** **these**

**considerations, all members voted to raise the**
**target for the overnight interbank interest rate by**
**50** **basis** **points** **to** **6.50%.** **All** **members**

**highlighted that, with this action, the monetary**
**policy stance adjusts to the trajectory required**
**for inflation to converge to its 3% target within**
**the forecast horizon.**

**Most members stated that in the next monetary**
**policy** **decisions,** **the** **Board** **will** **monitor**

**thoroughly the behavior of inflationary pressures**
**as well as of all factors that have an incidence on**
**the foreseen path for inflation and on its**
**expectations. The latter, in order to set a policy**
**rate that is consistent at all times with the**
**trajectory needed to facilitate the orderly and**
**sustained convergence of headline inflation to**
**the 3% target within the time frame in which**
**monetary policy operates as well as an adequate**
**adjustment of the economy and financial**
**markets.**

**One member highlighted that, given the inflationary**
pressures associated with the geopolitical conflict


and the beginning of a less expansionary policy by
the Federal Reserve, the monetary policy stance
must be reinforced to reduce possible second-round
effects in the price formation process, and to
maintain financial stability. However, he/she

mentioned that, in Mexico, the current interest rate is
relatively high, as little monetary stimulus was
granted during 2020 and began to be withdrawn early
in 2021. In this regard, he/she noted that it is not
convenient to overreact to the expected rate
increases in the United States. He/she highlighted
that domestic inflation will decrease along with world
inflation, as the number of infections decline, as
vaccination coverage improves at a global level, and
as monetary and fiscal policies in systemically
important economies are adjusted. He/she added
that inflationary risks stemming from the geopolitical
conflict are limited due to Mexico’s fuel price policy.
Given the aforementioned balance of risks, looking
ahead, the policy response should be moderate and
gradual, avoiding taking the reference rate to an
excessively restrictive level. He/she pointed out that
the interest rate levels anticipated by both private
sector analysts and market traders are too high,
considering the level of deviation of inflation from its
target, and the slack conditions in Mexico relative to
other economies. He/she warned that the Mexican
economy shows weakness precisely where

monetary policy has a direct influence, such as the
deterioration of credit for productive purposes, the
stagnation of investment, the lack of dynamism in
construction, the fall in consumer credit, and the
reduction in domestic sales of new automobiles.
He/she stated that, in contrast, consumption of nondurables, which responds more to other

determinants, has performed better. He/she added
that continuing to raise the reference rate at an
excessively elevated pace could affect the country's
growth outlook, which would reduce its attractiveness
to capital flows seeking high yields in emerging
market equities. He/she warned that a recession
would translate into macroeconomic and financial
instability, exerting pressures on both risk premium
and the exchange rate, which eventually could affect
inflation.

**Another member mentioned that Mexico is one of**
the few economies with a positive ex-ante real
interest rate close to its neutral level, which has
maintained solid macroeconomic fundamentals, and
still has a widely negative output gap. He/she stated
that geopolitical tensions constitute a new source of
uncertainty for the behavior of Mexico’s nominal, real
and financial variables, and that their potential effects
will depend on the duration and intensity of said
tensions. He/she added that, up to now, the impact


-----

on economic activity is uncertain, while regarding
inflation, the risks are several. He/she pointed out
that inflation in Mexico continues being subject to
pressures related mainly to the effects of the
pandemic and whose global factors may continue to
influence the inflation outlook. As a result, Banco de
México's forecasts were significantly revised and
convergence to the inflation target was also adjusted
accordingly to the horizon in which monetary policy
operates. He/she stated that the rapid increase in
inflation could affect the anchoring of inflation
expectations if sufficient measures are not

implemented. He/she mentioned that the monetary
policy stance must remain robust so that the balance
of risks regarding the medium-term inflation forecast
acquires a more neutral character. He/she added
that under an inflation forecast targeting framework,
it is fundamental to guarantee that long-term
expectations remain anchored and that shorter-term
expectations return to the target. Thus, looking
ahead, if the ex-ante real interest rate needs to be
above the range estimated as neutral, a balanced
relative monetary policy stance must be maintained.
He/she pointed out that commitment to the
constitutional mandate requires monetary policy
stance be such that it ensures convergence to the
inflation target, maintaining a proper balance in light
of the imminent cycle of upward adjustments in the
United States, and also foster the proper functioning
of the financial system and an orderly adjustment in
markets. He/she considered that, looking ahead,
Banco de México must continue monitoring the
observed and expected determinants of inflation.

**One member** stated that inflationary pressures
continue increasing and their persistence is not
expected to diminish for a long period. He/she noted
that it is necessary to induce a downward trajectory
of inflation towards its long-term target. He/she
argued that, at least in the short term, it is necessary
to respond to the Federal Reserve's cycle of interest
rate increases with proportional ones in order not to
relax the relative monetary policy stance, for which
there is no room for maneuver. He/she also pointed
out that Banco de México must remain attentive to
any possible effects of the Federal Reserve's
monetary tightening on financial markets, but without
acting mechanically. He/she pointed out that a
greater tightening than that of the Federal Reserve
could be required when the outlook for domestic
inflation so demands, but without introducing
excessive monetary restriction. He/she stated that
given the possibility of inflation reaching its peak in
the next quarter and then begin declining, decisions
should be taken cautiously. He/she argued that a
balance should be sought when assessing inflation


persistence, the cyclical conditions, and the Federal
Reserve’s cycle of interest rate increases, keeping in
mind inflation as the most important issue to tackle.
He/she noted that the ex-ante real interest rate is still
at the bottom of the neutral interest rate range, which
implies that monetary policy must continue to be
adjusted at the current pace until exiting the neutral
stance and reaching one that is consistent with the
current situation. He/she pointed out that inflation
expectations and the price formation process have
continued to deteriorate and that, without the
expectations channel functioning properly, monetary
policy’s transmission mechanisms will be limited.
He/she added that the expectations channel should
not be minimized by arguing that a rate increase only
mitigates the effect of inflationary shocks of a certain
nature. He/she argued that, instead, acting decisively
should make expectations adjust downwards. Thus,
understanding the causality of the expectations
channel and the lag with which it operates is crucial
to avoid narratives incompatible with its functioning.
He/she also highlighted that the credit channel is the
least effective in the Mexican economy due to the low
levels of depth, inclusion, and competitiveness of the
financial system, and the high levels of labor
informality. He/she mentioned that being in favor of
an insufficient monetary policy response, based on
the possible negative effects on economic activity,
could be counterproductive, as it would contribute to
higher levels of inflation, which in turn could hinder
economic growth. Therefore, he/she pointed out that
sending distorted signals that might undermine the
credibility regarding the central bank’s primary
mandate should be avoided. He/she noted that,
according to the latest Regional Economic Report,
around 30% of business agents surveyed consider
inflation as one of the main obstacles to growth.
He/she stated that the fact that high inflation has a
greater negative effect on low-income population
should also be taken into consideration.

**Another member mentioned that the outlook for**
inflation has deteriorated in light of the geopolitical
conflict, in addition to the negative implications of the
pandemic. He/she warned about the risk of high and
persistent inflation affecting the price formation
process and inflation expectations, especially longerterm ones. He/she recalled that the expectations
channel is one of the most important for monetary
policy transmission in Mexico, and that being
complacent in light of the observed levels of inflation
could lead to their unanchoring, which would imply a
high cost for society. He/she pointed out that
monetary policy faces a greater dilemma because
the recovery of economic activity is still incomplete.
He/she mentioned that the fundamental role of


-----

monetary policy is to stop the inflationary inertia that
has developed over the last year, and that it is
therefore necessary to act in a timely and decisive
manner. He/she argued that the desired effect on the
real interest rate has not been achieved because
forecasts have systematically underestimated

inflation, leading to lower real interest rates than
necessary. He/she stated that central banks that
have acted more rapidly have been able to reduce
their monetary stimulus more effectively. He/she
added that it is necessary to analyze more
extensively whether front loading the pace of
adjustment of the reference rate would curb
inflationary inertia more firmly, shorten the expected
duration of the upward cycle, and achieve a final
interest rate of lower magnitude. He/she noted that
markets expect an elevated trajectory for the
reference rate. He/she added that failure to act
rapidly and decisively may imply having higher and
longer-lasting real interest rates in the future, which
would increase the cost in terms of domestic
production and employment. He/she underlined that
the action brought forward maintains consistency
between communication about the primary objective
and the actions that are being implemented, and that
it seeks to strengthen medium- and long-term
expectations. He/she considered that, given the
balance of risks for inflation, the risk of a greater
monetary tightening at a global level, and the
possible impact of the current geopolitical conflict on
markets, it may be necessary to modify the pace of
adjustment of the reference rate, for which the
Governing Board is prepared to make the

appropriate decisions.

**One member mentioned that monetary policy faces**
an unprecedented environment, because in addition
to the challenges to fulfill the primary mandate
derived from the pandemic, which have not been fully
resolved, there is a geopolitical conflict that has
generated strong additional inflationary pressures
and significantly higher levels of uncertainty. He/she
argued that given the greater possibility of Mexico’s
price formation process becoming contaminated, it is
important to adjust the monetary policy stance to
keep inflation expectations anchored. He/she

warned that if the necessary measures are not taken,
inflation expectations could be affected given the
high levels of inflation that have been observed for
an extended period, which could in turn jeopardize
convergence to the inflation target. He/she pointed
out that the global inflationary environment would
also lead to tighter monetary conditions. He/she
argued that given Mexico's high degree of financial
and trade integration with the rest of the world and its
exposure to various types of external shocks, it is


necessary to maintain a solid macroeconomic stance
at all times. He/she underlined that, within Banco de
México's attributions, this implies procuring a low and
stable inflation and safeguarding the financial
system’s strength. He/she warned about the social
and economic costs of current inflation, which affect
the lower-income population to a greater extent.
He/she considered it imperative that, given the
aforementioned challenges, the monetary policy
response be clearly consistent with the convergence
of inflation to the target within the forecast horizon,
and seek to maintain inflation expectations anchored.
He/she highlighted that future decisions should
consider the evolution of the different shocks that
have exerted pressure on inflation throughout the
economic recovery, after the initial shock of the
pandemic, and of those associated with the conflict
in Eastern Europe, so that Banco de México fulfills its
constitutional mandate.

**3. MONETARY POLICY DECISION**

The Governing Board evaluated the magnitude and
diversity of the shocks that have affected inflation
and the factors that determine it, along with the risk
of medium- and long-term inflation expectations and
price formation becoming contaminated. It also
considered the challenges posed by the ongoing
tightening of global monetary and financial

conditions, and the environment of significant
uncertainty and greater inflationary pressures
associated with the geopolitical conflict. Based on
these considerations, and with the presence of all its
members, the Board decided unanimously to raise
the target for the overnight interbank interest rate by
50 basis points to 6.50%. With this action, the
monetary policy stance adjusts to the trajectory
required for inflation to converge to its 3% target
within the forecast horizon.

For the next monetary policy decisions, the Board will
monitor thoroughly the behavior of inflationary
pressures as well as of all factors that have an
incidence on the foreseen path for inflation and its
expectations. The latter, in order to take the
necessary actions to avoid the price formation
process from becoming contaminated, and set a
policy rate that is consistent at all times with the
trajectory needed to facilitate the orderly and
sustained convergence of headline inflation to the
3% target within the time frame in which monetary
policy operates as well as an adequate adjustment of
the economy and financial markets.


-----

**4. VOTING**

Victoria Rodríguez, Galia Borja, Irene Espinosa,
Gerardo Esquivel, and Jonathan Heath voted in favor


of increasing the target for the overnight interbank
interest rate by 50 basis points to 6.50%.


-----

**ANNEX**

The information in this Annex was prepared for this
meeting by the staff of Banco de México’s Directorate
General of Economic Research and Directorate
General of Central Bank Operations. It does not
necessarily reflect the considerations of the

members of the Governing Board as to the monetary
policy decision.

**A.1. External conditions**

**A.1.1. World economic activity**

Available indicators suggest a moderation in global
economic activity during the first quarter of 2022, due
to, among other factors, the rapid spread of the
Omicron variant of the SARS-CoV-2 virus and, more
recently, to its BA.2 subvariant. Leading indicators,
however, showed a recovery in February, particularly
in the services sector, suggesting that the latest wave
of infections have been of shorter duration and have
had a lower impact on world economic activity than
in previous episodes (Chart 1). Nevertheless, the
Russian invasion of Ukraine is expected to have
negative repercussions on world economic growth,
as a result of the significant rise in international
commodity prices, such as those of energy and food,
the disruptions in supply chains and world trade, and
the fall in business and investor confidence, which
may lead to a tightening of international financial
conditions.

World inflation continued increasing, pressured by
bottlenecks and the high levels of food and energy
prices. As a result, in most of the main advanced and
emerging economies, inflation remained above their
central banks' targets. In most major advanced
economies, central banks continued adjusting their
monetary policy stances. In its latest decision, the
Federal Reserve raised the target range for the
federal funds rate by 25 basis points and announced
that it anticipates that successive increases in the
target range will be appropriate, although it noted that
the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) would
be prepared to adjust the monetary policy stance as
necessary if risks that could prevent it from achieving
its goals arise. In emerging economies, a large
number of central banks continued raising their
reference rates. The ongoing increase in global
inflation has generated expectations of a faster
reduction of monetary stimulus worldwide.

International financial conditions tightened, with
interest rates increasing and a strengthening of the

1 Expressed as a seasonally adjusted quarterly annualized rate,
US GDP grew at a rate of 7.0% in the fourth quarter of 2021.


dollar, in a context of greater risk aversion associated
with the recent geopolitical conflict.

Among risks to the global economy, those associated
with the pandemic, longer-lasting inflationary

pressures, escalating geopolitical tensions, and
further adjustments in monetary and financial
conditions stand out. In particular, the magnitude of
the effects that the Russia-Ukraine conflict will have
on the economy is uncertain and will depend on its
intensity and duration, as well as on the effects and
extent of the economic sanctions imposed on Russia.

**Chart 1**

**Global: Purchasing Managers’ Index:**

**Production Component**

Diffusion index, s. a.

65

60

55

50

45

40

35 Manufacturing

Manufacturing (excl. China)

30 Services

Services (excl. China)

25 February

20

2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022

s. a. / Seasonally adjusted figures.
Source: IHS Markit.

In the United States, available indicators suggest that
economic activity continued to recover in the first
quarter of 2022, albeit at a more moderate pace, after
having grown at a seasonally adjusted quarterly rate
of 1.7% during the fourth quarter of 2021 (Chart 2).[1]
Available figures suggest that private consumption
remains one of the main drivers of US economic
activity, while fixed investment, mainly in machinery
and equipment, is expected to recover.

|Chart 1 Global: Purchasing Managers’ Index: Production Component  Diffusion index, s. a.|Col2|
|---|---|
|||
|Manufacturing Manufacturing (excl. China) Services Services (excl. China)|February|


-----

10

8

6

4

2

0

-2

-4

-6

-8

-10

-12


50

45

40

35

30

Private consumption expenditures 25
Residential investment 20
Nonresidential investment
Change in private inventories 15
Net exportsGovernment consumption expenditures 10
Total 5

0

II III IV I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV I

2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022

|Chart 2 US Real GDP and Components Quarterly percentage rate and contribution in percentage points, s. a.|Col2|Col3|Col4|Col5|Col6|Col7|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|Private consumption expenditures Residential investment Nonresidential investment Change in private inventories Net exports Government consumption expenditures Total|||||||
|I II III IV 2016|I II III IV 2017|I II III IV 2018|I II III IV 2019|I II III IV 2020|I II III IV 2021|I 2022|


s. a. / Seasonally adjusted figures.
Source: BEA and Blue Chip, March 2022.

US industrial production increased at a monthly rate
of 0.5% in February, after having grown 1.4% in
January, mainly due to a rebound in manufacturing
activity. Manufacturing production grew at a monthly
rate of 1.2% in February, as a result of a marked
increase in activity in sectors such as business
equipment and construction materials that offset the
fall in motor vehicle production, which continued to
be affected by the shortage of semiconductors.
Mining grew 0.1%, reflecting a modest increase in oil
drilling, despite the high level of oil and gas prices,
and the fall in oil extraction. In contrast, electricity and
gas production contracted 2.7% as weather
conditions improved, after the unusually low
temperatures of January. The manufacturing

Purchasing Managers' Index (PMI) suggests that this
sector will continue recovering, although it is
expected to continue being subject to pressures
related to the disruptions in global supply chains.

The US labor market continued improving in
February. The non-farm payroll increased by
678,000 jobs, after having expanded by 481,000 in
January, mainly reflecting the growth of the sector of
entertainment, recreation and art, temporary

accommodation and food preparation activities, and
professional, corporate and business support

services. Despite this improvement, the level of
employment in February was 2.1 million jobs below
its pre-pandemic level. The unemployment rate
decreased from 4.0% in January to 3.8% in February.

2 In annualized terms, euro area GDP registered a quarter-onquarter seasonally adjusted variation of 1.0% during the fourth
quarter of 2021.


In the euro area, available indicators suggest that
economic activity will remain weak in the first quarter
of 2022, after having grown at a seasonally adjusted
quarterly rate of 0.3% during the fourth quarter of
2021.[2] The region has also started to be affected by
the effects of the Russia-Ukraine conflict, particularly
in regards to the price and supply of energy. The
unemployment rate decreased from 7.0% in
December to 6.8% in January. Purchasing

Managers' Indices suggest an acceleration in the
services and manufacturing sectors during February,
as the effects of the Omicron variant began to fade.
However, these indicators precede the beginning of
the Russia-Ukraine conflict.

In Japan, available information suggests that
economic activity weakened once again in the first
quarter of 2022, after having expanded at a
seasonally adjusted quarterly rate of 1.1% during the
fourth quarter of 2021.[3] This, as a reflection of a
deterioration in household spending due to the
increase in COVID-19 cases and a lower mobility
since the beginning of 2022. In addition, the
persistent disruptions in supply chains and shortage
of semiconductor continued to affect the industrial
sector’s performance, particularly automobile

production. In this context, the unemployment rate
increased slightly from 2.7% in December to 2.8% in
January. Purchasing Managers' Indices suggest a
contraction in the services sector and point to a
slower pace of expansion in the manufacturing sector
given the continued disruptions in production chains.

In the main emerging economies, available indicators
suggest a slower pace of growth during the first
quarter, although with a marked heterogeneity
across countries, depending on the evolution of the
pandemic and the exposure of each country to the
effects on global supply chains and the RussiaUkraine conflict. In Emerging Asia, available
information indicates a weakening in GDP growth in
most economies. In China, although economic
activity indicators for February showed a rebound,
economic activity is expected to slow down during
the first quarter of the year due to the restrictions
imposed on several cities and provinces to contain
the recent increase in COVID-19 cases, which has
been the most severe so far in some regions such as
Shanghai and Guangzhou. In Latin America,
indicators point to a heterogeneous performance,
with the possible weakening of economic activity in
Chile due to the high number of COVID-19 infections
registered during the quarter standing out. In

3 In annualized terms, the quarterly seasonally adjusted variation
of Japan’s GDP during the third quarter of 2021 was 4.6%.


-----

Emerging Europe, available indicators suggest a
moderation in the pace of recovery in some
countries, while in Ukraine and Russia a sharp
contraction is expected due to the armed conflict and
the economic sanctions imposed on Russia.

International commodity prices trended upwards
since Mexico’s previous monetary policy decision
and have exhibited volatility in recent weeks. At the
beginning of March, oil prices reached their highest
level since 2008, following the sanctions imposed on
Russian oil exports, in a context in which oil markets
worldwide are facing significant supply restrictions.
The sanctions include the refusal of refineries, banks
and shipping companies to trade oil exported from
Russia and the decision by some countries, such as
the United States, Canada and the United Kingdom,
to ban or gradually reduce oil imports from this
country. Subsequently, oil prices registered episodes
of high volatility due partly to the announcement to
release crude oil reserves by the International
Energy Agency’s members, the possibility that a new
nuclear agreement is signed with Iran that would
allow the resumption of oil exports from that country,
and the disruptions in the supply of oil from a pipeline
in Kazakhstan. Natural gas reference prices rose
significantly, particularly in Europe, due to the high
risk of a disruption in the flow from Russia to the
region, although this trend has partially reversed in
recent weeks. Grain prices rose as a result of
uncertainty about a possible reduction in global
supply due to the geopolitical conflict, mostly
because Russia and Ukraine account for almost a
quarter of global grain exports. Similarly, industrial
metal prices trended upwards due to the risk of
disruptions in the supply from these countries, which
are also important producers of these metals and
other raw materials needed for their production, in an
environment of low inventory levels.

**A.1.2. Monetary policy and international financial**
**markets**

Inflation continued rising worldwide, pressured by
bottlenecks and high food and energy prices. Given
the persistence of bottlenecks in supply chains,
producer prices remained high in both advanced and
emerging economies, suggesting that upward
pressures on world inflation may last longer.

Headline and core inflation continued increasing in
most of the main advanced economies, with the
former standing above their central banks' targets,
except for Japan, whose inflation remains at low
levels (Chart 3). In most of these economies,
headline inflation has reached its highest level in


decades. In particular, in the United States, the
annualized consumer price index went from 7.5% in
January to 7.9% in February, its highest level since
1982, reflecting an increase in food inflation and in its
core component, which rose from 6.0 to 6.4% during
the same period. In this context, short-term inflation
expectations drawn from surveys and financial
markets increased for most of these economies,
while longer-term inflation expectations drawn from
financial instruments also rose, although in some
cases they have been revised slightly downwards in
recent weeks. This upward revision in inflation
expectations is largely attributed to the marked
increase in commodity prices, mainly due to the
geopolitical conflict.

**Chart 3**

**Selected Advanced Economies:**

**Headline Inflation**

Annual percentage change

9 United States PCE 1/

8 United States CPI

Japan 2/

7

Euro area

6 United Kingdom

5 Canada

4

3

2

1

0

-1

February

-2 January

-3

-4

2005 2009 2013 2017 2021

1/ The personal consumption expenditure deflator is used.
2/ Excludes fresh food. This series does not exclude the effect of the rise in
consumption tax in May 2014 and October 2019, nor the effect of the free
daycare and preschool program in October 2019.
3/ Preliminary figures for January.
Source: Bureau of Economic Analysis, Bureau of Labor Statistics, Eurostat,
Bank of Japan, Statistics Canada, Office of National Statistics.

In most of the main emerging economies, inflation
continued rising as a result of the same factors
affecting advanced economies. A wide range of
items were subject to pressures, with increases in the
prices of energy, food and in core items standing out.
Some countries were also affected by pressures
associated with the depreciation of their exchange
rates. In most of these economies, inflation remained
above their central banks' targets, except for some
Asian countries, such as Indonesia and China.

Looking ahead, the possibility that the RussiaUkraine conflict leads to longer-lasting disruptions in
the supply of commodities, could maintain their
prices at high levels, and even lead to higher levels
of inflation. The aforementioned conflict may also
prolong bottlenecks due to effect on the


-----

transportation of goods, and to the possible shortage
of inputs. The effect of said shock on inflation is
subject to a high degree of uncertainty.

In this context, the central banks of most major
advanced economies continued their plans for
monetary policy normalization. In some cases, they
announced a gradual reduction in securities
holdings, a slower pace of net asset purchases or
increases in their reference rates. Expectations for
interest rate increases in the main advanced
economies were adjusted downwards at the
beginning of the Russian invasion of Ukraine,
although they have recently been adjusted upwards
in view of the persistent upside risks to world
inflation. Based on the latest available information,
expectations drawn from financial instruments for
most major advanced economies foresee a faster
pace of interest rate increases than previously
expected, anticipating increases throughout 2022
and 2023 (Chart 4).

**Chart 4**

**Reference Rates and Trajectories**

**Implied in OIS Curves[1/]**

Percent


3.0% **― US Federal Reserve 2/**

**― Bank of England**
**― Bank of Japan**

2.5% **― Bank of Canada**

**― European Central Bank deposit rate**
**― OIS implicit trajectory Mar.17, 2022**

2.0% **--- OIS implicit trajectory Feb.3, 2022**

1.5%

1.0%

0.5%

0.0%

-0.5%

End of End of End of

-1.0% 2020 2021 2022

2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023

|Col1|― Bank of England ― Bank of Japan|Col3|Col4|Col5|Col6|Col7|Col8|Col9|Col10|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
||― Bank of Japan ― Bank of Canada ― European Central Bank depo ― OIS implicit trajectory Mar.17, --- OIS implicit trajectory Feb.3,|sit rate 2022 2022||||Forecasts||||
|||||||||||
|||||||||||
|||||||||||
|||||||||||
|||||||||||
|||||||||||
|||||||||||


End of
2023


1/ OIS: Fixed floating interest rate swap where the fixed interest rate is
associated to the effective overnight reference rate.
2/ For the observed reference rate of the US, the average interest rate of
the target range of the federal funds rate (0.0% - 0.25%) is used.
Source: Banco de México with data from Bloomberg.

Among the recent monetary policy decisions in the
main advanced economies, the following stand out:

i) At its March meeting, the Federal Reserve raised

the target range for the federal funds rate by 25
basis points to 0.25-0.50%. It pointed out that it
anticipates that successive increases in the target
range will be appropriate. It also announced that
the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC)
expects to begin reducing its holdings of Treasury
securities, agency debt, and agency mortgagebacked securities at an upcoming meeting, and
that it would be prepared to adjust the monetary
policy stance as appropriate if risks arise that


could jeopardize the attainment of its goals.
Regarding the balance sheet, the chairman stated
that they may begin to reduce it as soon as its
next meeting in May, although he forewarned that
this is not a decision that the Fed has already
made. He added that the stimulus withdrawal
scheme would be similar to that of the last time it
was implemented, but that it would be faster and
take place much earlier in the cycle with respect
to the previous episode. The Committee's
medians for headline inflation expectations were
revised upwards from 2.6 to 4.3% for 2022, from
2.3 to 2.7% for 2023, and from 2.1 to 2.3% for
2024. As for core inflation, the medians were
revised from 2.7 to 4.1% for 2022, from 2.3 to
2.6% for 2023 and from 2.1 to 2.3% for 2024.
Regarding expectations for the reference rate, the
medians show an increase from 0.875 to 1.875%
for 2022, from 1.625 to 2.750% for 2023, and from
2.125 to 2.750% for 2024. However, the median
for the long-term rate decreased slightly from 2.5
to 2.375%. This suggests expectations of a total
of seven 25 basis point interest rate increases in
2022, which compares to three anticipated in the
projections published last December. For 2023,
the median of forecasts foresees three additional
increases at least. In this regard, the Fed’s
Chairman reiterated on March 21 that if the
Committee concludes that it is appropriate to act
more aggressively by raising the federal funds
rate by more than 25 basis points at one or more
meetings, they would do so, and if it deems
necessary to go beyond the common neutral
measures and adopt a more restrictive policy
stance, it could do so as well. The above has been
reflected in the expected trajectory for the federal
funds rate implicit in financial instruments which,
considering the latest available information,
anticipates a higher-than-expected interest rate
increase at the end of 2022 than that based on
the median of the Committee's expectations.

ii) At its March meeting, the European Central Bank

left its refinancing, key lending and key deposit
rates unchanged at 0.0, 0.25 and -0.5%,
respectively. It pointed out that the Governing
Council expects these interest rates to remain at
current levels until: i) inflation reaches the 2%
target well before the end of their forecast horizon;
ii) inflation remains consistently at that level for
the remainder of the forecasted horizon; and iii)
this central bank considers that improvement in
core inflation is sufficiently advanced to be
consistent with stabilizing inflation at the 2%
target in the medium term. It pointed out that any
adjustment to interest rates will be gradual and


-----

will take place at a certain point after net
purchases under the Asset Purchase Program
(APP) have concluded. Regarding the latter, this
central bank accelerated the pace of reduction of
its purchases for the coming months. This central
bank stated that monthly net asset purchases will
stand at €40 billion in April, €30 billion in May and
€20 billion in June, and added that, if data
supports the expectation that the medium-term
inflation outlook will not weaken even after its net
asset purchases have concluded, the Council will
thus conclude net purchases under the APP in the
third quarter. Regarding its Pandemic Emergency
Program (PEPP), it reiterated that it will conclude
its net asset purchases by the end of March 2022.
The Council also decided to extend the
Eurosystem repo facility for central banks
(EUREP) until January 15, 2023.

iii) At its January meeting, the Bank of Japan left its

reference rate at -0.1% and its long-term interest
rate target (indexed to its 10-year bond) at around
0%. It restated that it expects interest rates to
remain at their current levels or even lower. With
respect to its commercial paper and corporate
bond purchase program, it reiterated that it will
continue its purchases until the end of March
2022 and that, beginning in April, it will make its
purchases at the same pace as prior to the
pandemic, so that outstanding amounts will
gradually return to pre-pandemic levels.


economies, there was a generalized increase in longterm government bond interest rates, while stock and
foreign currency markets exhibited a mixed

performance by region (Chart 6). On the one hand,
in the European region, stock indexes fell sharply
and currencies weakened as a result of their greater
exposure to the Russia-Ukraine conflict, with the
Russian stock market plummeting and the ruble
depreciating significantly. On the other hand, in Latin
America, stock markets showed gains and

currencies strengthened, partly as a result of the
increase in commodity prices. In this context, since
Mexico’s previous monetary policy decision, there
was a moderation in capital inflows to emerging
economies' equity markets, with the recent outflows
from the Russian market standing out. There were
outflows of fixed income instruments, particularly
from China, due to expectations of a more
accommodative monetary policy in that country.

**Chart 5**

**Change in Selected Financial Indicators from**

**February 3, 2022** **to March 17, 2022**

Percent; basis points


20%

10%


40%

30%


120

90


60

30


Since Mexico’s previous monetary policy decision, a
large number of central banks of major emerging
economies continued raising their reference rates,
including those of Brazil, Peru, Hungary, Poland and
Russia.

International financial markets registered a

significant increase in volatility and tightening,
particularly at the end of February and beginning of
March, in a context of greater risk aversion
associated with the recent geopolitical conflict (Chart
5). In particular, the stock markets of most of the main
advanced economies exhibited a negative behavior
from the second week of February to the second
week of March, although recently they have been
recovering. In foreign exchange markets, the dollar
strengthened significantly against the currencies of
most advanced economies. As for government bond
interest rates in the main advanced economies, they
have increased significantly so far in March, in view
of the outlook of a downturn in economic activity for
some specific regions, high levels of inflation, and
expectations of a less accommodative monetary
policy by the main central banks. In emerging


0%

-10%


0

-30


-20%


-60


Note: An upward adjustment indicates currency appreciation.
1/ The MSCI Emerging Markets Index consists of 24 countries.
2/ DXY: a weighted average estimated by the Intercontinental Exchange
(ICE) of the nominal exchange rate of the main six currencies operated
globally with the following weights: EUR 57.6%, JPY: 13.6%, GBP: 11.9%,
CAD: 9.1%, SEK: 4.2%, and CHF: 3.6%.
3/ J.P. Morgan index is constructed with the weighted average by the
nominal exchange rate of emerging economies’ currencies with the
following weights: TRY: 8.3%, RUB: 8.3%, HUF: 8.3%, ZAR: 8.3%, BRL:
11.1%, MXN: 11.1%, CLP: 11.1%, CNH: 11.1%, INR: 11.1% and SGD:
11.1%.
Source: Bloomberg and ICE.


-----

**Chart 6**

**Selected Emerging Economies: Financial Assets**

**Performance since February 2, 2021**

Percent, basis points

**2-year** **10-year**

**Equity**
**Region** **Country** **Currencies** **interest** **interest** **CDS**


ending the period with an appreciation of 0.40%
(Chart 8). This occurred in a context in which both
spot and future trading conditions deteriorated
slightly with respect to the previous period.

**Chart 8**

**Mexican Peso Exchange Rate with Moving**


**Latin**

**America**


Mexican peso


100-day moving average

50-day moving average


**Emerging**

**Europe**

**Asia**


J   F  M  A  M  J   J   A   S  O  N   D  J   F  M   A  M  J   J   A   S  O  N  D J   F  M


**Africa** **South Africa** **2.14%** **-0.75%** **11** **37** **-11**

|2-year Equity Country Currencies interest markets rates Mexico 0.40% 4.48% 87 Brazil 3.94% 1.06% 132 Chile 1.07% 6.04% 170 Colombia 2.73% 0.88% 136 Peru 2.70% 10.90% 8 Russia -56.04% -30.29% 2,336 Poland -6.43% -6.88% 148 Turkey -10.10% 6.93% 299 Czech Republic -5.30% -7.80% 59 Hungary -8.63% -16.76% 150 China -0.02% -3.28% 12 Malaysia -0.23% 5.22% 1 India -1.29% -2.84% 8 Philippines -2.55% -6.05% 43 Thailand -0.37% 0.65% -12 Indonesia 0.11% 3.69% -9 South Africa 2.14% -0.75% 11|10-year interest CDS rates Chart 8 85 -1 Mexican Peso Exchange Rate with M 126 -7 Averages 15 -5 MXN/USD 91 -37 51 -10 25.50 1,939 1,301 25.00 Mexican 24.50 100-day 72 36 24.00 50-day m 23.50 275 57 23.00 36 4 22.50 22.00 82 46 21.50 21.00 9 5 20.50 2 6 12 90 .. 50 00 -10 15 19.00 18.50 48 5 18.00 17.50 12 0 17.00 29 7 J F M A M J J A S O N D J F M A M J J A S O 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 37 -11 2020 2021|
|---|---|


Note: An upward adjustment indicates currency appreciation. Interest rates
correspond to swap rates at the specified terms, except for Hungary, where
government securities with 3-year maturities were used as a reference. For
the Philippines, a 2-year swap rate was used, and for Russia, a 2-year and
3-year swap rate was used.
Source: Bloomberg.

**A.2. Current situation of the Mexican economy**

**A.2.1. Mexican markets**

In the international context described above, in
domestic financial markets, the exchange rate
appreciated slightly, although with some volatility,
and interest rates rose across all terms, in line with
what was observed at the global level (Chart 7).

**Chart 7**

**Mexican Markets’ Performance**

Percent, MXN/USD and index


2020 2021 2022

Source: Prepared by Banco de México.

Interest rates of government securities exhibited
upward adjustments, in line with the movements of
yield curves worldwide (Chart 9), with increases of up
to 89 basis points in shorter-term bonds and of up to
96 basis points in longer-term ones. The yield curve
of real interest rate instruments showed a similar
dynamic, with adjustments between -30 and 33 basis
points for the short term and of 6 basis points for the
long term. In this context, compensation for inflation
and inflationary risk implicit in spreads between
nominal and real interest rates of market instruments
increased between 33 and 116 basis points for all
terms (Chart 10). These adjustments took place in an
environment in which trading conditions deteriorated
during the period covering the monetary policy
decision.


9.0

8.8

8.6

8.4

8.2

8.0

7.8

7.6

7.4

7.2

7.0


2.5

2.0


4.5

4.0


56,000

55,000

54,000

53,000

52,000

51,000

50,000


**Chart 9**

**Nominal Yield Curve of Government Securities**

Percent, basis points


3.5

3.0


21.6

21.4

21.2

21.0

20.8

20.6

20.4

20.2

20.0


M Bond


Inflation-indexed bonds


Range in year Range since previous monetary policy Feb-02-22 Mar-17-22

decision

Source: Prepared by Banco de México.

The Mexican peso fluctuated in a range of 1 peso and
14 cents, between 20.24 and 21.38 pesos per dollar,


Range in year Range since previous monetary policy Feb-02-22 Mar-17-22


Trading range over the period

Note: The chart does not include bonds maturing in December 2021 and
June 2022. CETES with similar maturities are considered.
Source: PIP.


-----

**Chart 10**

**Compensation for Inflation and Inflationary Risk**

**Implicit in Government Securities’ Interest Rate**

Basis points

550

525

500

475

450

425

400

375

350

325

300 3-year

10-year

275 20-year

250 30-year

3-year average

225 10-year average

200 20-year average

30-year average

175

150

J       M M        J         S         N        J        M

2021                                                         2022

Source: PIP.

Regarding expectations for the trajectory of the
monetary policy reference rate, information implied
by the Interbank Equilibrium Interest Rate (TIIE, for
its Spanish acronym) swap curve incorporates an
increase of around 70 basis points between the
March and May 2022 meetings, while for the end of
2022 it points to a reference rate close to 8.95%
(Chart 11). Most forecasters surveyed by

Citibanamex anticipate the interest rate to increase
by 50 basis points to 6.50% in the March decision,
while for the end of 2022 a rate of 7.50% is expected.

**Chart 11**

**Banco de México Overnight Interbank Rate**

**Implied in TIIE IRS Curve**

Percent

9.75 Tasa de referencia

Tasa implícita en futuros de TIIE de Fondeo
Tasa implícita en valores gubernamentales

8.75 Tasa implícita en swaps de TIIE al 03/17/2022


7.75

6.75

5.75

4.75


3.75

E   M    M   J     S    N    E    M   M    J    S    N
2021                       2022

Source: Prepared by Banco de México with Bloomberg data.

4 Refers to the value of merchandise exports in current dollars.
This value differs from that reported for goods exports in Mexico's


**A.2.2. Economic activity in Mexico**

In the last quarter of 2021, Mexico’s GDP stagnated
(Chart 12), although in November and December
economic activity slightly improved, which might
have extended into early 2022, despite the
increasing number of infections by the omicron
variant in January. Although recently the pandemic
seems to have evolved more favorably, the
worsening of geopolitical conflicts represents a new
factor of high uncertainty for the development of
economic activity.

With respect to external demand, in January 2022,
both automotive exports and those of other
manufactured goods contracted at the margin (Chart
13).[4] Despite this decline, the non-automotive
manufacturing component remains at relatively high
levels, while automotive manufacturing continues to
show some volatility due to persistent problems in the
supply of certain inputs. By destination,

manufacturing exports to the United States were at
high levels, while those to the rest of the world
remained weak.

15/03/2022
14/03/2022
11/03/2022
10/03/2022
09/03/2022
08/03/2022
07/03/2022
04/03/2022
03/03/2022
02/03/2022
01/03/2022
28/02/2022
25/02/2022

System of National Accounts, since the latter represents value
added, measured in constant pesos.


-----

**Chart 12**

**Gross Domestic Product**

Quarterly percentage change, s. a.


6

13.49

4

2

0

-2

-4

-17.85

-6 Q-IV

I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV

2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021

s. a. / Seasonally adjusted figures.
Source: Mexico’s System on National Accounts (SCNM, for its Spanish
acronym), INEGI.

**Chart 13**

**Total Manufacturing Exports**

Indices 2013 = 100, s.a.

180

Total

Automotive

160

Non-automotive

140

120

100

80

60

15.5 January

40

J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J

2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022

s. a. / Seasonally adjusted series and trend series based on data in nominal
US dollars. The former is represented by a solid line and the latter by a
dotted line.
Source: Prepared by Banco de México with data from the Tax
Administration Service (SAT, for its Spanish acronym), the Ministry of the
Economy (SE, for its Spanish acronym), Banco de México, the National
Institute of Statistics and Geography (INEGI, for its Spanish acronym).
Mexico’s Merchandise Trade Balance, and the National System of
Statistical and Geographical Information (SNIEG, for its Spanish acronym),
Information of national interest.

On the domestic demand side, based on its monthly
indicator, at the end of 2021, private consumption
continued to recover, registering six consecutive
monthly increases. This performance reflected
increases in the consumption of both domestic and
imported goods, as well as the gradual reactivation
of services consumption. Meanwhile, gross fixed
investment improved in December with respect to
previous months, although it remained weak in
general. In terms of its components, spending on
machinery and equipment continued to recover,
while that on construction investment continued
performing poorly.


On the production side, despite the upsurge of the
pandemic and the persistence of certain disruptions
in global supply chains, industrial production
continued recovering in January (Chart 14). This is
attributed to the performance of mining, which
rebounded as a result of a significant expansion in
mining-related services, such as oil well drilling.
Manufacturing maintained an upward trend, while
construction continued to perform weakly (Chart 15).
In December 2021, tertiary activities registered their
second consecutive monthly increase, maintaining a
heterogeneous behavior across its sectors. Within
them, the positive contributions of wholesale trade
and transport, and information services in mass
media stood out. Uncertainty regarding the

performance of services in early 2022 prevails due to
the upsurge of COVID-19 infections during the
period.

**Chart 14**

**Global Indicator of Economic Activity**

Indices 2013 = 100, s. a.

120 140

115 130

110 120

105 110

100 100

95 90

Total IGAE 1/

90 Industrial production 2/ 80

Services IGAE 1/

85 Agricultural-livestock products IGAE 1/ 70

80 60

75 December 50

January

70 40

J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J

2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022

s. a. / Seasonally adjusted and trend series. The former is represented by a
solid line and the latter by a dotted line.
1/ Figures as of December 2021.
2/ Figures for January 2022, Monthly Indicator of Industrial Activity.
Source: Mexico’s System of National Accounts (SCNM, for its Spanish
acronym), INEGI.


-----

**Chart 15**

**Industrial Activity [1/]**

Indices 2013 = 100, s. a.


130

120

110

100

90

Total

Mining (22.3%)

80

Manufacturing (49.7%)

70 Construction (23.3%)

Utilities (4.7%)

January

60

J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J

2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022


**Chart 16**

**Output Gap Estimates [1/]**

**Excluding Oil Industry [4/ ]**

Potential output percentages, s. a.


s. a. / Seasonally adjusted and trend series. The former is represented by a
solid line and the latter by a dotted line.
1/ Figures in parenthesis correspond to their share in the total in 2013.
Source: Mexico’s System of National Accounts (SCNM, for its Spanish
acronym), INEGI.

Regarding the cyclical position of the economy,
during the last quarter of 2021, output gap estimates
continued to suggest that slack conditions remain
significantly ample (Chart 16). During the first quarter
of 2022, slack conditions are expected to have
remained ample, although less than in the previous
quarter. In the context of the fourth wave of infections
in the country, in January 2022 various labor market
indicators exhibited a mixed performance. In
particular, national and urban unemployment rates
decreased at the margin (Chart 17) in a context in
which the labor participation rate and the

employment to working-age population ratio

contracted, after both indicators registered three
consecutive monthly increases. Meanwhile, with
seasonally adjusted figures, in February 2022, newly
created IMSS-insured jobs registered its largest
monthly increase since July 2021. Finally, in January,
unit labor costs in the manufacturing sector
registered four consecutive months of reductions
(Chart 18), as a reflection, to a large extent, of
advances in labor productivity.


12

8

4

0

-4

-8

-12

-16

-20

-24


December


J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S

2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021

s. a. / Calculations based on seasonally adjusted figures.
1/ Output gap estimated with a tail-corrected Hodrick-Prescott filter; see
Banco de México (2009), “Inflation Report, April-June 2009”, p.74.
2/ GDP figures up to Q4 2021, and IGAE figures up to December 2021.
3/ Output gap confidence interval calculated with a method of unobserved
components.
4/ Excludes both oil and gas extraction, support services for mining, and
petroleum and coal products’ manufacturing.
Source: Prepared by Banco de México with INEGI data.

**Chart 17**

**National and Urban Unemployment Rates**

Percent, s. a.

8.0

National unemployment rate

7.5

Urban unemployment rate

7.0

6.5

6.0

5.5

5.0

4.5

4.0

3.5

3.0

2.5 January

JA J O JA J O JA J O JA J O JA J O JA J O JA J O JA J O JA J O JA J O JA J O JA J O JA J O JA J O J

2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022

s.a./ Seasonally adjusted series and trend series. The former is represented
by a solid line and the latter by a dotted line.
Source: Prepared by Banco de México with data from ENOE, ETOE (from
April to June 2020), and ENOE new edition (ENOE[N]) from July to date.


-----

130

Unit labor costs 158.9

Productivity

120

110

100

90

January

80

J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J

2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022


s. a. / Seasonally adjusted and trend series. The former is represented by a
solid line and the latter by a dotted line.
1/ Productivity based on hours worked.
Source: Prepared by Banco de México with seasonally adjusted data of the
Monthly Manufacturing Industry Survey and industrial activity indicators of
Mexico’s System of National Accounts (Sistema de Cuentas Nacionales de
México, SCNM), INEGI.

In January 2022, domestic financing to firms
registered a real annual reduction similar to that
observed in the previous month. Bank credit to firms
continued to moderate its annual contraction rate.
This, in a context in which corporate demand for
credit continued to recover, while lending conditions
remained relatively stable, and therefore remain
tight. Meanwhile, net corporate debt issuance in the
domestic market continued to show low dynamism.
As for credit to households, commercial bank
housing portfolio kept increasing, albeit at a slower
pace as of the last quarter of 2021. At the same time,
outstanding bank consumer credit continued to
recover, increasing for the fourth consecutive month,
mainly as a result of the sustained dynamism of
payroll and credit card loans. This, in a context in
which household demand for credit has been
gradually recovering. Household lending conditions
remained stable in both housing and consumer
portfolios.

Interest rates on bank credit to firms have followed
the dynamics of the overnight interbank interest rate.
At the end of 2021, corporate credit intermediation
margins, except for issuers, returned to levels similar
to those observed prior to the pandemic. At the same
time, mortgages remained at levels around their
historical lows. Meanwhile, in December 2021, credit
card interest rates registered levels similar to those
observed during the third quarter of that year, while
personal credit rates increased. Thus, consumer
credit intermediation margins continued being at
levels higher than those observed prior to the


pandemic. As for portfolio quality, in December 2021,
delinquency rates for corporate and housing loans
remained at low levels. Finally, consumer portfolio
delinquency rates were lower than those registered
before the onset of the pandemic, although they
remain at high levels.

**A.2.3. Development of inflation and inflation**
**outlook**

Annual headline inflation continued being subject to
pressures related to the COVID 19 pandemic, rising
from 7.07 to 7.29% between January and the first
fortnight of March 2022 (Chart 19 and Table 1). This
result is explained by an increase of 33 basis points
in the contribution to headline inflation of the core
component, which was partially offset by a reduction
of 11 basis points in the incidence of the non-core
component.

**Chart 19**

**Consumer Price Index**

Annual percentage change

14

13 CPI

12 Core

11

10 Non-core

9

8

7

6

5

4

3

2

1

0

-1

-2

-3 F1 March

J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J

2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022

Source: Banco de México and INEGI.

Between January and the first fortnight of March,
annual core inflation increased from 6.21 to 6.68%.
Within this component, merchandise prices remain
affected by the imbalance between supply and
demand in various markets, and higher production
costs, and thus their annual variation went from 7.86
to 8.54% in that period. (Chart 20). In particular,
annual food merchandise inflation increased from
8.76 to 9.84% and non-food merchandise inflation
from 6.88 to 7.11%. (Chart 21). Regarding annual
inflation of services, it rose from 4.35 to 4.57% in said
period, still driven by the reopening of service
activities and their increasing demand, which had
been contained for several months, also favored by
progress in the vaccination campaigns. In this
regard, annual inflation of services other than
education and housing increased from 6.23 to
6.51%, with the highest annual variation in food
services prices standing out.


-----

**Chart 20**

**Merchandise and Services Core Price Sub-index**

Annual percentage change

9

Merchandise

8

Services

7

6

5

4

3

2

1

F1 March

0

J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J

2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022

Source: Banco de México and INEGI.

**Chart 21**

**Merchandise Core Price Sub-index**

Annual percentage change

12

10

8

6

4

2

Food, beverages and tobacco Non-food merchandise F1 March

0

J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J

2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022

Source: Banco de México and INEGI.

Annual non-core inflation decreased from 9.68 to
9.10% between January and the first fortnight of
March 2022 (Chart 22 and Table 1). This was the
result of a reduction from 6.75 to 4.60% in the annual
inflation of energy prices, which in turn responded to
the decrease from 10.20 to 5.68% in the annual
variation of gasoline prices. This contrasts with the
high levels of annual inflation of agricultural and
livestock products, which rose from 15.32 to 15.93%
during the same period.


Source: Banco de México and INEGI.

Regarding inflation expectations from the survey
conducted by Banco de México among Private
Sector Forecasters, between January and February,
the median of headline inflation for the end of 2022
increased from 4.27 to 4.68%, while that

corresponding to the core component went from 4.29
to 4.62%. At the same time, the median of headline
inflation expectations at the end of 2023 was revised
upwards from 3.76 to 3.80%, while that for core
inflation was revised from 3.60 to 3.70%. On the
other hand, the median of headline inflation
expectations for the medium term increased from
3.64 to 3.70%, while that for core inflation remained
at 3.60%. Expectations for the long term remained
around 3.50%. Finally, compensation for inflation
increased and remains at high levels. Expectations
implied by market instruments continued their
upward trend, while inflation risk premium remains
elevated.

Given the greater inflationary pressures,

convergence to the 3% target is now expected to be
achieved during the first quarter of 2024. This
forecast is subject to risks. On the upside: i)
persistence of core inflation at high levels; ii) external
inflationary pressures associated with the pandemic;
iii) greater pressures in agricultural and livestock
product prices and in energy prices due to the recent
geopolitical conflict; iv) exchange rate depreciation;
and v) cost-related pressures. On the downside: i) a
decline in the intensity of the armed conflict; ii) a
greater-than-expected effect from the negative
output gap; iii) energy prices below those anticipated;
and iv) exchange rate appreciation. The balance of
risks for the trajectory of inflation within the forecast
horizon has deteriorated and remains biased to the
upside.


**Chart 22**

**Non-core Price Sub-index**

Annual percentage change


25

20

15

10

5

0

Non-core

-5 Agricultural and livestock products

Energy and government-authorized prices

-10

-15 F1 March

J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J

2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022


-----

**Table 1**

**Consumer Price Index and Components**

Annual percentage change

**1st fortnight**

**Item** **January 2022** **February 2022**
**March 2022**

**CPI** **7.07** **7.28** **7.29**

**SubyacenteCore** **6.21** **6.59** **6.68**

**Merchandise** **7.86** **8.34** **8.54**

Food, beverages and tobacco 8.76 9.40 9.84

Non-food merchandise 6.88 7.18 7.11

**Services** **4.35** **4.62** **4.57**

Housing 2.61 2.72 2.71

Education (tuitions) 2.73 3.19 3.18

Other services 6.23 6.62 6.51

**Non-coreNo Subyacente** **9.68** **9.34** **9.10**

**Agricultural and livestock products** **15.32** **16.17** **15.93**

Fruits and vegetablesFruits abd vegetables 18.44 19.60 20.11

Livestock productsLivestock 12.87 13.57 12.80

**Energy and government-authorized prices Energéticos y Tarifas Aut. por Gobierno** **5.56** **4.48** **4.28**

Energy productsEnergy 6.75 4.97 4.60

Government-authorized pricesTarifas Autorizadas por Gobierno 2.74 3.27 3.47

Source: INEGI.


-----

-----

-----

