-----

-----

**FOREWARNING**
This document is provided for the reader’s convenience
only. The translation from the official Spanish version was
made by Banco de México’s staff. Discrepancies may arise
between the original document in Spanish and its English
translation. For this reason, the original Spanish version is
the only official document.


**1. PLACE, DATE AND PARTICIPANTS**

**1.1. Place:** Meeting held by virtual means.

**1.2. Date of Governing Board meeting:** December
15, 2021.

**1.3. Participants:**

Alejandro Díaz de León, Governor.
Galia Borja, Deputy Governor.
Irene Espinosa, Deputy Governor.
Gerardo Esquivel, Deputy Governor.
Jonathan Heath, Deputy Governor.
Rogelio Eduardo Ramírez, Secretary of Finance
and Public Credit.
Gabriel Yorio, Undersecretary of Finance and Public
Credit.
Elías Villanueva, Secretary of the Governing Board.

Prior to this meeting, preliminary work by Banco de
México’s staff analyzing the economic and financial
environment as well as the developments in inflation
and the determinants and outlook for inflation, was
conducted and presented to the Governing Board
(see Annex).

**2. ANALYSIS AND RATIONALE BEHIND THE**
**GOVERNING BOARD’S VOTING**

**_International environment_**

**The** **majority** **mentioned** **that** **available**

**information shows that world economic growth**
**has increased moderately during the fourth**
**quarter,** **heterogeneously** **across** **countries**

**depending on the evolution of the pandemic and**
**the actions implemented by their public health,**
**monetary and fiscal authorities. In particular, the**
**new variant of the virus and the adoption of**
**mobility restrictions, mainly in Europe, were**
**highlighted. Some members pointed out that supply**
constraints continue to affect industrial production
and noted that global employment has not been able
to return to its pre-pandemic levels. **One member**
stated that this is due to an incomplete recovery in
demand. **Some members indicated that the**
weakness in employment is also due to individuals’


labor supply decisions in light of health risks. **One**
member stated that the pandemic led to the early exit
of older generations from the labor force and a lower
participation of women and young people. He/she
added that there has been a change in relative
wages, associated to the risks of contagion, and to
wage-related pressures, which has worsened as a
result of the recent inflation dynamics. **Some**
members mentioned that forecasts for 2022
remained stable, although they continue to be
subject to a high degree of uncertainty. One member
highlighted that the evolution of the pandemic and its
new variants continues being the greatest risk factor
for the global economic recovery.

**Another member pointed out the effects that the**
pandemic has had on the global economy: i) the
shutdown of various sectors of productive activity; ii)
the adoption of substantial spending stimuli in
advanced economies; iii) a reallocation of spending;
and iv) profound effects on the labor market. He/she
stated that this series of unprecedented shocks has
led to considerable forecast errors for economic
activity and inflation. He/she highlighted that in 2021
fiscal support and transfers to households increased
considerably in the United States, generating an
increase in the demand for consumer durables
worldwide, thus exerting pressure on their prices and
generating bottlenecks. He/she also highlighted the
rigidity and lack of resilience in supply chains.

**All members mentioned that world inflation**
**continued** **increasing** **due** **to** **pressures**

**originated by bottlenecks in production, the**
**reallocation of spending towards merchandise,**
**the elevated food and energy prices, and the**
**recovery of some services. In the case of**
**emerging economies, most members pointed out**
**the impact of exchange rate depreciation on price**
**increases. One member stated that the increase in**
inflationary pressures has coincided with the decline
in the number of infections and the subsequent
increase in mobility and spending. **Some stressed**
that producer prices have been subject to significant
pressures. One member pointed out that consumer
durables have also been subject to pressures,
registering an annual change of 14.9% in November
2021 in the United States, as compared to February
of the previous year, when it registered -0.6%.
He/she stated that inflation has been heterogeneous
in advanced economies, highlighting the case of the
United States, where it has been associated with its
greater spending support programs. He/she detailed
that, in this country, the annual variation of the
personal consumption expenditure price deflator in
October and that of the consumer price index in

1


-----

November, registered their highest values in 31 and
39 years, respectively. **Some members noted,**
nevertheless, that the latest data related to the
manufacturing sector's purchasing managers' index,
such as outstanding orders, delivery times, and sea
freight rates, have shown an improvement at the
margin.

**Some members pointed out that inflation dynamics**
have affected inflation expectations in the main
advanced economies. **One member said that**
inflationary pressures could last longer than
expected, given that headline and core inflation have
been above their central banks' targets for several
consecutive months. He/she stated that in the main
advanced economies, expectations for the next 12
months have reached historic highs, although longterm expectations have remained stable. **Another**
member stated that in the United States, short- and
medium-term inflation expectations of businessmen,
consumers, and those implicit in fixed-income
markets have increased. **One member mentioned**
that inflation in that country will remain high during
2022. He/she added that upward pressures will
continue in emerging economies as well. **Another**
member pointed out that the forecasts of central
banks and international organizations anticipate a
significant decline in inflation during the second half
of 2022. He/she pointed out that commodity prices
decreased in the last month, particularly those of
basic energy commodities. He/she stated that as the
sanitary problem continues to be resolved and
uncertainty lessens, supply restrictions and price
pressures will begin to ease.

**One member considered that this environment poses**
considerable challenges for inflation in the face of: i)
disruptions and lack of flexibility in the supply of
multiple products; ii) the concentration of spending
on consumption of goods; iii) transfers to

households; and iv) the increase in financial savings
that may sustain high spending patterns going
forward. He/she added that this makes it more
complex to anticipate the duration of pressures on
global inflation. He/she expressed that the risks for
price formation at a global level, and their possible
influence on our country, are considerable and rising.
He/she highlighted that Mexico has one of the largest
gaps in headline and core inflation among emerging
economies.

**All members stated that the Federal Reserve**
**announced an acceleration of the removal of**
**monetary stimulus, doubling the pace of**
**reduction of its net asset purchases. One member**
mentioned that this purchase program is expected to


end in March 2022. **All members noted that**
**FOMC's projections for the federal funds rate**
**point to larger increases than previously**
**anticipated.** **They** **noted** **that** **they** **now**

**incorporate up to three increases by 2022. Some**
members noted the Fed's change in discourse
towards a more restrictive policy stance, as it no
longer considers the increase in inflation to be a
transitory phenomenon. One member added that the
Fed pointed out that supply-related issues and the
reopening of the economy have exerted pressure on
prices. **Another member mentioned that it is still**
expected that a negative real interest rate will be
maintained until 2024. He/she noted that the Fed's
gradual and clear communication has avoided abrupt
fluctuations in financial markets, and that it has been
careful not to withdraw its monetary stimulus
prematurely.

**The majority agreed that at a global level central**
**banks are expected to adopt progressively less**
**accommodative policy stances.** **One member**
added that while most central banks maintain an
accommodative stance, their narrative has started to
become more restrictive. **Another** member

mentioned that a large number of emerging
economies have accelerated their interest rate
raising cycles. One member detailed, however, that
the vast majority continue providing significant
stimulus despite headline inflation being above their
targets. He/she highlighted the cases of Chile,
Colombia, Peru, Hungary, and Poland. **Another**
member reflected upon the fact that, while advanced
economies, which for many years have had inflation
and its expectations below their targets, have more
room for maneuver, in emerging economies,
particularly in Mexico, price formation can be more
easily contaminated. He/she emphasized that
emerging economies face two considerable

challenges: i) the significant inflationary pressures to
which they have been subject for months; and ii) the
expectation of tighter global financial conditions in
the near future. He/she pointed out that for
economies that are already facing significant
inflationary pressures, deferring their monetary
policy response to synchronize it with that of the
Federal Reserve would imply the risk of

contaminating inflation expectations, eroding the
credibility of monetary authorities, and would require
greater adjustments in the future. He/she added that,
on the contrary, inducing more restrictive monetary
conditions in a timely manner would avoid a greater
impact on price formation and would favor a more
orderly adjustment in the economy as a whole, which
would lead to better conditions to face episodes of

2


-----

volatility. He/she stated that this reflection applies to
the case of the Mexican economy.

**The** **majority** **mentioned** **that** **international**

**financial markets exhibited greater volatility,**
**associated with the new variant of the virus, the**
**expectation** **of** **an** **earlier-than-anticipated**

**normalization of monetary policy by the main**
**central banks, and the increase in world inflation.**
**They highlighted the increase in interest rates of**
**short-term government bonds, particularly in the**
**United States, which contributed to a generalized**
**appreciation of the US dollar. Some members**
highlighted the increase in risk aversion in equity
markets. **One member stated that stock markets in**
advanced economies fluctuated markedly, although
he/she pointed out that in the United States, gains
were reported given the Federal Reserve's decision.

**Some members mentioned that, in this context,**
financial markets of emerging economies exhibited a
negative bias. One member noted that stock markets
fell, interest rates increased, and currencies
depreciated against the US dollar, although these
last ones registered a favorable behavior after the
Federal Reserve's announcement. Another member
stated that capital flows channeled to fixed-income
instruments registered outflows, while those destined
to equity showed positive movements. The majority
**mentioned that looking ahead, global financial**
**conditions are expected to tighten in light of the**
**expected earlier withdrawal of monetary stimulus**
**by the Federal Reserve. One member stated that**
this will be a risk factor for capital flows in emerging
economies.

**_Economic activity in Mexico_**

**The majority mentioned that information up to**
**October shows a recovery of economic activity,**
**after the contraction observed during the third**
**quarter. However, they noted that the recovery**
**remains fragile, incomplete and heterogeneous**
**across sectors. One member noted that activity will**
close the year below pre-pandemic levels. Another
member noted that the pandemic remains the main
risk to economic activity. He/she added that the new
variant of the virus could represent a setback to the
recovery.

**On the demand side, most members highlighted**
**that** **non-automotive** **manufacturing** **exports**

**remained at high levels in October. However,**
**they mentioned that disruptions in supply chains**
**persist** **and** **pointed** **out** **that** **automotive**

**manufacturing** **exports** **registered** **another**

**decline in October. One member mentioned that in**


that month, said exports were 9.04% lower than in
February 2020. **Another member noted that after**
having driven the economic recovery, exports have
lost momentum. **The majority underlined that**
**consumption showed a certain recovery in**
**September, although** **some members pointed out**
that its recovery remains weak. **Some members**
stated that consumption could continue recovering
during the fourth quarter and **one indicated that it**
would be supported by the increase in the wage bill
and in remittances. **The majority mentioned that**
**investment** **continued** **showing** **a** **lack** **of**

**dynamism as it registered a contraction in**
**September.** **One member highlighted that the fall in**
investment, both in construction and in machinery
and equipment, places it as one of the most lagging
variables, which shows the need to foster conditions
conducive to investing. Another member pointed out
that it remains stagnant since March and 16% below
its highest level reached in 2018. He/she stated that
timely indicators suggest that its lack of dynamism
will continue during the fourth quarter.

On the supply side, some members mentioned that
industrial production improved in October, mainly
driven by manufacturing, particularly of transport
equipment. **One** member highlighted that

construction contracted once again in October.
Looking ahead, another member pointed out that a
rebound in industrial production is anticipated,
especially in non-automotive manufacturing, driven
by external demand. **One member mentioned that**
the performance of services remains heterogeneous
across subsectors. He/she indicated that, within
business-support services, those related to

employment fell sharply in September, as a reflection
of the labor outsourcing reform. He/she mentioned
that the services sector is expected to slightly
rebound in October.

**The majority noted that the labor market**
**continues** **recovering,** **although** **it** **remains**

**affected relative to pre-pandemic levels. One**
member highlighted that in October the levels of
labor participation and employment improved.
**Another member noted the recovery in formal**
employment, which has already exceeded the level
observed in February 2020. He/she added that
separations and hires caused by the new labor
outsourcing reform appear to have compensated
each other, thus maintaining employment at stable
levels. **One member pointed out that, although the**
level of alternative unemployment declined slightly in
October, it remains above pre-pandemic levels.
**Another member pointed out that both national and**
urban unemployment rates are above pre-pandemic

3


-----

levels, and that the underemployment rate is above
11%. Some members underlined that the recovery in
the labor market remains uneven in terms of gender.
**One member added that inequality is also observed**
by age groups. **Most members** **noted that the**
**recent increase in the minimum wage could exert**
**pressures on labor costs. One member stated that**
the increase in the unit labor cost indicates an
upward trend, as a result of an increase in mean real
wages and a decline in productivity.

**All members agreed that slack conditions have**
**persisted. Most members pointed out that**
**significant differences are still observed across**
**sectors. One** member noted that output gap
estimations indicate that slack conditions remained
wide during the fourth quarter. **Another member**
mentioned that the deviation of economic activity
from the trend that would have been observed in the
absence of the pandemic is of around 10%. **One**
member considered that slack conditions remain
sensitive to both direct and indirect factors
associated with the pandemic, and, to a lesser
extent, to monetary conditions. **Some members**
highlighted the problems to measure slack conditions
in the economy. **One** member underlined that
underestimating the amount of slack could lead to
equivocal decisions, as it could contribute to
overestimate the magnitude of demand-related
inflationary pressures and to underestimate the costs
associated with a less accommodative policy stance.
**Another member warned that the negative output**
gap is probably being overestimated in view of a
lower potential GDP, given that supercore inflation
has continued following an upward trend despite the
ample slack conditions.

**_Inflation in Mexico_**

**All members stated that global and domestic**
**inflationary pressures continue affecting annual**
**headline and core inflation. Most members**
**mentioned that in November annual headline**
**inflation reached its highest level since January**
**2001. They highlighted that the prices of more**
**than half of the generic items that comprise the**
**CPI are growing at rates above 5%. One member**
noted that the monthly inflation rate exhibited an
increase unseen for the month of November since
1998. Another member highlighted that in November
it once again exceeded the projections of both private
sector economic analysts and Banco de México.
He/she considered that the fact that the annual
growth rates of multiple components are above the
inflation target reflect not only problems associated
with products affected by bottlenecks, but rather a


generalized problem. One member pointed out that
the inflation rates of all CPI components show clear
upward trends, which suggests that the peak has not
been reached. **Some members underlined that**
different inflation indicators, such as the trimmed
mean indicator and supercore inflation point to a
steady upward trend. **One member added that the**
trimmed mean indicator of headline inflation was
5.75%, its highest level in a series calculated starting
in 2003.

**Most members stated that, due to the deep**
**economic integration with the United States, the**
**higher levels of inflation in that country have**
**contributed to the rebound in inflation in Mexico.**
**One member highlighted that in the United States the**
producer price index reached 9.6%, while in Mexico
it registered an annual change of 9.9% in November.
**Another** member underlined that, considering the
high levels of inflation that will persist in the United
States in 2022, there could be more imported
inflation. **Some members pointed out that headline**
inflation is currently influenced by an adverse base
effect, as a result of an extension in the number of
days that comprise the “Buen Fin” discount sales
campaign during 2020. One member mentioned that,
considering the aforementioned, in November last
year, annualized monthly inflation was exceptionally
low and close to zero, and core inflation registered
deflation. He/she added that, even if in November
this year monthly inflation would have been in line
with its historic average, the annual rate would have
exceeded 7% in either case, given that 67% of the
increase in annual inflation between October and
November is attributed to the base effect. He/she
pointed out that the rest of the increase in inflation
was due to additional pressures. However, these
occurred in a context of higher mobility and spending,
due to an improvement in the indicators of contagion,
and thus there is no reason for the sudden increase
in demand to repeat itself.

**All members mentioned that core inflation faced**
**pressures in merchandise prices and a rebound**
**in services prices. Some members highlighted that**
the core component accumulated 12 consecutive
monthly increases in November. **Some members**
noted that in said month annual core inflation was the
highest in 20 years. One member pointed out that it
has been above 4% since March, and that supercore
inflation is increasingly close to surpassing it.
**Another member considered core inflation dynamics**
a cause of concern, as, after having shown a
resistance to decline until 2019, it has been clearly
following an upward trend, indicating that there has
been a pass-through of second-round effects to the

4


-----

rest of the economy. **One member pointed out that**
the increase of annual core inflation in October and
November is largely explained by the base effect
related to greater number of days comprising last
year’s “Buen Fin” sales campaign. **Most members**
**mentioned that merchandise prices have reacted**
**to the increase in international prices and to**
**disruptions in productive processes. Some**
members mentioned that pressures have continued
to intensify both on food and non-food merchandise.
**One member highlighted that the above occurred**
despite the “Buen Fin” sales. **Another member**
pointed out that over 70% of merchandise
components registered annual changes above 5%.
He/she added that the increase in merchandise
prices is higher than that registered in 2009, when
the peso depreciation exceeded 35% at some point.
**Some members pointed out that the variation in**
services prices continues to rebound, reaching levels
close to 4%, pressured by components different from
education and housing. **One member mentioned**
that, despite the recent increase in annual inflation,
the biennial annualized inflation of services remains
around 3%, which indicates that pressures on this
component remain limited. **Most members stated**
**that pressures on non-core inflation increased.**
**They highlighted the annual rates of change of**
**agricultural and livestock product prices, and**
**energy** **prices.** **One** member added that

government-authorized prices are accumulating cost
pressures that could cause an increase in inflation
next year. **Another member stated that non-core**
inflation has almost reached its highest level in
twenty years.

**All members mentioned that headline and core**
**inflation expectations for 2021, 2022 and for the**
**next 12 months increased again, along with**
**medium-term** **expectations,** **while** **long-term**

**expectations have remained stable at levels**
**above the target. Most members pointed out that**
**expectations corresponding to the end of 2022**
**are already above the upper limit of the target**
**range. One member mentioned that more than half**
of the private sector economic analysts interviewed
believe that inflation will be above 4% in the next 12
months and in 2022, and that the probability that it
will be above 5% has started to increase. **Another**
member stated that the deterioration in short-term
expectations is estimated to extend until 2023, given
that monthly inflation expectations have consistently
been below observed figures. However, one member
mentioned that the National Survey on Consumer
Confidence (ENCO, for its acronym in Spanish)
shows a more favorable outlook for expectations for
the next 12 months, given that these do not show a


significant upward trend, have not reached their
worst level since the beginning of the pandemic, and
are far below the levels reached during the 2017
inflationary episode. **Another member noted that**
analysts do not expect inflation to decrease as fast
as estimated by the central bank and that there is a
significant discrepancy regarding the rate of
decrease of the core component. He/she pointed out
that the increase in medium-term headline inflation
expectations is worrying, as these are at 3.68%
despite the fact that the ones corresponding to the
following two years are at 3.5%. He/she noted that
this indicates the presence of doubts regarding the
convergence of inflation to its target in the medium
term. One member stated that, if the deterioration in
medium-term expectations is not addressed, these
could contaminate long-term expectations. **Some**
members highlighted that inflation expectations
drawn from market instruments remain high. **One**
member pointed out that they are above those drawn
from surveys. **Another member added that said**
expectations have continued following an upward
trend, particularly those of 1- to 5-year expectations.
**One member mentioned that the average of 6- to 10-**
year expectations is at 3% and that they show a lower
variability than short-term ones. **Another member**
stated that inflationary risk premia decreased during
last month. One member considered the high levels
of the breakeven inflation rate implicit in medium- and
long-term bonds as worrisome. **Some members**
warned that de-anchoring of inflation expectations is
one of the most important challenges faced by
monetary policy.

**All members stated that the forecasts for**
**headline and core inflation were once again**
**revised upwards, especially those for 2022. The**
**majority of members mentioned that it is**
**expected that, in its annual measurement, they**
**will decrease to a larger extent after one year and**
**that they will converge to the 3% target by the end**
**of the forecast horizon. Some members noted that**
the upward revisions reflect an exchange rate
depreciation and additional inflationary pressures.
**One member mentioned that the systematic**
revisions to the inflation forecast show how difficult it
has been to determine the duration of bottlenecks,
how long high transportation and freight costs will be
maintained, and the unusual variations in

commodities. **Some members pointed out that the**
pressures originate from the core component. **One**
member added the effects registered in non-core
inflation and a higher-than-expected increase in
minimum wages. He/she stated that upward
revisions to forecasts have been made for over six
months and that the most recent one was of

5


-----

considerable magnitude. **Another member noted**
that the core component shows a strong upward
adjustment, especially for the first quarter of 2022,
although it is expected to decline from the second
quarter of that year. **One member considered that**
supply chain disruptions and input shortages are
likely to remain until mid-2022, and that their effects
could be exacerbated by the new variant of the virus.
He/she noted that it cannot be expected that an
economic slowdown will contain the increase in
prices. He/she added that the emergence of new
shocks and a more adverse behavior of the non-core
component could prevent the convergence to the
target within the forecast horizon. Another member
stated that providing the annualized seasonally
adjusted quarterly inflation forecasts in each
monetary policy decision will give the public greater
elements for evaluating and monitoring the current
inflationary environment, which will contribute to
better price formation.

**Some members mentioned that the phenomenon of**
readjustment in relative prices and the arguments
about the transitory nature of inflationary pressures
no longer seem appropriate to explain the current
situation, since the increase in inflation has been
persistent and widespread. One member highlighted
that headline inflation and its components show an
upward trend under different methodologies. He/she
added that this phenomenon has begun to
contaminate inflation expectations and that the
prolonged duration of price increases is not only a
reflection of bottlenecks, but also of global demand
pressures. **Another member noted that the debate**
on the transitory nature of the pressures has been
left behind given the accumulation of inflationary
shocks that will last for a longer period of time and
whose effects will outlast the pandemic. He/she said
that the high breakeven inflation rate implicit in
medium- and long-term bonds reflects the fact that
investors perceive inflationary pressures to be more
permanent. One member noted that a large part of
the inflationary shocks has been associated with the
pandemic and that these have coincided with other
shocks whose origins precede the pandemic. He/she
added that the slow fading and uncertain duration of
these shocks could lead to a scenario where high
inflation synchronizes with new shocks that prevent
the convergence of inflation and de-anchor

expectations. Another member mentioned that longterm expectations drawn from market instruments
are close to 3%, which is consistent with the
perception that pressures are transitory. He/she
stated that, although the shocks have been
prolonged, it is important to remember that their
origin was due to the change in consumption patterns


and supply restrictions that have generated an
increase in the prices of goods at a global level; to
the increase in international commodity prices; and
to a reversion in the trend of prices of services and
some goods, which means that their inflation levels
will be high for some more months, without this
implying a lack of control in the price formation
process. He/she pointed out that the first two factors
are affecting domestic prices despite the domestic
slack conditions. He/she estimated that pressures
will tend to fade insofar as the world economy
continues evolving towards a more homogeneous
recovery, with more control of the pandemic, which
will favor the mitigation of the abovementioned
supply restrictions. He/she noted that signals in this
direction are already beginning to be observed, such
as food and industrial inputs price stability and
improvements in transportation indicators.

**Among upward risks to inflation, the majority of**
**members** **highlighted** **external** **inflationary**

**pressures. Some members mentioned cost-related**
pressures, an exchange rate depreciation and
energy price increases. **One member added the**
persistence of core inflation at high levels. **Some**
members mentioned the effects of the recent
increase in the minimum wage. One member stated
that this could be observed as a result of the growing
proportion of workers with a salary close to this new
reference value. **Another member stated that this**
wage policy, together with the deterioration of labor
productivity, is an internal factor that could reinforce
inflationary pressures and trigger a wage-price spiral,
eroding workers' purchasing power. **One member**
added as a risk the pressures that are still being
observed in the prices of commodities, food, and in
producer prices, in addition to the volatility of the
exchange rate. He/she highlighted that those core
inflation items that are more susceptible to the
exchange rate and energy prices could continue
registering larger increases. Among downward risks,
**another member pointed out: i) the widening of the**
negative output gap, ii) social distancing measures,
and iii) exchange rate appreciation. The majority of
**members mentioned that the balance of risks**
**with respect to the expected trajectory of**
**inflation over the forecast horizon deteriorated**
**further and remains biased to the upside.**

**_Macrofinancial environment_**

**Most members noted that domestic financial**
**markets have recently registered volatility. Some**
members mentioned that this was due to both
international and idiosyncratic factors. In this regard,
**one member pointed out the central bank’s**

6


-----

succession process. He/she mentioned that risks to
financial markets increased moderately. **The**

**majority of members noted that the peso**
**depreciated. One** member noted that this was a
result of the Federal Reserve's less accommodative
policy stance, the deterioration of the trade balance,
and the greater local uncertainty. **Another member**
explained that the national currency proved to be
highly sensitive to fluctuations in global financial
markets, especially in relation to other emerging
market currencies. In this context, **some members**
warned about the negative variation in the holdings
of foreign investors in peso-denominated assets.
**One member added that, recently, long-term bond**
holdings, which had been relatively stable, have also
been affected, despite the fact that Mexico keeps a
better relative position as compared to other
emerging market economies. **Another member**
stated that foreign holdings of government securities
as a percentage of the total amount outstanding
reached their lowest level in a decade. He/she
mentioned that capital flows are more sensitive to
interest rate spreads. **Some members mentioned**
that medium- and long-term interest rates registered
upward adjustments, influenced by external

conditions. They noted that the Mexican stock market
performed negatively. One member mentioned that
sovereign risk indicators increased and **another**
member noted that there is an increase in risk
aversion by the private sector, which is showing a
preference for highly liquid assets over term
instruments. He/she mentioned that net corporate
debt placements in the domestic and foreign markets
exhibited low dynamism, reflecting a cautious
behavior.

**One** member mentioned that credit to firms and
households remains deteriorated, and that financing
to Small- and Medium-sized Enterprises (SMEs) is
still more than 12% below pre-pandemic levels.
**Another member noted that the contraction in**
domestic credit is due to factors that are beyond the
reach of monetary policy, such as business agents’
reluctance to invest. **One member noted that the**
corporate credit portfolio increased slightly in
October, which contributed to mitigate its annual
contraction. He/she added that monetary aggregates
continue registering a slowdown compared to last
year, although they remain at high levels.

**_Monetary policy_**

**The Governing Board evaluated the magnitude**
**and diversity of the shocks that have affected**
**inflation and the factors that determine it, along**
**with the risk of price formation becoming**


**contaminated, and the challenges posed by the**
**ongoing tightening of monetary and financial**
**global** **conditions.** **Based** **on** **these**

**considerations, on this occasion, the majority**
**of the Board decided to increase the target for**
**the overnight interbank interest rate by 50 basis**
**points to 5.50%. The Board highlighted that,**
**with this action, the monetary policy stance**
**adjusts to the trajectory required for inflation to**
**converge to its target. For the next monetary**
**policy decisions, the Board will monitor**
**thoroughly** **the** **behavior** **of** **inflationary**

**pressures as well as of all factors that have an**
**incidence on the foreseen path for inflation and**
**its expectations. The latter, in order to**
**determine a policy rate that is consistent at all**
**times with the trajectory needed to facilitate the**
**orderly and sustained convergence of headline**
**inflation to the 3% target within the time frame**
**in which monetary policy operates as well as an**
**adequate adjustment of the economy and**
**financial markets.**

**One member stated that in the absence of other**
factors contributing to dissipate pressures on
financial markets and the exchange rate, a moderate
tightening of the monetary policy stance is
necessary. However, he/she warned that this should
be done with caution, given that an overly restrictive
policy stance could affect economic growth and,
eventually, capital flows and the exchange rate,
thereby going against the original objective of the
aforementioned policy. He/she noted that several
emerging market economies were able to provide
greater monetary stimuli in 2020 and 2021 than
Mexico despite having less strong macroeconomic
fundamentals. He/she argued that, if a more gradual
tightening policy had been chosen during 2021, or
more stimulus measures provided during 2020, there
would be more room today to pursue financial
stability and maintain an accommodative policy, as
other emerging economies have done. He/she
mentioned that continuous interest rate increases in
2021 have led to a situation where it may be
necessary to sacrifice this stance to achieve such
stability. He/she added that moving too far ahead of
the Fed's rate normalization process puts the
economy at risk of falling into a trap of low growth
and financial instability. He/she highlighted the
importance of analyzing and communicating the
nature of the current inflationary phenomenon,
related to exogenous and global factors, which will
begin to fade in the following months, and added that
monetary policy can do very little to contain such
pressures. He/she recalled that continuous rate
increases have failed to prevent inflation in Mexico

7


-----

from rising to levels not seen in two decades. He/she
stated that, instead, interest rate increases do imply
a high cost for economic activity in Mexico, affecting
credit, investment, consumption, financial markets
and public finances. He/she considered that the
argument of controlling expectations seems

insufficient to justify the continuous increases, since
short-term expectations have continued to rise
despite the interest rate increases. He/she pointed
out that, on the one hand, not all measurements of
medium-term expectations have been affected, while
long-term expectations are stable, which is

consistent with the transitory nature of inflationary
pressures.

**Another member pointed out that, in light of the**
Federal Reserve's accelerated removal of its asset
purchases, the data regarding inflation, and the
deterioration of its expectations, decisive actions are
essential to promote the anchoring of inflation
expectations. He/she pointed out that monetary
policy reinforcing initiated this year was intended to
act preemptively to avoid possible second-round
effects, a de-anchoring of inflation expectations, and
the contamination of price formation in Mexico, and
that, with this objective, the interest rate had been
raised by 100 basis points. He/she noted that,
despite these increases, the ex-ante real interest rate
has been adjusted by less than a quarter of a
percentage point since June so far, given that
inflation expectations have continued to deteriorate,
which suggests that monetary policy has to be more
decisive in view of the level of observed inflation and
the uncertainty about the duration of the shocks that
are being faced. He/she recalled than in an inflation
forecast targeting regime, the monetary policy stance
must insure that the projected inflation trajectory
tends to converge to the target and that, if monetary
policy adjustments are perceived as highly credible,
then the shocks will not manage to divert inflation
from its target in a sustained manner, expectations
will remain anchored, and there will be gains in the
efficiency of inflation convergence, and thus he/she
considered that maintaining a framework of credible
actions is currently an imperative task. He/she
pointed out that his/her vote seeks to propitiate an
adequate formation of inflation expectations and their
firm anchoring. He/she stated that, given the
macroeconomic fundamentals of the Mexican
economy, the monetary strengthening should not
require increases similar to those observed in other
economies. However, he/she stated that, given the
current uncertain environment, it is necessary to
show an unequivocal commitment to Banco de
México’s constitutional mandate and to take on a
more robust monetary policy approach.


**One member noted that since the previous monetary**
policy decision, inflation has reached very high
levels, with an outlook for longer external and internal
pressures. He/she warned that the contamination of
the price formation process demands a faster, firm
and proactive pace of adjustment that considers all
the factors, not mechanically, but rather upon
adequate consideration. This, in order to maintain an
inflation trajectory convergent to the target, which
allows for the anchoring of expectations and the
synchronization of local and global monetary cycles.
He/she pointed out that a balance must be found
between a weak economic recovery, persistent
inflationary pressures, and the beginning of the new
monetary tightening cycle by the Federal Reserve.
He/she stated that Banco de México’s autonomy, the
impossibility of financing the government, and the
good performance of public finances have prevented
falling into a situation of fiscal dominance. However,
he/she pointed out that the argument of not raising
the rate because it would have an effect on public
spending through an increase in financial costs, may
introduce elements of fiscal dominance that would
harm the proper functioning of monetary policy.
He/she highlighted that it is essential to send clear
signals of commitment to the primary mandate in
order to preserve the institution’s credibility. To this
end, he/she was of the opinion that the inflation
forecast targeting regime, which relies on the
transmission channel of expectations, should be
strengthened. He/she pointed out that considering
that an increase in the monetary policy rate sends the
opposite signal by increasing inflation expectations,
is not consistent with the current monetary strategy
and leads to the danger of inflation that is higher and
difficult to control, similar to what Turkey is currently
undergoing. He/she argued that a proactive attitude
prevents a further deterioration of expectations.
Therefore, he/she emphasized that the monetary
policy response should be proportional to the
inflationary outlook in order to preserve credibility
and the long-term anchoring of expectations. He/she
stated that, looking ahead, the Governing Board will
continue to work together to find the best strategy to
meet Banco de México's primary mandate in the
current complex environment.

**Another member considered that, in view of inflation**
risks and of the adjustments to forecasts, and in
order to serve responsibly the central bank's primary
mandate, it is essential to increase the pace of
removal of monetary stimulus. He/she emphasized
that, in the absence of a more decisive and forceful
action that ratifies the commitment to the primary
objective, there is a risk of losing credibility and of a
de-anchoring of inflation expectations, which would

8


-----

imply exceedingly costly measures for the

population, especially for those of lower incomes.
He/she argued that in view of the results obtained so
far, the monetary policy strategy should be
reconsidered. He/she noted that the inflationary
outlook has deteriorated during the year to levels not
seen in two decades, while the response has
remained gradual, cautious and data-dependent.
He/she stated that this was made feasible by a policy
stance in June 2021 that allowed some margin to
adopt a gradualist approach. He/she stated that the
continuous upward revisions to the inflation forecasts
show that the strategy has not been effective in
containing inflation and its expectations. He/she
pointed out that this strategy poses a risk for Banco
de México’s expectations and credibility, in the event
that there is a perceived lack of consistency between
the monetary policy statements and the actions
taken. He/she noted that the monetary policy
statement should emphasize the deterioration of the
inflation outlook and the upward bias of the balance
of risks. He/she added that the statement should
endorse the commitment that the necessary actions
will be taken to ensure the convergence of inflation
to the target and the firm anchoring of expectations.
He/she highlighted that inflationary pressures from
abroad and due to supply shocks will remain even
with the monetary policy stance adjustment;
nevertheless, the latter mainly seeks to strengthen
the expectations channel and limit demand-related
pressures. He/she added that this adjustment places
Banco de México strategically to face the tighter
global financial conditions that will be observed
during 2022, especially considering that the Mexican
peso is strongly exposed to external shocks, and
above all given the upcoming shift in advanced
economies’ monetary stimuli, mainly in the United
States. He/she estimated that risks will be faced that
must be addressed in a timely and decisive manner.

**One member highlighted that although the monetary**
policy target rate has increased by 100 basis points
throughout the year, with the increase of more than
80 basis points in inflation expectations for the next
12 months, the ex-ante real rate has remained
practically unchanged between May and November.
He/she argued that the monetary policy stance
should consider: i) the magnitude and diversity of the
shocks that have driven headline and core inflation
to levels unseen in two decades; ii) the persistent
uncertainty about global price dynamics; iii) the high
risk of price formation and inflation expectations
becoming contaminated; and iv) the challenges
faced by a small emerging economy that is highly
integrated to world financial markets, in view of the
tightening of global monetary and financial conditions


that may imply capital outflows and exchange raterelated pressures. He/she added that these

economies, which supplement their internal savings
with external sources, must maintain sustainable
public finances, a monetary policy focused on low
and stable inflation, and a strong financial system.
He/she stated that monetary policy should keep
inflation expectations anchored, bring about orderly
conditions in the exchange market, contain risk
premia along the yield curve, and enable the
convergence of headline inflation to its 3% target.
He/she added that in the current context, the
trajectory of monetary policy implies exceeding the
upper limit of the interval for the neutral rate in real
terms within the forecast horizon. He/she pointed out
that the role of monetary policy is to maintain inflation
around its target, ensuring that the high levels it has
reached are transitory, and avoiding the

contamination of price formation. He/she considered
that tolerating high inflation levels, well above the
target, without making the necessary adjustments,
would affect price formation and lead to a significant
deterioration of domestic financial markets. He/she
underlined that this would represent hindering the
convergence of inflation to its target and would erode
the hard-earned credibility of Banco de México.
He/she emphasized that in the current context, the
central bank’s commitment to its constitutional
mandate of protecting the peso’s purchasing power
must be reinforced.

**3. MONETARY POLICY DECISION**

The Governing Board evaluated the magnitude and
diversity of the shocks that have affected inflation
and the factors that determine it, along with the risk
of price formation becoming contaminated, and the
challenges posed by the ongoing tightening of
monetary and financial global conditions. Based on
these considerations, on this occasion, the Board
decided to increase the target for the overnight
interbank interest rate by 50 basis points to 5.50%.
With this action, the monetary policy stance adjusts
to the trajectory required for inflation to converge to
its 3% target within the forecast horizon.

For the next monetary policy decisions, the Board will
monitor thoroughly the behavior of inflationary
pressures as well as of all factors that have an
incidence on the foreseen path for inflation and its
expectations. The latter, in order to determine a
policy rate that is consistent at all times with the
trajectory needed to facilitate the orderly and
sustained convergence of headline inflation to the
3% target within the time frame in which monetary

9


-----

policy operates as well as an adequate adjustment of
the economy and financial markets.

**4. VOTING**

Alejandro Díaz de León, Galia Borja, Irene Espinosa,
and Jonathan Heath voted in favor of increasing the
target for the overnight interbank interest rate by 50
basis points to 5.50%. Gerardo Esquivel voted in
favor of increasing the target for the overnight
interbank interest rate by 25 basis points to 5.25%.

**5. DISSENTING OPINIONS / VOTES**

**Vote. Gerardo Esquivel**

Expectations of a less accommodative policy stance
by the Federal Reserve affected global financial
conditions. This, along with idiosyncratic factors, has
generated greater uncertainty and volatility in local
markets. For this reason, I believe the monetary
policy stance must be reinforced. This process


should be moderate, as an overly restrictive policy
stance could have several negative implications. A
short-term vision that reacts mechanically with rate
increases before any shock should be avoided.
Understanding and properly communicating the
nature of the current inflationary phenomenon is
crucial. This phenomenon is explained by exogenous
factors that will begin to fade in subsequent months
without the need for prematurely tightening local
monetary conditions excessively. Continued rate
increases did not prevent inflation from rising to
levels unseen in two decades. The reason is that the
origin of this episode is predominantly external. The
argument of controlling expectations, which has
justified said increases, has been disproved by the
facts, since short-term expectations have not
stopped rising despite such increases. In
perspective, it should be considered that getting too
far ahead of the Fed's normalization process puts the
economy at risk of falling into a trap of low growth
and financial instability.

10


-----

**ANNEX**

The information in this Annex was prepared for this
meeting by the staff of Banco de México’s Directorate
General of Economic Research and Directorate
General of Central Bank Operations. It does not
necessarily reflect the considerations of the
members of the Governing Board as to the monetary
policy decision.

**A.1. External conditions**

**A.1.1. World economic activity**

Available information shows that world economic
growth has moderately increased during the fourth
quarter of 2021, heterogeneously across countries,
depending on the evolution of the pandemic and the
actions taken by their public health, monetary, and
fiscal authorities. World industrial production and
international trade in goods have been affected by
the persistence of bottlenecks in global supply
chains. These bottlenecks have increased as a result
of stimulus spending and the reallocation of spending
towards merchandise consumption in the context of
the pandemic. Prospective indices suggest a
recovery in manufacturing and services activity
(Chart 1), despite the resurgence of infections in
several countries and the emergence of the Omicron
variant of the SARS-CoV-2 virus. World inflation
continued to rise, pressured by bottlenecks in
production, the reallocation of spending towards
merchandise, high food and energy prices, and the
recovery of some services. In most major economies,
both advanced and emerging, inflation remained
above their central banks' targets.

In this context, the monetary authorities of most of
the main advanced economies have begun the
process of reducing their monetary stimulus, and the
greater inflationary pressures have generated
expectations that, in some cases, such as that of the
US Federal Reserve, they will hasten it. In emerging
economies, several central banks intensified their
reference rate increases. In this environment, during
most of the period, financial markets

1 Expressed as a quarterly annualized rate, US seasonally
adjusted GDP grew at a rate of 2.1% during the third quarter of
2021.


registered greater volatility, associated with higher
inflationary pressures, the expectation of an earlierthan-previously-expected reduction of monetary
stimulus in some advanced economies, the evolution
of the pandemic, and uncertainty in light of the
emergence of the Omicron variant of the SARS-CoV2 virus and its possible effects on economic recovery
and inflation.

Among the risks to the global economy, those
associated with the pandemic, inflationary pressures,
and adjustments to monetary and financial conditions
stand out, as does the possibility that disruptions in
supply chains may last longer than expected. Also,
although some of the factors that have driven world
inflation are expected to have a temporary effect on
annual inflation, a scenario in which these could
become more persistent cannot be ruled out, which
would lead to a faster tightening of monetary policy
in some countries and generate new episodes of
volatility in financial markets.

**Chart 1**
**Global: Purchasing Managers’ Index:**
**Production Component**

Diffusion Index, s. a.

65

60

55

50

45

40

35 Manufacturing

Manufacturing (excl. China)

30 Services

Services (excl. China)

25

November

20

2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021

s. a. / Seasonally adjusted figures.
Source: IHS Markit.

In the United States, after having grown 0.5% during
the third quarter at a seasonally adjusted quarterly
rate,[1 ] available indicators suggest that economic
activity accelerated its pace of expansion during the
fourth quarter (Chart 2). This reflects the advances in
the vaccination process and a decline in the number
of infections as compared to the summer months.
Growth is expected to have been driven by

11

|Chart 1 Global: Purchasing Managers’ Index: Production Component Diffusion Index, s. a.|Col2|
|---|---|
|||
|Manufacturing Manufacturing (excl. China) Services Services (excl. China)|November|


-----

household consumption, which in turn was supported
by still accommodative financial conditions, favorable
household finances, and relatively high levels of
employment. Available data on capital goods orders
suggests a rebound in investment, while indicators
on business inventories suggest that these could
contribute positively to growth during the fourth
quarter. Net exports are also expected to have a
positive contribution given the rebound in exports,
especially automotive ones. Regarding progress on
the approval of a social spending package, although
it has already been approved by the House of
Representatives, it still needs to be ratified by the
Senate.


10

8

6

4

2

0

-2

-4

-6

-8

-10

-12


50

45

40

35

30

25

20

15

10

5

0

|Chart 2 US Real GDP and Components Quarterly percentage rate and contributions in percentage points, s. a.|Col2|Col3|Col4|Col5|Col6|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|Private consumption expenditures Residential investment Nonresidential investment Change in private inventories Net exports Government consumption expenditures Total||||||
|I II III IV 2016|I II III IV 2017|I II III IV 2018|I II III IV 2019|I II III IV 2020|I II III IV 2021|


s. a. / Seasonally adjusted figures.
Note: The shaded area refers to Blue Chip's forecasts of December 2021.
Source: BEA and Blue Chip.

US industrial production grew at a monthly rate of
1.6% in October, after having contracted 1.3% in
September. This reflected a generalized growth in its
main sectors. Particularly noteworthy was the 4.1%
expansion in mining as a result of the normalization
of oil and gas extraction activities, following the
dissipation of the adverse effects of Hurricane Ida in
the Gulf of Mexico region at the end of August and
beginning of September. The manufacturing sector
exhibited a recovery, driven by the petrochemical
and automotive sectors. The Purchasing Managers'
Index (PMI) of the manufacturing sector suggests
that the sector will continue to be affected by the
persistence of bottlenecks, high input costs, and
labor shortages.

2 In annualized terms, euro area GDP registered a quarter-onquarter seasonally adjusted variation of 9.3% during the third
quarter of 2021.


The US labor market continued to recover in
November, although at a slower pace than in
previous months. The non-farm payroll increased by
210 thousand jobs in that month, after having
expanded by 546 thousand jobs in October, which
reflects a moderation in the growth of the leisure and
hospitality sectors. In November, the level of
employment was 3.9 million below pre-pandemic
levels, while the unemployment rate declined from
4.6% in October to 4.2% in November, due to the
strong expansion of employment.

In the euro area, available indicators suggest that,
during the fourth quarter, economic activity

moderated its pace of recovery, after having
expanded 2.2% at a seasonally adjusted quarterly
rate in the third quarter.[2] The lower dynamism may
respond to the impact on production chains and the
reimposition of containment measures in response to
the increase in the number of COVID-19 cases,
although these have varied in magnitude and
duration within the economies of the region. Despite
the aforementioned, economic activity would

continue being supported by domestic demand,
particularly household consumption, which has been
favored by the recovery of the labor market.
Likewise, public and private investment have started
to show the effects of the implementation of the
Recovery and Resilience Facility Plan. The

unemployment rate decreased from 7.4% in
September to 7.3% in October. Meanwhile, the
Purchasing Managers' Indices suggest that

economic activity will continue to recover, although it
will still be affected by the aforementioned factors.

In the United Kingdom, available indicators point to a
sustained recovery of economic activity during the
fourth quarter of 2021, after having expanded at a
seasonally adjusted quarterly rate of 1.3% during the
third quarter.[3] Economic activity has been supported
by domestic demand, as the recovery in employment
has translated into a recovery in household
consumption. However, distortions in supply chains,
the high number of COVID-19 cases, and the
weakness in trade and investment associated with its
exit from the European Union (Brexit) continued to
affect the economic recovery. Regarding the labor
market, the unemployment rate declined from 4.3%
in September to 4.2% in October. The Purchasing
Managers' Indices suggest that manufacturing and
services activities will continue recovering.

3 In annualized terms, the quarterly seasonally adjusted variation
of UK GDP during the third quarter of 2021 was 5.1%.

12


-----

In Japan, available information suggests that, after
having contracted at a seasonally adjusted quarterly
rate of 0.9% during the third quarter, economic
activity rebounded during the fourth quarter due to
the lifting of the state of emergency and the easing of
supply restrictions.[4] In particular, household

consumption, especially of services, registered
significant growth in October as mobility restrictions
were lifted. Production and exports, mainly of
automobiles and industrial inputs, recovered,

although they continued to be affected by bottlenecks
and shortages of semiconductors. Meanwhile, the
unemployment rate declined from 2.8% in

September to 2.7% in October. Purchasing

Managers' Indices suggest that activity in the
services and manufacturing sectors continued to
recover during the remainder of the fourth quarter.
The recovery of economic activity would continue to
be driven by the government's recently announced
fiscal stimulus package, which is expected to be
approved by the end of 2021.

During the fourth quarter, the main emerging market
economies have grown heterogeneously across
regions and countries, depending on the evolution of
the pandemic and the exposure of each country to
the impact on global supply chains, as well as, in
some cases in Latin America and Emerging Europe,
the tightening of financial conditions. In Latin
America, indicators point to a continued recovery of
economic activity in most countries, although in some
cases at a slower pace than in the previous quarter.
In Emerging Asia, available information suggests
robust GDP growth in most economies, due to the
gradual normalization of productive activities after
the emergence of new COVID-19 cases in the
previous months. In particular, in China, timely
indicators point to an increase in economic activity
mainly explained by a recovery in private

consumption and a favorable performance of
industrial production. In Emerging Europe, available
indicators suggest that economic activity will
continue to recover, although in some cases at a
more moderate pace in view of the imposition of new
restrictions due to the resurgence of COVID-19
cases in the region.

International commodity prices have been on a
downward trend since Mexico's previous monetary
policy decision. After reaching in October their
highest levels in more than seven years, oil prices
declined during most of November due to concerns

4 In annualized terms, Japan GDP declined at a quarter-onquarter seasonally adjusted variation of -3.6% during the third
quarter of 2021.


about the increase in COVID-19 cases in some
regions, mainly in Europe, and the resulting
downside risk to the recovery of world crude oil
demand. At the beginning of December, prices rose,
as the gradual reduction in production cuts by
members of the Organization of the Petroleum
Exporting Countries (OPEC) and other producers is
not expected to counteract the increasing oil demand
in the coming months. Natural gas prices have
registered a mixed performance across regions,
decreasing in the United States due to higher
production and lower demand resulting from warmerthan-expected temperatures, while in the European
and Asian markets, reference prices continue
trending upwards. The price of most grains declined
based on reports of a higher-than-expected global
production and uncertainty regarding future demand.
In recent weeks, the prices of most industrial metals
have been subject to downward pressures due to
concerns associated with the new Omicron variant of
the SARS-CoV-2 virus and its possible impact on
global economic activity.

**A.1.2. Monetary policy and international financial**
**markets**

World inflation continued increasing in both

advanced and emerging countries, pressured by
bottlenecks in production chains, the reallocation of
spending towards merchandise, high food and
energy prices, and the recovery of some services.
Headline inflation in most of the main advanced
economies continued to be above their central banks'
targets, except for Japan (Chart 3). In this context,
short-term inflation expectations drawn from surveys
continued to increase for these economies, while
longer-term inflation expectations drawn from
financial instruments remained relatively stable.

13


-----

**Chart 3** **Chart 4**

**Selected Advanced Economies:** **Reference Rates and Trajectories**

**Headline Inflation** **Implied in OIS Curves[1/]**

Annual percentage change Percent

6.0 United States PCE 1/
5.5 United States CPI 3.0% **― US Federal Reserve** 2/ Next increase up to Dec.10, 2021 3/
5.04.5 Japan 3/Euro area 2/ 2.5% **――― Bank of Japan Bank of England Bank of Canada** Next increase up to Nov.5, 2021
4.0 **― European Central Bank deposit rate**
3.53.0 United KingdomCanada 2.0% **―--- OIS implicit trajectory Nov.5, 2021 OIS implicit trajectory Dec.10, 2021**
2.5 1.5%
2.0
1.5 1.0%
1.0
0.5 0.5%
0.0

-0.5 0.0%
-1.0
-1.5 October -0.5%
-2.0 October End of End of End of End of
-2.5 November -1.0% 2020 2021 2022 2023
-3.0 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023

2005 2009 2013 2017 2021 1/ OIS: Fixed floating interest rate swap where the fixed interest rate is

1/ The personal consumption expenditure deflator is used. associated to the effective overnight reference rate.
2/ Preliminary figures for November. 2/ For the observed reference rate of the US, the average interest rate of
3/ Excludes fresh food. This series does not exclude the effect of the rise in the target range of the federal funds rate (0.0% - 0.25%) is used.
consumption tax in May 2014 and October 2019, nor the effect of the free 3/ A first increase of 25bps is assumed for the US Federal Reserve and the
daycare and preschool program in October 2019. Bank of Canada, 15 bps for the Bank of England and 10 bps for the
Source: Bureau of Economic Analysis, Bureau of Labor Statistics, Eurostat, European Central Bank and the Bank of Japan.
Bank of Japan, Statistics Canada, Office of National Statistics. Source: Banco de México with data from Bloomberg.

Among the recent monetary policy decisions in the

In most of the main emerging market economies, main advanced economies, the following stand out:
inflation continued increasing as a result of the same
factors that affected inflation in advanced economies, i) At its December meeting, the US Federal
although in some cases the depreciation of their Reserve left its target range for the federal funds
exchange rates has also influenced said results. rate unchanged at 0.0-0.25%. It indicated that it
Moreover, in most of these economies, inflation will be appropriate to maintain that range until
remained above their central banks' targets, except labor market conditions have reached levels
for some in the Asian region, such as Indonesia and consistent with its estimate of maximum
China, which have faced less disruptions from the employment, acknowledging that inflation has
pandemic. It is worth noting that continued pressures exceeded the 2% level for some time. In addition,
from bottlenecks in global supply chains have been considering the evolution of inflation and the
reflected in higher producer prices in both advanced improvement in the labor market, the Federal
and emerging economies, suggesting that world Open Market Committee (FOMC) decided to
inflation could be subject to upward pressures for a accelerate the removal of monetary stimulus,
longer time. doubling the pace of reduction of net asset

purchases. The monthly reduction in Treasury

In this context, most central banks in advanced securities net purchases was adjusted from USD
economies have started to remove their monetary 10 billion to USD 20 billion starting in January,
stimulus, and the persistence of inflationary while in agency mortgage-backed securities net
pressures has led to the expectation that, in some purchases, it was adjusted from USD 5 billion to
cases, this will be done at a faster pace. In this USD 10 billion. The Committee's medians for
regard, the Federal Reserve doubled the pace of its growth expectations were revised downwards for
asset purchase reduction and released forecasts for 2021 and 2023 and upwards for 2022, while
the federal funds rate in 2022 and 2023 with higher those for the unemployment rate for 2021 and
than anticipated increases. Expectations drawn from 2022 decreased. The medians of headline
financial instruments anticipate interest rate inflation expectations were revised from 4.2 to

increases in most of the main advanced economies 5.3% for 2021, from 2.2 to 2.6% for 2022, and
throughout 2022 (Chart 4). from 2.2 to 2.3% for 2023, and inflation is

expected to be 2.1% in 2024. Regarding the
timing of interest rate increases, the Fed’s
Chairman pointed out that all Committee
members expect that the conditions for this to

14


-----

happen will materialize next year, and that they
anticipate a gradual pace of interest rate
increases that will place the federal funds rate
around its estimated long-term level by the end
of 2024. In this regard, the medians of the
Committee's projections published in December
show an increase in the reference interest rate
from 0.3 to 0.9% for 2022, from 1.0 to 1.6% for
2023, and from 1.8 to 2.1% for 2024. The above
suggests the expectation of three 25 basis points
interest rate increases by the end of 2022. This
trajectory for the federal funds rate compares to
that implied by financial instruments, which
incorporates the expectation of around three
increases by the end of 2022.

ii) At its December meeting, the European Central

Bank (ECB) left its refinancing rate, key deposit
facility rate and key lending facility rate
unchanged at 0.0, -0.5 and 0.25%, respectively.
It also reiterated that the ECB board expects
these interest rates to remain at current or lower
levels until: i) inflation reaches the 2% target
before the end of its forecast horizon; ii) inflation
remains at that level for a sustained period of
time over its remaining forecast horizon; and iii)
the central bank considers that progress in core
inflation is sufficiently advanced to be consistent
with the stabilization of inflation at 2% over the
medium term. Regarding its Pandemic

Emergency Purchase Program (PEPP), it stated
that: i) during the first quarter of 2022, it will make
net asset purchases at a slower pace than in the
fourth quarter of this year; ii) it will end net asset
purchases by the end of March 2022; and it will
extend until at least the end of 2024 the horizon
for reinvesting the principal of maturing

securities. However, it mentioned that flexibility
will remain an element of monetary policy, that
reinvestments may be adjusted, and that net
purchases under the PEPP could also be
resumed if necessary. In addition, the monthly
pace of purchases under its Asset Purchase
Program (APP) was increased to €40 billion
during the second quarter of 2022, to €30 billion
during the third quarter, returning to its current
level of €20 billion for as long as necessary
starting October 2022, and ending shortly before
interest rates begin to rise. The ECB president
reiterated that, under the current circumstances,
it is very unlikely that interest rates will be raised
in 2022.

iii) At its December meeting, the Bank of England

raised its reference interest rate by 15 basis
points to a level of 0.25%. It noted that while the


Committee considered that there are upside and
downside risks to the inflation outlook in the
medium term, further moderate monetary
tightening over the forecast period is likely to be
necessary in order to meet its 2% inflation target
on a sustainable basis. Regarding its asset
purchase programs, although the Committee
concluded the government bond purchase
program announced in November 2020 as
planned, it left the target amount of its
government bond purchase program unchanged
at £875 billion and the purchase of non-financial
corporate bonds at £20 billion.

In the main emerging economies, given the
continuous rise in inflation and the additional risks to
price formation relative to advanced economies, a
large number of central banks intensified their
reference rate increases. Since the previous
monetary policy decision in Mexico, the central banks
of Peru, Brazil, Chile, Hungary, Poland and South
Africa, among others, raised their interest rates. In
contrast, Turkey's central bank announced additional
interest rate decreases.

In this environment, during most of the period since
the previous monetary policy decision in Mexico,
international financial markets registered a

significant increase in volatility and greater risk
aversion, although this was partially reversed at the
beginning of December (Chart 5). This behavior took
place in an environment of uncertainty regarding the
evolution of the pandemic, the emergence of new
variants of the virus, and the possible impact that a
reimposition of mobility restrictions could have on
economic activity, the increase in inflationary
pressures, and the expectation that the latter would
accelerate the gradual removal of monetary stimulus
in some advanced economies. In this context, the
stock markets of most of the main advanced and
emerging economies performed negatively towards
the end of November, although this trend was
reversed at the beginning of December due to
diminished concerns regarding the severity and
potential impact of the Omicron variant of the SARSCoV-2 virus on economic activity. In foreign
exchange markets, in November, the US dollar
strengthened against most currencies of advanced
economies. The currencies of emerging economies
followed a depreciation trend, although this was
partially reversed in some cases at the beginning of
December (Chart 6). With respect to government
bond interest rates in the main advanced economies,
long-term rates decreased, while short-term rates
increased, particularly in the United States. The
recent increase is in line with expectations of an

15


-----

earlier-than-anticipated removal of monetary

stimulus. Long-term interest rates in emerging
economies showed mixed movements. In this
environment, moderate net capital inflows towards
equity assets in some emerging market economies
and outflows from fixed-income markets in most
cases were observed during the period.

In addition to the aforementioned risks to global
growth, there are still several risks to the stability of
international financial markets that are related to
inflationary pressures, to a disorderly or earlier-thanexpected removal of monetary stimuli resulting in
new episodes of volatility and tighter global financial
conditions, to distortions in the valuation of financial
assets, and to high levels of private and public sector
debt that could result in default or contagion
problems, among others.

**Chart 5**

**Change in Selected Financial Indicators from**

**November 5 to December 10, 2021**

Percent, basis pointsPercentage, basis points


**Chart 6**

**Selected Emerging Economies: Financial**

**Assets Performance since November 8, 2021**

Percent, basis pointsPercentage, basis points


15%

10%


45

30


5%


15

0


0%

-5%


-10%


-15

-30


1/ The MSCI Emerging Markets Index consists of 24 countries. 2/ DXY: a
weighted average estimated by the Intercontinental Exchange (ICE) of the
nominal exchange rate of the main six currencies operated globally with the
following weights: EUR 57.6%, JPY: 13.6%, GBP: 11.9%, CAD: 9.1%, SEK:
4.2%, and CHF: 3.6%. 3/ J.P. Morgan index is constructed with the weighted
average by the nominal exchange rate of emerging economies’ currencies
with the following weights: TRY: 8.3%, RUB: 8.3%, HUF: 8.3%, ZAR: 8.3%,
BRL: 11.1%, MXN: 11.1%, CLP: 11.1%, CNH: 11.1%, INR: 11.1% and
SGD: 11.1%. Source: Bloomberg and ICE.


Note: Interest rates correspond to swap rates at the specified terms, except
for Hungary, where government securities with 3-year (instead of 2-year)
maturities where used as a reference. For the Philippines, a 2-year swap
rate is used.
Source: Bloomberg.

**A.2. Current situation of the Mexican economy**

**A.2.1. Mexican markets**

Since the previous monetary policy decision,
financial asset prices in Mexico have exhibited a
negative behavior (Chart 7), in an environment of
volatility in global financial markets and in which the
normalization of monetary policy by the central banks
of the major advanced countries is anticipated to
begin earlier-than-previously expected.

The Mexican peso fluctuated in a wide range of 1
peso and 61 cents, between 20.32 and 21.92 pesos
per dollar, ending the period with a depreciation of
2.57% (Chart 8). This occurred in a context in which
both spot- and future trading conditions deteriorated
with respect to the previous period.

16


-----

**Chart 7**

**Mexican Markets’ Performance**

Percent, MXN/USD and index


**Chart 9**

**Nominal Yield Curve of Government Securities**

Percent, basis points


9.0

8.0

7.0

6.0

5.0

4.0

3.0

2.0

1.0

0.0


22.5

22.0

21.5

21.0

20.5

20.0

19.5

19.0


54,000

52,000

50,000

48,000

46,000

44,000

42,000

40,000


M Bond


4.0

3.5

3.0

2.5

2.0

1.5

1.0

0.5

0.0

Inflation-indexed bonds


Range in year Range since last monetary policy decision Nov-11-21 Dec-10-21


Source: Prepared by Banco de México.

**Chart 8**

**Mexican Peso Exchange Rate with Moving**

**Averages**
MXN/USD


Trading range over the period

Note: The chart does not include bonds maturing in December 2021 and
June 2022. CETES with similar maturities are considered.
Source: PIP.


**Chart 10**

**Compensation for Inflation and Inflationary Risk**

**Implicit in Government Securities’ Interest Rate**

Basis points

550


25.50
25.00
24.50
24.00
23.50
23.00
22.50
22.00
21.50
21.00
20.50
20.00
19.50
19.00
18.50
18.00
17.50
17.00


2020 2021

Source: Prepared by Banco de México.

Interest rates of government securities exhibited a
steepening (Chart 9), with movements between -9
and 4 basis points in bonds of shorter terms and
increases of up to 11 basis point in long-term ones.
In contrast, the yield curve of real interest rate
instruments exhibited a flattening dynamic, with
increases of up to 19 basis points in short-term
Udibonos and of between -1 and 4 basis points in
long-term ones. In this context, compensation for
inflation and inflationary risk implicit in spreads
between nominal and real rates of market

instruments decreased for most terms (Chart 10).
These movements took place in an environment in
which trading conditions deteriorated during the
period covering the monetary policy decision.


Source: PIP.

In line with the swap mechanism established
between Banco de México and the Federal Reserve,
on November 10 a dollar funding auction was held in
which resources totaling USD 50 million were
allocated.

Regarding expectations for the trajectory of the
monetary policy reference rate, information implied
by the Interbank Equilibrium Interest Rate (TIIE, for
its Spanish acronym) swap curve incorporates an
increase of around 62 basis points for the December
2021 and February 2022 meetings, while for the end
of 2022 it points to a reference rate close to 7.23%
(Chart 11). Finally, most forecasters surveyed by
Citibanamex anticipate the reference rate to increase

17


-----

by 25 basis points to 5.25% for the December 2021
decision and a rate of 6.25% for the end of 2022.

**Chart 11**

**Banco de México Overnight Interbank Rate**

**Implied in the TIIE IRS Curve**

Percent


16

12

8

4

0


**Chart 12**

**Gross Domestic Product**

Quarterly percentage change, s.a.


8.50
8.25
8.00
7.75
7.50
7.25
7.00
6.75
6.50
6.25
6.00
5.75
5.50
5.25
5.00
4.75
4.50
4.25
4.00
3.75


-4

-8


J  M  M  J   S  N  J M  M  J   S  N  J M  M  J   S  N
2020               2021               2022

Source: Prepared by Banco de México with Bloomberg data.

**A.2.2. Economic activity in Mexico**

During the third quarter, economic activity halted its
recovery (Chart 12), in a context of an upsurge of the
pandemic, persistence of disruptions in global supply
chains, and a transition towards the new regulation
on labor outsourcing. Information available up to
October shows some reactivation of economic
activity. A heterogeneous performance of economic
activity across sectors and uncertainty regarding the
evolution of the pandemic in light of the emergence
of new variants persist.

As for external demand, in October the value of nonautomotive manufacturing exports remained at high
levels, while automotive exports continued to be
affected by production issues worldwide (Chart 13).[5]
By destination, manufacturing exports to the United
States showed a certain lack of dynamism at the
margin, while those to the rest of the world followed
a downward trajectory.


-12

-16 25/10/2021

-20 I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV I22/10/202121/10/2021II III IV I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV I Q-III II III

2013 2014 2015 2016 201720/10/20212018 2019 2020 2021

s. a./ Seasonally adjusted figures. 19/10/2021
Source: Mexico’s System of National Accounts (SCNM, for its Spanish 18/10/2021

15/10/2021

acronym), INEGI. 14/10/2021

**Chart 13 13/10/2021**

**Total Manufacturing Exports 12/10/202111/10/2021**

Indices 2013 = 100, s.a. 08/10/2021

180 07/10/2021

Total 06/10/2021


J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O

2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021

s. a. / Seasonally adjusted series and trend series based on data in nominal
US dollars. The former is represented by a solid line and the latter by a
dotted line.
Source: Prepared by Banco de México with data from the Tax
Administration Service (SAT, for its Spanish acronym), the Ministry of the
Economy (SE, for its Spanish acronym), Banco de México, the National
Institute of Statistics and Geography (INEGI, for its Spanish acronym).
Mexico’s Merchandise Trade Balance, and the National System of
Statistical and Geographical Information (SNIEG, for its Spanish acronym),
Information of national interest.

According to its monthly indicator, at the end of the
third quarter, private consumption registered a
moderate recovery, after the weak performance
exhibited in previous months. Within it, consumption
of services recovered slightly, although it still remains
below the levels observed in February 2020.
Consumption of goods of national origin exhibited a
lackluster performance and that of goods of imported
origin an incipient downward change of trend. In
September, gross fixed investment partly reversed
the moderate recovery of the previous two months.


160

140

120

100

80

60

40

20


0


5 Refers to the value of merchandise exports in US dollars. This
value differs from that reported for goods exports by Mexico’s
System of National Accounts (SCNM, for its acronym in


Spanish), given that the latter represents the value-added
measured in constant pesos.


18


-----

This reflected the reduction of spending in both
construction and machinery and equipment.

As for production, in October industrial activity
partially recovered from the decline observed during
the previous month, although it still remained weak
(Chart 14). The result in that month was driven by the
behavior of manufacturing, although disruptions in
global supply chains and shortages of certain inputs
persist (Chart 15). Mining continued to show a
lackluster performance, while construction followed
an incipient downward trend. In September, services
fell for the fourth consecutive month, with marked
differences across its sectors. A decline was
observed in professional, corporate and business
support services (related to the entry into force of the
new regulation on outsourcing) and in retail trade. In
contrast, the increases in transportation and mass
media information services; wholesale trade

services, as well as temporary accommodation and
food and beverage preparation services stood out.

**Chart 14**

**Global Indicator of Economic Activity**

Indices 2013 = 100, s. a.

120 140

115 130

110 120

105 110

100 100

95 90

90 80

Total IGAE 1/

85 70

Industrial production 2/

80 60

Services IGAE 1/

75 50

Agricultural and livestock products IGAE 1/

70 40

65 September 30

October

60 20

J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O

2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021

s. a. / Seasonally adjusted and trend series. The former is represented by a
solid line and the latter by a dotted line.
1/ Figures for September 2021.
2/ Figures for October 2021, Monthly Indicator of Industrial Activity.
Source: Mexico’s System of National Accounts (SCNM, for its Spanish
acronym), INEGI.


s. a. / Seasonally adjusted and trend series. The former is represented by a
solid line and the latter by a dotted line.
1/ Figures in parenthesis correspond to their share in the total in 2013.
Source: Mexico’s System of National Accounts (SCNM, for its Spanish
acronym), INEGI.

Regarding the economy's cyclical position, slack
conditions remained significantly ample during the
third quarter of the year, with marked differences
across sectors (Chart 16). In October, several labor
market indicators showed some improvement,
partially reversing the weakness they had registered
during the previous two months. In particular, the
labor participation rate and the employment-toworking age population ratio increased, after having
declined for two consecutive months. The national
unemployment rate remained at a level similar to that
of the previous month, while the urban

unemployment rate decreased (Chart 17). In
November, based on seasonally-adjusted figures,
the creation of IMSS-insured jobs was slightly above
February 2020 levels, prior to the health emergency.
Finally, in September, unit labor costs in the
manufacturing sector increased, reflecting the
behavior of both real average earnings and labor
productivity (Chart 18).

19


**Chart 15**

**Industrial Activity1[/]**

Indices 2013 = 100, s, a.


130

120

110

100

90

80 Total

Mining (22.3%)

70 Manufacturing (49.7%)

Construction (23.3%)

60

Utilities (4.7%)

October

50

J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O

2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021


-----

**Chart 16**

**Output Gap Estimates[1/]**

**Excluding Oil Industry[4/ ]**

Potential output percentages, s. a.


**Chart 18**

**Productivity and Unit Labor Costs in the**

**Manufacturing Sector[1/]**
Indices 2013 = 100, s. a.


12

8

4

0

-4

-8

-12

-16

-20

-24


September


J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S

2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021

s. a. / Calculations based on seasonally adjusted figures.
1/ Output gap estimated with a tail-corrected Hodrick-Prescott filter; see
Banco de México (2009), “Inflation Report, April-June 2009”, p.74.
2/ GDP figures up to Q3 2021, and IGAE figures up to September 2021.
3/ Output gap confidence interval calculated with a method of unobserved
components.
4/ Excludes both oil and gas extraction, support services for mining, and
petroleum and coal products’ manufacturing. Source: Prepared by Banco
de México with INEGI data.

**Chart 17**

**National and Urban Unemployment Rates**

Percent, s. a.

8.5

National unemployment rate

8.0

7.5 Urban unemployment rate

7.0

6.5

6.0

5.5

5.0

4.5

4.0

3.5

3.0

October

2.5

J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O

2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021

s.a./ Seasonally adjusted series and trend series. The former is represented
by a solid line and the latter by a dotted line.
Source: Prepared by Banco de México with data from ENOE, ETOE (from
April to June 2020), and ENOE new edition (ENOEN) from July to date.


170

Unit labor costs

160

Productivity

150

140

130

120

110

100

90

September

80

J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S

2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021


s. a. / Seasonally adjusted and trend series. The former is represented by a
solid line and the latter by a dotted line.
1/ Productivity based on hours worked. Source: Prepared by with seasonally
adjusted data of the Monthly Manufacturing Industry Survey and industrial
activity indicators of Mexico’s System of National Accounts (Sistema de
_Cuentas Nacionales de México, SCNM), INEGI._

In October 2021, domestic financing to firms
continued moderating its contraction in real terms at
an annual rate. This was observed for both large- and
smaller-sized firms, with the latter standing out for
registering an increase at the margin in their portfolio
balances for the fourth consecutive month. The
demand for corporate credit continued to recover,
although it remains at low levels. Lending conditions
to firms have remained relatively stable so far this
year; thus, they continue to be tight. In October and
November, net corporate debt issuance in the
domestic market showed a low dynamism. In terms
of credit to households, the housing portfolio
continued to show a positive real annual variation,
with the greater dynamism of commercial bank credit
during the last four months standing out. In turn, the
outstanding consumer bank loan portfolio reduced its
annual rate of contraction for the seventh

consecutive month, where the sustained dynamism
in payroll loans and an increase in the balance of
credit card portfolio at the margin stand out. This
occurred in a context of a gradual recovery of
household demand for credit. As for lending
conditions, mortgages remained stable, while in the
case of consumer portfolio, those for credit cards and
payroll loans eased, while those for the rest of the
segments remained tight.

Interest rates of bank credit to firms have followed the
dynamic of the bank funding rate. Intermediation
margins remained relatively stable, registering high
levels, although close to pre-pandemic levels. In turn,
mortgage interest rates remained at levels around
their historic lows. In August, credit card and
personal credit interest rates were at levels similar to
those observed during the first quarter of the year.

20


-----

Thus, consumer credit intermediation margins
remained at levels higher than pre-pandemic ones.
With respect to portfolio quality, in October, corporate
loan delinquency rates decreased and continued at
low levels. Mortgage loan delinquency rates
decreased for the second consecutive month and
also remained at low levels. Finally, consumer
portfolio delinquency rates remained without

significant changes, after having decreased for
seven consecutive months, although they remain at
high levels.

**A.2.3. Development of inflation and inflation**
**outlook**

Annual headline inflation increased from 6.24 to
7.37% between October and November (Chart 19
and Table 1). This behavior was determined by the
increase in non-core inflation, associated with the
higher levels of inflation of agricultural and livestock
products and energy, while core inflation continued
to rise, reflecting cost-related pressures, the
reallocation of household spending towards

merchandise, and the effects of the reopening of
several activities, which keep pushing merchandise
and services inflation.

**Chart 19**

**Consumer Price Index**

Annual percentage change

13

12 CPI

11 Core

10

Non-core

9

8

7

6

5

4

3

2

1

0

-1

-2

-3 November

J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S

2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021

Source: Banco de México and INEGI.

Between October and November 2021, annual core
inflation rose from 5.19 to 5.67%, thus accumulating
twelve consecutive months of increases. Within it,
annual merchandise inflation rose from 6.58 to
7.24%, driven by the disruptions in production and
supply chains, bottlenecks and the resulting higher
production costs, coupled with the reallocation of
spending towards these goods (Chart 20). The above
is taking place in a context of global supply and
demand imbalances. In particular, between October
and November 2021, annual food merchandise
inflation increased from 7.16 to 7.59%, while nonfood merchandise inflation rose from 5.94 to 6.86%
(Chart 21). The behavior of both of them was also


influenced upwards, to some extent, by the fact that
the "El Buen Fin" discount sales campaign that takes
place in November had a shorter duration in 2021
than in the previous year. Between October and
November 2021, the annual inflation of services
increased from 3.64 to 3.92%, reflecting the
reopening of these activities and the high demand
that had been contained for several months,
combined with the increase in business operating
costs due to the restrictions associated with the
pandemic. Worth highlighting is the increase from
5.11 to 5.60% in the annual inflation of services other
than education and housing, within which the highest
annual variations in the prices of air transportation,
food services and tourism services stood out.

**Chart 20**

**Merchandise and Services Core Price Sub-index**

Annual percentage change

8

Merchandise

7 Services

6

5

4

3

2

1

November

0

J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S

2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021

Source: Banco de México and INEGI.

**Chart 21**

**Merchandise Core Price Sub-index**

Annual percentage change

8

7

6

5

4

3

2

1

Food, beverages and tobacco Non-food merchandise November

0

J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S

2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021


Source: Banco de México and INEGI.

Between October and November 2021, annual noncore inflation rose from 9.47 to 12.61% (Chart 22 and
Table 1). This behavior reflected the increase from
9.02 to 14.36% in the annual inflation of agricultural
and livestock products, associated in turn with the
greater annual variation of fruit and vegetable prices,
which went from 5.72 to 17.80%, while the annual

21


-----

inflation of livestock products registered levels of
11.98 and 11.44%, respectively. Likewise, during this
period, annual energy inflation rose from 13.44 to
15.41%.

As for inflation expectations drawn from Banco de
México’s Survey among Private Sector Forecasters,
between October and November, the median of
expected headline inflation for the end of 2021
increased from 6.63 to 7.22%, while that for core
inflation went from 5.30 to 5.50%. Median

expectations for the end of 2022 were adjusted from
3.84 to 4.03% for headline inflation, while those for
core inflation remained at 3.83%. The medians of
headline and core inflation expectations for the
medium term were adjusted upwards, from 3.60 to
3.68% and from 3.56 to 3.60%, respectively. Longterm inflation expectations remained at around
3.50%. Finally, compensation for inflation and
inflationary risk decreased, but remains at high
levels. Expectations implicit in market instruments
continued trending upwards, while the inflation risk
premium decreased slightly, although it remains at
high levels.


J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S

2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021

Source: Banco de México and INEGI.

Headline and core inflation forecasts were once
again revised upwards, especially for 2022. Their
annual variations are expected to decrease to a
larger extent after one year, and converge to the 3%
target by the end of the forecast horizon. These
projections are subject to risks. On the upside: i)
external inflationary pressures; ii) cost-related
pressures; iii) core inflation persistence at high
levels; iv) exchange rate depreciation; and v)
increases in agricultural and livestock product prices
and in energy prices. On the downside: i) a widening
of the negative output gap; ii) social distancing
measures; and iii) exchange rate appreciation. The
balance of risks for the trajectory of inflation within
the forecast horizon has deteriorated further and
remains biased to the upside.

22


**Chart 22**

**Non-core Price Sub-index**

Annual percentage change


25

20

15

10

5

0

-5

-10

-15


November


-----

**Table 1**

**Consumer Price Index and Components**

Annual percentage change

**Item** **September 2021** **October 2021** **November 2021**

**CPI** **6.00** **6.24** **7.37**

**SubyacenteCore** **4.92** **5.19** **5.67**

**Merchandise** **6.26** **6.58** **7.24**

Food, beverages and tobacco 6.87 7.16 7.59

Non-food merchandise 5.59 5.94 6.86

**Services** **3.43** **3.64** **3.92**

Housing 2.26 2.37 2.46

Education (tuitions) 2.04 2.09 2.09

Other services 4.78 5.11 5.60

**No SubyacenteNon-core** **9.37** **9.47** **12.61**

**Agricultural and livestock products** **10.41** **9.02** **14.36**

Fruits and vegetablesFruits abd vegetables 9.38 5.72 17.80

Livestock productsLivestock 11.29 11.98 11.44

**Energy and government-authorized prices Energéticos y Tarifas Aut. por Gobierno** **8.55** **9.82** **11.26**

Energy productsEnergy 11.69 13.44 15.41

Government-authorized pricesTarifas Autorizadas por Gobierno 1.86 1.88 1.97

Source: INEGI.


23


-----

-----

