-----

-----

**FOREWARNING**
This document is provided for the reader’s convenience
only. The translation from the official Spanish version was
made by Banco de México’s staff. Discrepancies may arise
between the original document in Spanish and its English
translation. For this reason, the original Spanish version is
the only official document.


**1. PLACE, DATE AND PARTICIPANTS**

**1.1. Place: Meeting held by virtual means.**

**1.2. Date of Governing Board meeting: August 10,**
2022.

**1.3. Participants:**

Victoria Rodríguez, Governor.
Galia Borja, Deputy Governor.
Irene Espinosa, Deputy Governor.
Gerardo Esquivel, Deputy Governor.
Jonathan Heath, Deputy Governor.
Rogelio Eduardo Ramírez, Secretary of Finance and
Public Credit.
Gabriel Yorio, Undersecretary of Finance and Public
Credit.
Elías Villanueva, Secretary of the Governing Board.

Prior to this meeting, preliminary work by Banco de
México’s staff analyzing the economic and financial
environment as well as the developments in inflation
and the determinants and outlook for inflation, was
conducted and presented to the Governing Board
(see Annex).

**2. ANALYSIS AND RATIONALE BEHIND THE**
**GOVERNING BOARD’S VOTING**

**_International Environment_**

**Most members stated that global economic**
**activity weakened during the second quarter.**
**They pointed out that, timely indicators suggest**
**said weakness would persist during the third**
**quarter. They mentioned that economic activity**
**was mainly affected by the slowdown in China, in**
**view of mobility restrictions, the adverse effects**
**of the military conflict, and the tightening of**
**global financial and monetary conditions. They**
**highlighted specifically, that in the United States**
**GDP fell for the second consecutive quarter. One**
member stated that this was associated with a
decrease in inventories, and, to a lesser extent, with
a decline in investment. He/she added that certain
indicators associated with the real estate sector of
that country registered a considerable moderation.


**Nevertheless, most members highlighted that job**
**creation in the United States accelerated at the**
**beginning of the third quarter. One member**
mentioned that this is considered to be incompatible
with a recession scenario. Another member pointed
out that an incipient change of trend is starting to be
observed in certain indicators, such as vacancies
and initial unemployment insurance claims.

**Most members underlined that global economic**
**growth forecasts have been revised downwards.**
**They added that fears of recession in the near**
**future have escalated. Among the risks to the**
**global** **economy** **they** **highlighted** **those**

**associated** **with** **the** **pandemic,** **greater**

**adjustments** **to** **monetary** **and** **financial**

**conditions, and the intensification of geopolitical**
**tensions. Some members indicated that these**
factors have resulted in an environment of
uncertainty and risk aversion. **One member**

considered that the balance of risks to global
economic activity remains biased to the downside.

**Most members pointed out that world inflation**
**continued increasing, in some cases once again**
**reaching** **levels** **unseen** **in** **decades.** **This**

**occurred in an environment where imbalances**
**between demand and supply in diverse markets**
**and high levels of food and energy prices persist.**
**However,** **they** **highlighted** **that** **different**

**commodity prices have stabilized recently and**
**have even decreased. Some members added that**
disruptions in supply chains have decreased at the
margin. **One member underlined that the expected**
trajectories for inflation in the short-term in the main
advanced economies were revised upwards, albeit
maintaining the convergence to their respective
central banks’ targets towards the end of 2023 and
the beginning of 2024. Another member mentioned
that the increase in input and final goods’ prices
reported in purchasing managers’ surveys has
moderated, that inflation expectations implicit in
market instruments have decreased, and that global
aggregate spending has moderated. He/she argued
that the above-mentioned facts allow to foresee that
the downward adjustment in world inflation has
already begun. He/she pointed out that said progress
is reflected in the latest figure for US inflation. Most
**members pointed out that, although headline**
**inflation in the United States decreased between**
**June and July, it still remains high.** **One member**
considered that there are signs indicating that it has
reached a peak. **Another member underlined that**
core inflation remained high, reflecting labor market
pressures. **Some members indicated that the**
personal consumption expenditure deflator

1


-----

increased between May and June. **One member**
pointed out that around 70% of the components of
this inflation indicator registered annual variations
above 4%. Another member stated that in the euro
area annual headline inflation continued increasing
between June and July. Some members noted that
inflation also continued increasing in emerging
economies. One member pointed out its persistence
in Latin America, where the declines in commodity
prices have not been reflected in lower levels of
inflation, which could imply the presence of secondround effects.

**All members stated that a large number of central**
**banks continued raising their reference rates.**
**Most members noted that, in some cases, they**
**did it in a greater magnitude than previously**
**expected. Regarding the Federal Reserve, they**
**stated that in its latest monetary policy decision**
**it raised the target range for the federal funds rate**
**by 75 basis points for a second consecutive time**
**and anticipated future increases. Some members**
indicated that the European Central Bank raised its
reference rate by 50 basis points. **One member**
added that said institution announced its strategy to
prevent the fragmentation of European sovereign
debt markets, to reestablish orderly trading

conditions, and to limit the risks for monetary policy
implementation. As to emerging economies, he/she
pointed out that their central banks also continued
raising their reference rates. **Another member**
mentioned the presence of certain heterogeneity in
monetary tightening in these economies, which
depends on whether there are demand pressures or
not, and on the observed levels of inflation. He/she
indicated that, in most of them, real interest rates
remain at low or even negative levels. He/she added
that Mexico continues to be one of the economies
with the highest real interest rate worldwide.

**Most members stated that uncertainty prevails**
**regarding the future trajectory of monetary policy**
**worldwide. They underlined that several central**
**banks have adopted a forward guidance that**
**conditions reference rate adjustments to the**
**evolution of data. Some members agreed that the**
slowdown of global economic activity has moderated
expectations of a faster reduction of the monetary
stimulus. **Some members added that, in certain**
economies, interest rates are expected to decrease
starting in the second quarter of 2023. One member
pointed out that financial markets anticipate the
Federal Reserve’s rate to be above 3.5% by the end
of 2022. **Another** member highlighted that,

according to the Federal Reserve, the magnitude of
the subsequent rate increases is yet to be discussed.


**One member mentioned that according to such**
institution, although the interest rate already lies at a
neutral level, the need for the rate to attain to a more
restrictive level is foreseen, which generated
uncertainty about the terminal value for the Federal
Reserve’s rate in the current cycle. Another member
stated that a certain unwarranted optimism with
respect to US monetary policy prevails, regarding
expectations of quickly achieving a “soft landing”.
He/she emphasized that a historic analysis of US
disinflationary periods suggests that the current
monetary policy is behind the curve and that a
greater than expected monetary effort is required to
bring inflation back to its target. He/she added that,
over the last decades, the Federal Reserve has not
managed to reduce inflation rates that were higher
than 3% without causing a significant deterioration in
economic activity and employment. For this reason,
he/she considered it surprising that the Federal
Reserve’s projections anticipate a reduction of
inflation in a short period of time, with a low reference
rate, and without affecting employment.

**All members stated that international financial**
**markets registered volatility, in an environment**
**in which financial conditions remained tight and**
**economic activity weakened. Some members**
noted a reduction in risk appetite. **One member**
pointed out that the new geopolitical tensions
between the US and China add to the uncertainty
resulting from the Russian-Ukrainian military conflict.
**Another member added that volatility implicit in**
foreign exchange options signals a greater level of
uncertainty. Most members mentioned that the US
**dollar registered a generalized appreciation.**
**They pointed out a decrease in government bond**
**yields, especially long-term ones. One member**
added that certain forward-looking indicators of
interest rates have trended downwards. Another
member mentioned that corporate bond spreads
exhibited a mixed behavior. Most members pointed
**out that stock markets registered gains. One**
member indicated that this behavior was supported
by the lower costs of financing and, more recently, by
the favorable inflation figures in the United States.
**Another member pointed out that, in emerging**
economies, yield curves registered a mixed behavior,
while the foreign exchange market had a negative
performance and the stock market, a positive one.
He/she underlined that outflows from the equity
market were observed for the first time, while the
fixed-income market maintains a negative balance.
**One member stated that, for most of these**
economies, risk premia had a somewhat positive
behavior during the period.

2


-----

**_Economic Activity in Mexico_**

**Most members pointed out that economic activity**
**continued recovering and that timely information**
**indicates that in** **the second quarter of 2022 it**
**grew at a rate similar to that of the previous**
**quarter.** **Some members underlined that the**
economic recovery continued, despite the complex
environment and the rebound in the number of
infections. However, some members noted that the
recovery is still incomplete. One member highlighted
that monthly Global Economic Activity Indicator
(IGAE, for its acronym in Spanish) figures indicate
that during the period of May-June the recovery rate
moderated slightly. He/she added that some highfrequency indicators suggest that said moderation
might have continued at the beginning of the third
quarter.

**On the supply side, most members stated that**
**industrial** **production** **continued** **recovering,**

**supported by progress in the manufacturing**
**sector. Some members added that a slight recovery**
in the construction sector also contributed. **One**
member pointed out that mining and construction
have remained flat since the first months of 2021.
**Most members indicated that the services sector**
**kept** **expanding,** although **some** members

highlighted that said recovery has been

heterogeneous. **One member noted that both**
industrial activity and services moderated during the
May-June period.

**On the demand side, most members mentioned**
**that consumption continued recovering. Some**
members noted that the recovery has been
observed, to a larger extent, in the consumption of
imported goods. One member pointed out that their
consumption is around 30% above its pre-pandemic
level, while the demand for national goods has barely
reached such level. **Most members stated that**
**different** **indicators,** **such** **as** **consumer**

**confidence, retail sales and real average income,**
**among others, suggest that private consumption**
**has started to decelerate.** Nonetheless, **some**
members mentioned that certain determinants of
consumption, such as remittances and the wage bill
in real terms, remain at high levels. Most members
**highlighted** **that** **investment** **has** **slightly**

**improved, while some members pointed out that it**
slowed down in May. Some members noted that
investment has been driven by spending on
machinery and equipment, while spending on
construction remains sluggish. **Regarding the**
**external sector, most members highlighted the**
**expansion** **in** **manufacturing** **exports,** **both**


**automotive and non-automotive.** **One member**
underlined that the increase in manufacturing exports
has derived from increases in both their volume and
prices. However, **some** members noted a

moderation in their growth rate.

**Most members stated that different labor market**
**indicators** **have** **continued** **to** **improve.**

**Nonetheless, they pointed out that the recovery**
**remains incomplete.** **One member pointed out that**
the improvement in employment has included most
economic sectors. **Another member noted that the**
labor participation rate and the employment rate
among the working age population continued
approaching their pre-pandemic levels, while the
national and urban unemployment rates remained
low. **One member pointed out that annual nominal**
wage revisions of IMSS-insured workers registered
record increases of 11.5% in July, while those of the
private sector fluctuated between 7 and 9%
throughout the year. He/she warned that said
increases may be indicating a certain contamination
towards wages due to the high levels of inflation.
He/she considered that these increases contrast with
the 3.5% average adjustment observed in the public
sector. However, **some members highlighted that**
certain labor market indicators show weakness, such
as the extended unemployment rate, which includes
the unemployed, the underemployed, and individuals
who are not economically active but willing to work,
which still remains above its pre-pandemic levels.

**Most members pointed out that slack conditions**
**in the economy have decreased. However,** **one**
member mentioned that slack in economic activity
and in the labor market remains ample. **Another**
member pointed out that, if professional and
business support services are excluded, the gap
appears to have closed. However, he/she warned
that said estimates should be taken with caution,
given that their measurements exhibit a wide range
of variability, depending on the methodology used.

**Most** **members** **agreed** **that** **an** **uncertain**

**environment for the economic recovery prevails.**
**One member pointed out that the economy is**
expected to continue recovering, albeit at a lower
rate than in the first semester. **Some members**
indicated the presence of risks associated with a
lower external demand from the United States and
with strong inflationary pressures. **One member**
stated that a survey to businesses identified both the
observed and expected behavior of inflation as the
main obstacles to sales and investment, due to its
harmful effects on consumers’ purchasing power and
to the difficulty in making plans for the future. Some

3


-----

members mentioned drought conditions in Mexico as
an additional risk. One member pointed out that this
could affect primary sector activities and the
manufacturing industry in the affected regions. Some
members agreed that the balance of risks for
economic activity is biased to the downside.

**_Inflation in Mexico_**

**All members emphasized the high inflation**
**levels. Most members stated that in July headline**
**and core inflation registered annual rates of 8.15**
**and 7.65%, respectively. One member pointed out**
that the accumulation of unexpected, subsequent,
broad-spectrum, deep and persistent inflationary
shocks has been reflected in the significant price
increases registered by most CPI items. Another
member stated that, on several occasions since the
beginning of 2021, headline inflation has been higher
than expected. One member underlined that in July
the annualized monthly rate of headline inflation was
significantly higher than its pre-pandemic average,
which implies that pressures have continued at the
margin, albeit having declined slightly in relation to
the previous four months. Most members indicated
**that inflation in Mexico is partly attributed to a**
**global phenomenon.** **Some members pointed out**
that this is directly due to the imported content in
goods or, indirectly, due to the incidence of
international references on local prices. One member
highlighted that the above poses a significant
challenge for price formation. Nevertheless, another
member pointed out that certain products’ prices
have also been subject to domestic pressures related
to insecurity in the country. One member mentioned
that headline inflation has been mainly affected by a
greater incidence of the core component. Another
member underlined the sharp upward trend followed
by the inflation of processed and unprocessed foods,
whose incidence accounts for over half of the level of
headline inflation in July, a contribution that is greater
than the nearly one-third that was observed, on
average, between 2017 and 2019.

**Most members mentioned that core inflation**
**remained at high levels. Some members pointed**
out that this component continues on a concerning
upward trajectory. **One member added that it**
continues showing significant persistence. **Another**
member highlighted that it has increased for twenty
consecutive months. He/she noted that all of its
components, except for telecommunication services,
register seasonally adjusted monthly variations that
are above the average of the last ten years. **One**
member pointed out that core inflation remains
subject to pressures related to increases in


production costs, increases of different input prices,
and to disruptions in production and distribution
chains. He/she added that these factors have
hindered the adjustment of supply to the high levels
of demand worldwide. **Some members underlined**
that merchandise inflation reached double digits.
**One member mentioned that its components have**
faced continuous shocks for three years. Most
**members pointed out that food merchandise**
**inflation** **registered** **the** **greatest** **increase,**

**reaching 12.09% in July.** **One member highlighted**
that this component has increased by double digits
for five months and that the outlook is complex, even
if food merchandise prices are excluded from the
core inflation estimation, as is the case in the United
States. He/she pointed out that inflation of non-food
merchandise and of services have settled above 4%.
**Another member expressed his/her concern about**
services inflation, which better reflects domestic
pressures, maintaining an upward trend for over a
year and reaching levels close to 5%. One member
mentioned that said inflation increased as a result of
the higher adjustments in tourism and food services’
prices. He/she highlighted that services inflation is
the highest on record since 2009 and that of services
other than housing and education registered its
highest variation in the last 20 years. **Another**
member noted that, at the margin, pressures on
merchandise prices remained similar to those
observed in recent months, while those on services
prices decreased slightly.

**All members noted that non-core inflation**
**remains at high levels, affected mainly by the**
**prices of agricultural and livestock products.**
**Some members highlighted that these goods**
registered double-digit inflation levels. One member
added that said inflation has been subject to
pressures due to an increase in input prices, such as
those of fertilizers and grains. **Most members**
**mentioned that energy inflation has remained at**
**relatively low levels. Some members pointed out**
that variations in this component have been
contained by Federal Government policies. **One**
member highlighted that the dynamics of the energy
price subindex were influenced by the lower
variations in L.P. gas prices.

**All members mentioned that expectations for**
**headline and core inflation for 2022 rose again.**
**Most members pointed out that those for 2023**
**and for the medium-term increased to a lesser**
**extent.** **One member indicated that expectations for**
the next 12 months have remained stable for five
consecutive months, although above the 3% target.
**Another member noted that even though the**

4


-----

deterioration of medium-term expectations has
eased at the margin, these are still affected. **Some**
members noted that long-term expectations for
headline inflation remained stable, although at levels
above target. Some members highlighted that those
for long-term core inflation increased at the margin.
**One member pointed out that between May and July,**
those corresponding to the next four years went from
3.70 to 3.83%, while those for the next 5 to 8 years
were adjusted from 3.50 to 3.57%. **Some members**
considered the gradual deterioration of long-term
expectations a cause for concern. **One member**
mentioned that this could signal the beginning of a
process of unanchoring of inflation expectations.
**Another member indicated that this could suggest**
negative effects on the price formation process.
Regarding expectations drawn from market

instruments, some members pointed out that these
have continued to deteriorate. However, **some**
members noted that breakeven inflation decreased
for all maturities. **One member underlined that**
longer-term expectations drawn from market

instruments remained at levels close to the 3%
target, although with slight increases at the margin.

**Most members indicated that in view of greater-**
**than-anticipated** **inflationary** **pressures,** **the**

**forecasts for headline and core inflation were**
**revised upwards for the period up to the third**
**quarter** **of** **2023.** **They** **pointed** **out** **that**

**convergence to the 3% target is still projected to**
**be attained in the first quarter of 2024. Some**
members underlined that inflation is still expected to
reach its highest level in the third quarter of 2022.
**One member pointed out that observed and**
expected inflation continue to be at levels

incompatible with the 3% target, in a context of high
uncertainty. **Another member highlighted that**
although it is possible that inflation reaches a peak
during the third quarter, it will almost certainly be
above 8% by the end of the year. He/she pointed out
that, given the persistence of inflation, doubts have
increased as to whether the inflection point in its
trend is near. He/she stated that it is highly probable
that the inflationary peak will be reached later than
expected. He/she said that each revision to the
inflation forecast incorporates the assumption that
inflation will reach a higher level at a later-thananticipated date, and thus it is not possible to assure
that the peak of the inflationary cycle has been
reached.

Among upward risks to inflation, **some members**
mentioned cost-related pressures. **One member**
highlighted labor-related costs. He/she noted that
minimum wage increases above 20% could be


observed in 2022 and 2023. He/she mentioned that
these would materialize just at the time when inflation
is expected to begin converging to its target. Some
members noted that droughts in several areas of the
country could exert further pressure on the prices of
agricultural and livestock products. **One member**
highlighted as additional upward risks: i) the
persistence of core inflation at high levels; ii) the
external inflationary pressures associated with the
pandemic; iii) the continued pressures on agricultural
and livestock product prices and on energy prices
due to the ongoing geopolitical conflict; and iv) an
exchange rate depreciation. Among downward risks,
**one member pointed out: i) a greater-than-**
anticipated slowdown in global economic activity; ii)
a decline in the intensity of the geopolitical conflict;
iii) better functioning of supply chains; iv) a greaterthan-expected effect from the negative output gap;
and v) a larger-than-anticipated contribution from the
Policy Program to Fight Inflation and High Prices
(PACIC, for its acronym in Spanish). He/she stated
that in both Mexico and the rest of the world, inflation
would eventually perform favorably insofar as the
Federal Reserve’s actions contribute to bring down
inflation levels in the United States. Another member
indicated that, although world and US inflation might
have reached a peak, this will not necessarily
translate into an immediate reduction of inflation in
Mexico, given the lag between world and domestic
inflation cycles. **Most members stated that the**
**balance of risks for the trajectory of inflation**
**within the forecast horizon remains biased**
**significantly to the upside.**

**_Macrofinancial environment_**

**Regarding domestic financial markets, most**
**members highlighted the resilience of the**
**exchange rate, although it exhibited episodes of**
**volatility. They highlighted that the resilience of**
**the Mexican peso in relation to other currencies**
**was partly due to the wide volatility-adjusted**
**interest rate spread relative to the United States.**
**They** **also** **highlighted** **Mexico’s** **solid**

**macroeconomic fundamentals.** **One member**
noted that the Mexican peso stood out as the
second-best performing currency during the period,
only slightly behind the Brazilian real.

**Most members pointed out that short-term**
**interest rates increased and longer-term ones**
**decreased. One member mentioned that the**
flattening of yield curves was supported by inflows
into Udibonos and marginally into M-Bonos. He/she
added that the interest-rate spread between
_M-Bonos_ and US Treasuries also adjusted

5


-----

downwards. **Most members noted that the stock**
**market remained stable. One member mentioned**
that this market was recently favored by a greater
appetite for risk. **Another member added that the**
premia reflected by credit default swaps at different
maturities shifted downwards. **Some members**
highlighted that tighter monetary conditions and the
increase in geopolitical tensions are a source of
uncertainty and volatility for domestic financial
markets and have generated an environment of risk
aversion.

**Some members pointed out that the rounds of**
dispute settlement consultations with the United
States and Canada regarding Mexico's energy
policies within the framework of the USMCA could
have significant repercussions for the Mexican
economy. One member warned that they could result
in compensatory tariffs that would translate into
pressures on the country’s balance of payments.
**Another member noted that one rating agency**
ratified the country's sovereign rating while changing
the outlook from negative to stable, while another
one downgraded both the sovereign and Pemex’s
ratings. In this regard, one member pointed out that
there are factors of domestic pressure that could
increase the idiosyncratic risk premium.

**Some members noted that financing conditions for**
the private sector have improved at the margin. They
highlighted that during the second quarter of 2022,
domestic financing to firms continued moderating its
rate of contraction in annual terms. They pointed out
that commercial bank credit to firms continued
recovering. They indicated that this occurred in a
context of increased demand from firms and in spite
of the tighter monetary conditions. **One member**
noted that lending conditions for smaller firms have
become less restrictive since the second half of
2021. He/she added that interest rates on credit to
firms were at levels similar to those observed prior to
the pandemic and that delinquency rates continued
to decrease. In contrast, he/she warned about the
13.6% contraction in the amount of development
banks’ financing to firms, as compared to an
expansion of 2.1% by commercial banks. Regarding
household financing, **another member mentioned**
that mortgage lending continued growing moderately
at a real annual rate. He/she added that consumer
credit continued increasing in real annual terms,
mainly as a result of the sustained dynamism of
payroll credit and the credit-card portfolio, as well as
the recent recovery in the personal-loan portfolio.


**_Monetary policy_**

**The Governing Board evaluated the magnitude**
**and diversity of the shocks that have affected**
**inflation and its determinants, along with the**
**evolution of medium- and long-term inflation**
**expectations and the price formation process. It**
**considered** **the** **increasing** **challenges** **for**

**monetary policy stemming from the ongoing**
**tightening of global financial conditions, the**
**environment of significant uncertainty, and**
**inflationary pressures accumulated as a result of**
**the pandemic and the geopolitical conflict, as**
**well as the possibility of greater effects on**
**inflation. Based on these considerations, all**
**members voted to raise the target for the**
**overnight interbank interest rate by 75 basis**
**points to 8.50%. They highlighted that, with this**
**action, the monetary policy stance adjusts to the**
**trajectory required for inflation to converge to its**
**3% target within the forecast horizon.**

**The Governing Board will thoroughly monitor**
**inflationary pressures as well as all factors that**
**have an incidence on the foreseen path for**
**inflation and its expectations. This, in order to set**
**a policy rate that is consistent at all times, with**
**both the orderly and sustained convergence of**
**headline inflation within the time frame in which**
**monetary policy operates as well as with an**
**adequate adjustment of the economy and**
**financial markets. The Board added that it will**
**assess the magnitude of the upward adjustments**
**in the reference rate for its next policy decisions**
**based on the prevailing conditions.**

**One member stated that, like most economies,**
Mexico has faced a highly complex and uncertain
environment due to the concurrence of shocks that
have caused widespread and large-scale inflationary
pressures. In this context, it has been imperative to
focus on establishing a monetary policy stance
conducive to an adequate adjustment of relative
prices and domestic financial markets. He/she
pointed out that Banco de México has acted timely
and decisively considering: i) the negative impact
that a prolonged period of inflation well above the
target could have on longer-term inflation

expectations; ii) the high social and economic costs
derived from inflation; and iii) the risk of a disorderly
behavior in financial markets, including the foreign
exchange market. He/she recalled that, although
from June 2021 to June 2022 the reference rate has
been raised by 375 basis points, until early 2022, the
impact on the ex-ante real interest rate had been
partially offset by the increase in inflation

6


-----

expectations due to the additional and unexpected
shocks that were observed. However, he/she
estimated that, given the 75 basis points increase of
the previous decision, an additional 75 basis points
increase in the current decision would allow the exante real interest rate to be in restrictive territory.
He/she considered that a smaller increase would be
insufficient for the real interest rate to exceed the
estimated range for the neutral interest rate. He/she
highlighted that it is essential for Banco de México to
act decisively in order to avoid a deterioration in the
price formation process. He/she added that, given
the complexity of the environment, characterized by
tighter global financial conditions and high

uncertainty, it is the central bank's responsibility to
take the necessary measures to comply with its
constitutional mandate, which increases the

importance of decisively raising the reference rate in
the present decision. He/she warned that in order to
guarantee the convergence of inflation to its target,
additional upward adjustments in the reference rate
will be required, the magnitude of which must be
assessed according to the available information.

**Another member stated that the inflationary**
landscape confirms that a process of unanchoring of
inflation expectations is beginning to take place.
He/she underlined that, in his/her opinion, it is
evident that the adjustments implemented in the
monetary policy stance have been insufficient to
counteract the deterioration in the price formation
process and the increase in inflation expectations,
and therefore he/she considered it absolutely
necessary to bring the real interest rate to restrictive
territory. He/she pointed out that only through firm
and decisive actions it will be possible to rebuild the
confidence in the central bank's commitment to the
convergence of inflation to the target within the
forecast horizon. He/she added that the deterioration
in the global economic environment, geopolitical
conflicts, uncertainty about the reestablishment of
supply chains, and the future path of world inflation,
result in an even greater challenge for the conduction
of monetary policy, and that the start of a period of
elevated interest rates and economic weakness may
be witnessed. He/she highlighted that in addition to
figuring out the adequate pace of adjustment, the
duration of the restrictive stance must also be
defined. He/she considered that, currently, the main
risk is the possibility of unforeseen changes in
monetary policy in the United States. He/she argued
that given the complex outlook, it is crucial to
maintain a risk management approach, maintain the
pace of monetary tightening, eliminate inflationary
inertia, strengthen confidence and anchor inflation
expectations at around 3%, as well as to promote an


orderly adjustment of markets in light of tighter
financial conditions. He/she added that the monetary
policy statement should allow to anticipate more
restrictive monetary conditions in the future. He/she
pointed out that given the high uncertainty prevailing
in the economic environment, such forward guidance
should guarantee flexibility and reiterate that Banco
de México will act decisively when required. He/she
mentioned that the number of shocks the economy
has faced, as well as their intensity and duration,
have persistently accelerated inflationary dynamics.
He/she warned that, in accordance with the central
bank’s constitutional mandate, it is the Governing
Board's duty to implement an active monetary policy
that curbs the aforementioned inflationary dynamics
and seeks the stability of prices and of inflation
expectations around the target, thus strengthening
monetary policy’s main transmission channels.

**One** **member stated that the proposed adjustment of**
the reference rate is appropriate for reasons of
financial stability and to avoid second-round effects
on the price formation process. He/she indicated that
these effects occur in view of high and persistent
inflation and consist of prices increasing simply
because they rose yesterday and are expected to do
so tomorrow. To avoid this, and considering the
nature of the shocks, it is necessary to transit to a
moderately restrictive monetary policy stance.
However, he/she warned that an excessive

tightening could imply a high cost in terms of
employment, purchasing power, and economic
activity, and even be counterproductive for

macroeconomic and financial stability. He/she
considered that since the consequences of the
pandemic and the intensification of geopolitical
conflicts are still being experienced, there is high
uncertainty about the effect of the monetary
adjustments on inflation and economic activity,
however, there are signs that an unnecessarily high
level of monetary tightening is soon to be reached.
He/she mentioned that the variables most sensitive
to the monetary policy stance, such as investment,
construction, consumer durables sales and business
credit, have remained weak since before the
pandemic, and that further tightening could affect
their performance even more. He/she added that the
incipient deceleration of production in various
sectors, of private consumption and of investment
suggests that the monetary policy stance might have
already started to have an impact on these variables.
He/she stated that inflationary pressures stem mainly
from external factors, and thus a moderation in
domestic spending would not necessarily translate in
an improvement in the country’s price formation
process. He/she argued that, in the current

7


-----

environment, the use of monetary policy could be
relatively inefficient. He/she mentioned that there are
signs that global pressures have started to ease, and
therefore inflation in Mexico might decline regardless
of the monetary policy stance. He/she indicated that
avoiding an excessively restrictive monetary policy
would imply the possibility of decoupling from the
pace of the Federal Reserve's interest rate hikes
relatively soon. He/she expressed that this is feasible
since: i) the volatility-adjusted interest rate spread
relative to the United States is one of the highest
among emerging economies; ii) the Mexican peso
stands out for its good performance and low volatility;
iii) the Federal Reserve's policy stance is an
important factor to consider, but Mexico’s monetary
policy stance should rely more on the evolution of
domestic variables and on the absolute policy
stance; iv) Mexico started the hiking cycle earlier,
and with a 75-basis point increase the policy stance
would be situated in restrictive territory; v) unlike the
United States, Mexico does not seem to face
inflationary pressures from demand or the labor
market; and vi) inflation in Mexico is closer to its
target than the United States and other countries. For
said reasons, he/she stated that there is room for a
less restrictive monetary policy than in other
emerging countries.

**Another member considered that, given the**
inflationary outlook, the hiking cycle must continue
and a restrictive policy stance must be consolidated
to contain inflation in the short-term and have a policy
stance consistent with a downward path of inflation,
even if this occurs in the medium term. He/she added
that adjustments in the policy rate will not eliminate
global pressures, but will help to avoid second-round
effects. He/she pointed out that there are also
domestic pressures. He/she indicated that there are
no clear signs of deceleration, and that a lower slack
allows for a more restrictive monetary policy stance.
He/she stated that in view of the continuous
deterioration of observed inflation and its

expectations, during this hiking cycle it has been
necessary to increase the pace of tightening two
times. Even so, the ex-ante real interest rate
remained in expansionary territory for almost a year,
and after the last decision it finally reached a neutral
stance. He/she estimated that an increase of 75
basis points would allow to barely reach a restrictive
level, so there should be no concern that the real
interest rate is too high or harmful for economic
activity. He/she highlighted that cyclical conditions
become less important, until inflation is under control.
He/she stated that an interest rate increase lower
than that of the Federal Reserve is not feasible
because: i) the interest rate spread of 600 basis


points relative to the United States has been
sufficient to enable a good performance of the
Mexican peso under episodes of volatility and a
generalized appreciation of the dollar, and

maintaining a relative policy stance would contribute
to avoid episodes of exchange rate volatility; ii) there
is still a sentiment of global risk aversion; and iii)
there are idiosyncratic factors that could increase the
risk premium. He/she pointed out that a change of
direction in the monetary cycle remains distant since:
i) there is no guarantee that the inflationary cycle has
reached a peak; ii) even if it is reached, the reference
rate cannot be lowered too early without being sure
that inflation is clearly trending downwards; and iii)
the deterioration of inflation expectations, especially
long-term ones, might suggest the presence of
negative effects on the price formation process.
He/she stated that it is crucial to provide guidance on
the path of the policy rate, to communicate explicitly
that the hiking cycle is not over yet, to emphasize that
the central bank will act decisively as needed, and
that the Governing Board will monitor the evolution of
the inflationary outlook and the external monetary
conditions to determine whether the pace of
increases in the reference rate will be maintained or
if there is a space that can be used to ameliorate this
pace. He/she stated that the central bank’s reaction
function must be communicated with a clear and
explicit forward guidance. For this purpose, the
qualitative references about the future actions that
have been made in previous communications must
be complemented. He/she mentioned that the
favorable reception of these changes by the public
suggests that communication with forward guidance
in which the path of the reference rate consistent with
the inflation forecast is published should be
analyzed. With such an addition, there would be
greater certainty about the outlook for the current
hiking cycle in order to counterbalance the
uncertainty in the inflationary scenario. He/she
indicated that this exercise of transparency and
accountability would reinforce the credibility on the
central bank's commitment to its mandate.

**One member highlighted that the international**
monetary conditions showed greater tightness and
that geopolitical tensions increased and are an
important source of uncertainty and volatility. He/she
added that inflation continued increasing and that its
expectations are still affected. He/she argued that an
increase of 75 basis points in this decision would
strengthen the absolute monetary policy stance in
two dimensions: i) the ex-ante real interest rate would
exceed the upper threshold of the estimated range
for the neutral rate, which, in his/her opinion, is a key
element for the monetary policy stance to be effective

8


-----

and decisively support the process of inflation
convergence to its target. He/she also added that it
would allow to send a clear signal so that inflation
expectations remain anchored and return to their
previous levels; and ii) the nominal interest rate
would reach the level of headline inflation and
exceed that of core inflation, a circumstance that has
been observed in other monetary cycles before
achieving inflation convergence. He/she added that,
at the global level, during the current monetary cycle,
this situation has been observed in very few
economies. He/she mentioned that, as for the
relative monetary policy stance, the interest rate
spread relative to the United States is above both its
historical average and the average observed during
previous hiking cycles. He/she argued that there are
two elements that indicate that the current relative
monetary policy stance is competitive: i) when the
interest rate spread relative to the United States is
measured through ex-ante real interest rates, a much
more solid policy stance in terms of level, speed and
celerity can be noted, highlighting that said
soundness has even been transmitted along the yield
curve, where medium and long-term interest rate
spreads are at high levels; and ii) since Mexico is an
economy that complements its sources of financing
with foreign savings, it is important to note that the
interest rate spread has been complemented by
favorable expectations on the performance of the
Mexican peso with respect to other emerging
economies' currencies, even when such indicators
are adjusted for volatility. He/she argued that the
current environment of high uncertainty worldwide,
with domestic inflation at high levels, and with the
policy stance that would be achieved with the
proposed increase, would require, in the future, to
carefully assess the available space so that the next
decisions are consistent with the convergence of
inflation to the target as well as with an orderly
adjustment of the economy and financial markets,
prioritizing the safeguarding of the central bank’s
credibility.


**3. MONETARY POLICY DECISION**

The Governing Board evaluated the magnitude and
diversity of the shocks that have affected inflation
and its determinants, along with the evolution of
medium- and long-term inflation expectations and the
price formation process. It also considered the
increasing challenges for monetary policy stemming
from the ongoing tightening of global financial
conditions, the environment of significant

uncertainty, and inflationary pressures accumulated
as a result of the pandemic and the geopolitical
conflict, as well as the possibility of greater effects on
inflation. Based on these considerations, and with the
presence of all its members, the Board decided
unanimously to raise the target for the overnight
interbank interest rate by 75 basis points to 8.50%.
With this action, the monetary policy stance adjusts
to the trajectory required for inflation to converge to
its 3% target within the forecast horizon.

The Board will thoroughly monitor inflationary
pressures as well as all factors that have an
incidence on the foreseen path for inflation and its
expectations. This, in order to set a policy rate that is
consistent at all times, with both the orderly and
sustained convergence of headline inflation to the
3% target within the time frame in which monetary
policy operates as well as with an adequate
adjustment of the economy and financial markets.
The Board will assess the magnitude of the upward
adjustments in the reference rate for its next policy
decisions based on the prevailing conditions.

**4. VOTING**

Victoria Rodríguez, Galia Borja, Irene Espinosa,
Gerardo Esquivel, and Jonathan Heath voted in favor
of increasing the target for the overnight interbank
interest rate by 75 basis points to 8.50%.

9


-----

**ANNEX**

The information in this Annex was prepared for this
meeting by the staff of Banco de México’s
Directorate General of Economic Research and
Directorate General of Central Bank Operations. It
does not necessarily reflect the considerations of the
members of the Governing Board as to the monetary
policy decision.

**A.1. External conditions**

**A.1.1. World economic activity**

World economic activity weakened during the
second quarter of the year. This has mainly been the
result of the negative economic effects of the military
conflict between Russia and Ukraine, the slowdown
of the Chinese economy as a result of the
implementation of temporary closures to contain
COVID-19 infections in some regions and the
weakening of its real estate sector, and a tightening
of global financial conditions due to a more
accelerated withdrawal of monetary stimulus in
response to the high inflation levels. Timely
indicators suggest that this weakening could persist
in the third quarter, although with significant
heterogeneity across countries (Chart 1).

World inflation continued increasing, once again
reaching its highest levels in decades in some of the
main economies. Inflationary pressures have spread
to a larger number of items, in addition to the
elevated prices of energy and food, in an
environment in which imbalances between demand
and supply persist in various markets. In this context,
a large number of central banks continued raising
their reference rates, some of them in a greater
magnitude than anticipated, while expectations of an
accelerated reduction of monetary stimulus

worldwide persist. Financial conditions therefore
remained tight. Nevertheless, given the risks of a
sudden slowdown in economic activity, expectations
regarding monetary policy rates in the main
advanced economies, particularly those for 2023, lay
at levels below those foreseen in previous months.

Among the most important global risks to growth are
those associated with the COVID-19 pandemic,
inflationary pressures, the escalation of geopolitical

1 Expressed as a seasonally adjusted quarterly annualized rate,
US GDP grew at a rate of -1.6% during the first quarter of 2022
and -0.9% in the second quarter.


tensions, the risk of greater adjustments to
economic, monetary and financial conditions, and
the intensification of health emergencies due to other
diseases.

**Chart 1**

**Global: Purchasing Managers’ Index:**

**Production Component**

Diffusion index, s. a.

65

60

55

50

45

40

35 Manufacturing

Manufacturing (excl. China)

30 Services

Services (excl. China)

25 July

20

2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022

s. a. / Seasonally adjusted figures.
Source: IHS Markit.

In the United States, Gross Domestic Product (GDP)
contracted during the second quarter of 2022 at a
seasonally adjusted quarterly rate of 0.2%, after
having decreased 0.4% during the previous quarter

1

(Chart 2). The contraction in economic activity

mainly reflected the negative contributions from
changes in inventories and, to a lesser extent, from
residential investment and investment in structures
and equipment, as well as government spending.
Meanwhile, net exports and personal consumption,
particularly in services, contributed positively to
growth during the quarter, although the lower
purchasing power of households and the expectation
of a faster monetary tightening have reduced the
dynamism of private consumption. It is worth
mentioning that, in August, the US Senate approved
the Inflation Reduction Act, which aims to reduce the
costs faced by US families and reduce the fiscal
deficit through measures in the areas of health, clean
energy, and taxes.

US industrial production contracted 0.2% at a
seasonally adjusted monthly rate in June, after
remaining unchanged in May. This weakening
reflected a contraction in gas and electricitygeneration activities as well as in manufacturing
activity, after the latter contracted for the second
consecutive month, largely as a result of the fall in

10

|Chart 1 Global: Purchasing Managers’ Index: Production Component  Diffusion index, s. a.|Col2|
|---|---|
|||
|Manufacturing Manufacturing (excl. China) Services Services (excl. China)|July|


-----

machinery, metal products and vehicles. In contrast,
mining grew at a faster pace, supported by oil and
gas production. The manufacturing Purchasing
Managers' Index (PMI) suggests that the sector will
continue to be affected by the slowdown in global
demand, high production costs, the deterioration of
expectations, and the persistence of disruptions in
supply chains, although these have recently
diminished.

**Chart 2**

**US Real GDP and Components**

Quarterly percentage rate and contribution in

percentage points, s. a.

10

5

0

-5 Private consumption expenditures

Residential investment
Nonresidential investment
Change in private inventories
Exports

-10 Imports


-15


0


s. a. / Seasonally adjusted figures.
Source: BEA.

The US labor market continued to show

improvement during June and July. Job creation
accelerated, with non-farm payrolls increasing by
463 thousand new jobs on a monthly average during
June and July, after growing by 386 thousand jobs in
May. With this, the non-farm payroll recovered its
pre-pandemic level. The most notable increases
were in professional and business services, leisure
and hospitality, and health care. The unemployment
rate registered 3.5% in July, after having been at
3.6% for four consecutive months. Meanwhile,
despite declining in recent readings, vacancy rates
the growth of wages remain high, giving signs of a
tight labor market.

In the euro area, economic activity expanded at a
faster-than-expected pace during the second
quarter, increasing at a seasonally adjusted
quarterly rate of 0.7%, after registering growth of
0.5% in the previous quarter.[2] The normalization of
activities following the decline in COVID-19 cases

2 Expressed as a seasonally adjusted annualized quarterly rate,
the change in euro area GDP was 2.0% during the first quarter of
2022 and 2.8% in the second quarter.
3 In annualized terms, Japan’s GDP registered a quarter-onquarter seasonally adjusted variation of -0.5 during the first
quarter of 2022.


and higher household spending driven by the
strength of the labor market contributed to these
results. However, more recent data began to reflect
the adverse effects of the military conflict between
Russia and Ukraine, such as disruptions in supply
chains, mainly for natural gas, and higher production
costs. In June, the unemployment rate remained at
6.6% for the third consecutive month. Purchasing
managers' indices point to a weakening of
manufacturing production and a moderation of
services in view of the effects associated with the
military conflict between Russia and Ukraine, and the
high levels of inflation.

In Japan, available information suggests a rebound
in economic activity during the second quarter of
2022, after having contracted 0.1% at a seasonally
adjusted quarterly rate in the first one.[ 3] This was due
to the recovery of private consumption, particularly in
services, following the lifting of mobility restrictions
due to COVID-19. Regarding the external sector, net
exports are expected to contribute negatively to the
quarter's growth due to the unfavorable external
conditions registered at the beginning of the quarter,
especially after the lockdown measures in China. In
this environment, the unemployment rate remained
unchanged at 2.6% in June. Purchasing managers'
indices suggest a moderation in both manufacturing
and services activity.

In the main emerging economies, available

indicators suggest a weakening of growth during the
second quarter of 2022, although with marked
heterogeneity across countries and regions. In
Emerging Asia, a slower pace of growth is expected
in most of the region, where the 2.6% contraction of
economic activity at a seasonally adjusted quarterly
rate in China stands out, following the imposition of
restrictions in various cities and provinces of the
country to contain contagions, and in light of the
continued weakening of its real estate sector.[4] In
Emerging Europe, available indicators point to a
weakening of economic activity in most of the
economies in the region, and to a sharp contraction
in Russia and Ukraine. In Latin America, a gradual
recovery is expected in most economies.

In general, international commodity prices have
trended downwards since the last monetary policy

4 Expressed as a seasonally adjusted quarterly rate, China's GDP
growth went from 1.4% during the first quarter of 2022 to a
contraction of 2.6% in the second quarter, while at an annual rate,
it moderated from 4.8% during the first quarter of 2022 to 0.4% in
the second quarter.

11


-----

decision in Mexico. Oil prices declined due to
concerns about a possible slowdown in world
economic growth and its implications for energy
demand. Meanwhile, natural gas reference prices in
the United States increased due to strong demand
for air conditioning as a result of unusually high
temperatures, which, together with high exports to
Europe, has prevented the adequate replenishment
of inventories. In the European market, natural gas
prices rose sharply as a result of disruptions to the
flow from Russia and the risk of such disruptions
intensifying. The price quotations of most industrial
metals trended markedly downwards at the

beginning of the period, primarily due to lower
demand as a result of intermittent production
shutdowns in China and concerns regarding slower
growth in world economic activity. However, at the
end of July and beginning of August, prices partially
reversed this trend in view of the prospects of lower
production and the risk that some industrial metal
producers in Europe could be affected in the event
of an energy crisis. Meanwhile, grain prices have
decreased since the last monetary policy decision in
Mexico due to concerns of a lower demand for grains
in response to a slowdown in world economic
activity, coupled with increased global supplies
following a better-than-expected harvest in the
northern hemisphere and the gradual reopening of
some grain export channels from Ukraine. However,
these prices remain at relatively high levels due to
the uncertainty generated by the military conflict
between Ukraine and Russia.

**A.1.2. Monetary policy and international financial**
**markets**

World inflation continued to rise, once again reaching
maximum levels in decades in some of the world's
major economies. Inflationary pressures have
spread to a greater number of items. This, in an
environment in which imbalances continue to exist
between the recovery of demand and supply in
various markets, and where energy and food prices
are still high. Although disruptions in global supply
chains and pressures on commodity prices

stemming from the military conflict between Russia
and Ukraine have moderated recently, they remain
at high levels and uncertainty persists about their
future evolution and their effect on global inflation.

In most major advanced economies, headline and
core inflation continued to rise, with headline inflation
in most cases remaining significantly above their
central banks' targets for a prolonged period (Chart
3). In particular, in the United States, the Consumer
Price Index increased from an annual rate of 8.6% in


May to 9.1% in June, its highest level since 1981.
Although it declined to 8.5% in July, mainly reflecting
a fall in energy prices, it remains at high levels.
Meanwhile, annual core inflation, after having
reached 6.0% in May, stood at 5.9% in June and
July. In this context, although in general short-term
inflation expectations derived from surveys for the
main advanced economies continued to increase,
longer-term inflation expectations derived from
financial instruments for most of these economies
moderated slightly, after having risen during March
and April in some cases.

**Chart 3**

**Selected Advanced Economies:**

**Headline Inflation**

Annual percentage change

10 United States PCE 1/

9 United States CPI

8 Japan 2/

Euro area 3/

7

United Kingdom

6

Canada

5

4

3

2

1

0

-1

-2 June

July

-3

-4

2005 2009 2013 2017 2021

1/ The personal consumption expenditure deflator is used.
2/ Excludes fresh food. This series does not exclude the effect of the
increase in the consumption tax in May 2014 and October 2019 nor the
effect of the free daycare and preschool program in October 2019.
3/ Preliminary figures for July.
Source: Bureau of Economic Analysis, Bureau of Labor Statistics, Eurostat,
Bank of Japan, Statistics Canada, Office of National Statistics.

In most of the main emerging economies, headline
inflation also continued to rise, remaining

significantly above their central banks' target. The
rise in inflation in this group of economies has
continued to be driven, in general, by increases in
energy and food prices, as well as by core inflation
in light of pressures on the prices of other goods and
services.

In this context of high inflation and tightening labor
markets in some of the major advanced economies,
the central banks of most of these economies have
continued with the reduction of their monetary
stimulus, in some cases accelerating the pace of
interest rate hikes and/or announcing larger than
anticipated increases. The European Central Bank
announced the first increase in its interest rates since

12


-----

2011. The Bank of England implemented its largest
increase in 27 years by raising its reference rate by
50 basis points up to 1.75%, while the Committee
stated that monetary policy does not follow a preset
path and will act forcefully if necessary. It also noted
that it is tentatively prepared to begin asset sales
shortly after its September meeting, depending if the
economic and market conditions are appropriate.
Regarding their asset purchase programs, most of
these economies continued with the gradual
reduction of their securities holdings, mainly through
the suspension of maturity rollovers. Looking ahead,
expectations from financial instruments for most of
the major advanced economies foresee a lower than
previously anticipated level of interest rates at the
end of 2022, suggesting, in some cases, such as the
United States, Canada and, to a lesser extent, the
United Kingdom, that these rates would begin to
decline during the second half of 2023 (Chart 4). The
latter, in light of expectations of a slowdown of
economic activity and its potential effects on inflation.
It is worth noting that, given the highly uncertain
environment, some of the central banks have chosen
to limit their forward guidance measures regarding
their next reference rate movements.

**Chart 4**

**Reference Rates and Trajectories**

**Implied in OIS Curves[1/]**

Percent


4.0% **― US Federal Reserve 2/**

**― Bank of England**
**― Bank of Japan**

**― European Central Bank deposit rate**

3.0% **― OIS implicit trajectory Aug 5 2022**

**--- OIS implicit trajectory Jun 17 2022**

2.0%

1.0%

0.0%

End of End of End of

-1.0% 2020 2021 2022

2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023

|%|― US Federal Reserve 2/ ―|Col3|Col4|Col5|Col6|Col7|Col8|Col9|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
||― Bank of England ― Bank of Japan ― European Central Bank depo ― OIS implicit trajectory Aug 5 2 --- OIS implicit trajectory Jun 17|sit rate 022 2022||||Forecasts|||
||||||||||
||||||||||
||||||||||


End of
2023


1/ OIS: Fixed floating interest rate swap where the fixed interest rate is
associated to the effective overnight reference rate.
2/ For the observed reference rate of the US, the average interest rate of
the target range of the federal funds rate (2.25% - 2.50%) is used.
Source: Banco de México with data from Bloomberg,

Among the recent monetary policy decisions of the
main advanced economies’ central banks, the
following stand out:

i) At its July meeting, the Federal Reserve raised

the target range for the federal funds rate by 75
basis points for the second consecutive meeting,


to between 2.25 and 2.50%. The FED reiterated
that it anticipates that successive increases in the
target range will be appropriate and that the
Committee is strongly committed to returning
inflation to its 2% target. The chairman stated that
while another unusually large increase may be
appropriate at their next meeting, the pace of
interest rate hikes will continue to depend on the
data and the evolution of the outlook for the
economy and that they will make decisions on a
meeting-by-meeting basis without providing

specific guidance. He added that the target range
for the rate is at an interval they consider neutral
and that, as the monetary policy stance tightens
further, it will likely be appropriate to reduce the
pace of increases. Regarding the Federal
Reserve's balance sheet, the Federal Open
Market Committee (FOMC) ratified that it will
continue to reduce its holdings of Treasury
securities, agency debt, and mortgage-backed
securities as outlined in the Plans to Reduce the
Size of the Federal Reserve's Balance Sheet
published in May. Following the July decision,
statements by some of the Federal Reserve's
regional branch presidents and better-thanexpected July employment data helped to offset
the declines in the market-implied reference rate
that had been registered at the beginning of the
period due to concerns about a possible
economic recession. Thus, the expected interest
rate levels at the end of 2022 were similar to
those observed in the previous period, while
those associated with 2023 showed some
reduction.

ii) At its July meeting, the European Central Bank

raised its refinancing, key lending and key deposit
rates for the first time since 2011 by 50 basis
points, setting them at 0.5, 0.75 and 0.0%,
respectively. The magnitude of the hike was
larger than the Bank itself had anticipated at its
June meeting, when it indicated that it intended to
raise these rates by 25 basis points at its July
meeting. It also reiterated that further

normalization of interest rates would be

appropriate at its next meetings. Regarding the
Asset Purchase Program (APP), it concluded its
purchases as of July 1 of this year, in line with its
previous expectation, although it reiterated the
Governing Council's plans of reinvesting the
principal payments on securities reaching

maturity. In the case of its Pandemic Emergency
Purchase Program (PEPP), it also reiterated its
plans to reinvest principal payments on maturing
securities, although it added that flexibility in said
reinvestments remains the first line of defense to

13


-----

counter pandemic-related monetary policy

transmission mechanism risks. The Council
approved the Transmission Protection Instrument
(TPI), which seeks to ensure that the monetary
policy stance is transmitted in a uniform manner
to all euro area countries as it continues its
normalization process. It added that, subject to
the fulfillment of established criteria, the

Eurosystem may make secondary market

purchases of securities issued in jurisdictions
experiencing a deterioration in financing

conditions that is not justified by the specific
fundamentals of the country. It pointed out that
purchases are not restricted in advance and that
the scale of these purchases will depend on the
severity of the risks faced by the transmission of
monetary policy.

iii) In its July meeting, the Bank of Japan left the

benchmark rate unchanged at -0.1% and the 10year interest rate target around zero and restated
that it expects interest rates to remain at their
current levels or even lower. Said central bank
reiterated the guidelines for its yield curve control
strategy, as well as for the purchase of assets
other than government bonds.

In the main emerging economies, during the
analyzed period, most central banks raised their
reference interest rates, with significant increases
equal to or greater than 100 basis points registered
in cases such as Hungary and Colombia, among
others. Meanwhile, Indonesia, Turkey, China,
Ukraine and Czech Republic kept their interest rates
unchanged, while Russia's central bank cut its
reference rate by an additional 150 basis points in
July, bringing it down to 8.0%.

International financial markets reflected an

environment of high uncertainty and concern
associated with the high levels of world inflation, the
evolution of geopolitical tensions and of the
pandemic, as well as with a moderation in global
economic activity. Increased concerns about the
economic slowdown in some of the main economies
thus resulted in a slight improvement of financial
conditions, although they continue to reflect a high
level of tightening (Chart 5). Equity markets in most
of the major advanced economies showed some
recovery, while emerging economies registered a
mixed performance with a positive bias. In foreign
exchange markets, the dollar continued exhibiting
strength against most advanced economies'

currencies, reaching its highest level in more than 20
years during the period. Most emerging market


currencies depreciated against the dollar (Chart 6),
although such trend reverted partially in recent
weeks. Government bond interest rates in most
major advanced economies declined, mainly for
longer maturities, in a context of concerns regarding
the slowdown in economic activity. In the United
States, the slope of the yield curve, measured by the
spread between 10-year and 2-year bond interest
rates, recently moved into negative territory, which in
the past has been associated with periods of
recession. In emerging economies, interest rates
exhibited a heterogeneous behavior, differentiated
by region (Chart 7). In this context, since the last
monetary policy decision in Mexico, capital outflows
from emerging economies, both from fixed income
and equity markets, were generally registered,
although capital inflows to equity markets were
registered in China during the period.

**Chart 5**

**Financial Conditions Index[1/]**

Units

106

105

104

103

102

101

100

99

Tightening 98

Easing 97

96

2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022

Financial Conditions Index - United States
Financial Conditions Index - Global
Financial Conditions Index for Euroarea 2/
Financial Conditions Index for Emerging Market Economies

1/ The financial conditions index is constructed considering the effect of five
variables on economic activity: the reference interest rate, the 10-year
government bond, the spread of investment-grade bonds over the
government debt bond with equivalent maturity, the ratio of a stock index
with 10-year average earnings per share and the trade-weighted exchange
rate. Emerging economies include Brazil, Chile, China, Czech Republic,
Hungary, India, Indonesia, Israel, Malaysia, Mexico, Philippines, Poland,
Romania, South Korea, South Africa, Thailand, and Turkey. The global
sample includes G10 countries and emerging economies.
2/ In the case of emerging economies, the financial conditions index
considers the CDS as the credit spread component and includes the debtweighted exchange rate. The vertical black line indicates the last scheduled
meeting of Banco de México's Monetary Policy Committee.
Source: Prepared by Banco de México with Bloomberg and Goldman
Sachs data.

14


-----

**Chart 6**

**Change in Selected Financial Indicators from**

**June 17, 2022 to August 5, 2022**

Percent; basis points


**A.2. Current situation of the Mexican economy**

**A.2.1. Mexican markets**

In the international context described above, in the
domestic financial markets, the Mexican peso
remained stable against the dollar, while longer-term
interest rates showed downward movements, in line
with the movements observed in global yield curves
(Chart 8), in response to a less aggressive
adjustment in the Federal Reserve's expected path
for monetary policy.

**Chart 8**

**Mexican Markets’ Performance**

Percent, MXN/USD and index


24%

16%


150

100


8%

0%


50

0


United States


-8%

-16%


-50

-100


1/ The MSCI Emerging Markets Index includes 24 countries.
2/ DXY: a weighted average estimated by the Intercontinental Exchange
(ICE) of the nominal exchange rate of the main six currencies operated
globally with the following weights: EUR 57.6%, JPY: 13.6%, GBP: 11.9%,
CAD: 9.1%, SEK: 4.2%, and CHF: 3.6%.
Source: Bloomberg and ICE.

**Chart 7**

**Selected Emerging Economies: Financial**

**Assets Performance since June 20, 2022**

Percent, basis points Percent, basis points


10.0

9.5

9.0

8.5

8.0

7.5

7.0


2.5

2.0


4.5

4.0


21.8

21.3


3.5

3.0


20.8

20.3


59,000

57,000

55,000

53,000

51,000

49,000

47,000

45,000


19.8

19.3


M Bond


Inflation-indexed bonds


Range in year Range since last monetary policy decision Jun 20, 2022 Aug 5, 2022


Note: An upward adjustment indicates currency appreciation. Interest rates
correspond to swap rates at th3 specified terms, except for Hungary, where
government securities with 3-year maturities were used as a reference. For
the Philippines, a 2-year swap rate was used, and for Russia, a 2-year and
3-year swap rate was used.
Source: Bloomberg.


Source: Prepared by Banco de México.

The Mexican peso fluctuated in a range of 99 cents,
between 19.87 and 20.86 pesos per dollar, ending
the period with a marginal depreciation of 0.09%.
(Chart 9). This occurred in a context in which both
spot and future trading conditions slightly

deteriorated.

**Chart 9**

**Mexican Peso Exchange Rate with Moving**

**Averages**
MXN/USD


25.50
25.00
24.50
24.00
23.50
23.00
22.50
22.00
21.50
21.00
20.50
20.00
19.50
19.00
18.50
18.00
17.50
17.00


Peso mexicano

Promedio móvil de 100 días


Promedio móvil de 50 días

|3 specified terms, except for Hungary ear maturities were used as a referen rate was used, and for Russia, a 2-y|, where 25.50 ce. For 25.00 Peso mexican ear and 24.50 Promedio móv 24.00 Promedio móv 23.50 23.00 22.50 22.00 21.50 21.00 20.50 20.00 19.50 19.00 18.50 18.00 17.50 17.00|
|---|---|


E  F  M  A  M  J  J  A  S  O  N  D  E  F  M  A M  J  J  A  S  O  N  D  E  F  M  A  M  J J  A


2020 2021 2022

Source: Prepared by Banco de México.


15


-----

Interest rates on government securities moved
mainly downward (Chart 10), with movements of
between -72 and +30 basis points in the short-term
segment, and decreases of up to 92 basis points and
64 basis points in the medium- and long-term nodes,
respectively. Likewise, the yield curve for real-rate
instruments registered a steepening, with decreases
of between 16 and 34 basis points in the short and
medium term and decreases of up to 11 basis points
in longer-duration instruments. In this context,
breakeven inflation registered generalized

decreases of between 30 and 51 basis points in all
maturities (Chart 11). These movements took place
in an environment in which trading conditions
remained relatively unchanged in relation to the
previous period.

**Chart 10**

**Nominal Yield Curve of Government Securities**

Percent, basis points

10.00 60

9.50 30

9.00 0

8.50 -30

8.00 -60

7.50 -90

7.00 -120

June 20, 2022 August 5, 2022 Change (June 20, 2022 to August 5, 2022)

Trading range over the period

Source: PIP.


**Chart 11**

**Breakeven Inflation and Inflation Risk**

**Implied in Government Securities’ Yields**

Basis points

600

575

550

525

500

475

450

425

400

375

350

325

300 3-year

275 10-year

20-year

250 30-year

225 3-year average

200 10-year average

20-year average

175 30-year average

150

J     M M      J       S      N       J     M      M      J

2021                                      2022

Source: PIP.

Regarding expectations for the monetary policy
reference rate, the information implicit in the interest
rate swap curve incorporates an increase of 86 basis
points for the August decision, while for the end of
2022 it points to a rate of 9.51% (Chart 12). The
majority of the analysts surveyed by Citibanamex
anticipate that the reference rate will be raised 75
basis points up to a level of 8.50% in the August
decision, while for the end of 2022 they anticipate a
rate of 9.50%.

**Chart 12**

**Interbank Funding Rate Implied in TIIE Swaps**

Percent

10.75

Banxico overnight interbank rate (reference rate)

Implied overnight interest rate in funding TIIE futures contracts

9.75 Implied overnight interest rate in government bond yield curve

Implied interest rate in TIIE swaps for 08/05/22

Implied interest rate in TIIE swaps for 06/20/2022

8.75

7.75

6.75

5.75

4.75

3.75

J    M    M   J    S    N    J M     M   J    S   N

2021                        2022

Source: Prepared by Banco de México with Bloomberg data.

16


-----

**A.2.2. Economic activity in Mexico**

According to the GDP flash estimate for Mexico,
during the second quarter economic activity
maintained a similar pace of recovery to that of the
previous quarter (Chart 13). This, despite the fact
that during said period uncertainty persisted
regarding the evolution of the pandemic due to the
increase in the number of COVID-19 infections,
disruptions in global supply chains, and, in general,
a complex global economic environment.

Regarding external demand, during the second
quarter, the value of manufacturing exports, both
automotive and non-automotive, continued

increasing (Chart 14).[5] By destination,

manufacturing exports to the United States

continued to grow, while shipments to the rest of the
world contracted marginally.

**Chart 13**

**Gross Domestic Product**

Quarterly percentage change, s. a.

6


2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022

s. a. / Seasonally adjusted series and trend series based on data in nominal
US dollars. The former is represented by a solid line and the latter by a
dotted line
Source: Prepared by Banco de México with data from the Tax
Administration Service (SAT, for its Spanish acronym), the Ministry of the
Economy (SE, for its Spanish acronym), Banco de México, the National
Institute of Statistics and Geography (INEGI, for its Spanish acronym).
Mexico’s Merchandise Trade Balance, and the National System of
Statistical and Geographical Information (SNIEG, for its Spanish acronym),
Information of national interest.

On the domestic demand side, based on its monthly
indicator, private consumption halted its growth in
May, after having increased at the margin for ten
consecutive months. Within it, consumption of
domestic goods showed an incipient downward
trend, while consumption of imported goods and
services moderated its rate of expansion. In May,
gross fixed investment reversed part of the rebound
observed in the previous two months. Machinery and
equipment interrupted the growth observed in the
previous seven months, while construction

investment spending continued showing weakness.

On the production side, industrial activity continued
growing during the April-May period (Chart 15),
mainly due to an increase in manufacturing and a
moderate reactivation of construction (Chart 16).
Services continued to expand, although with some
differences in the levels of reactivation by sector. The
services that contributed the most to growth during
the April-May period were transportation and mass
media information services, commerce, financial and
real estate services, leisure and other services.


**Chart 14**

**Total Manufacturing Exports**

Índices 2013 = 100, s. a.


200

180

160

140

120

100

80

60

40


A J


4

2


0

-2


-4

-6


Q-II1/


2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022

s. a. / Seasonally adjusted figures.
1/ The Q2-2022 figure corresponds to GDP’s quarterly flash estimate by
INEGI.
Source: Mexico’s System on National Accounts (SCNM, for its Spanish
acronym), INEGI.


5 Refers to the value of merchandise exports in current dollars.
This value differs from that reported for goods’ exports in Mexico’s


System of National Accounts, since the latter represents value
added, measured in constant pesos.

17


-----

**Chart 15**

**Global Indicator of Economic Activity**

Indices 2013 = 100, s. a.


120

115

110

105

100

95

Total

90 Secondary activities

Tertiary activities

85 Primary activities

80

75 May

May

70

J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M

2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022


140

130

120

110

100

90

80

70

60

50

40


**Chart 17**

**Output Gap Estimates [1/]**

**Excluding Oil Industry [4/ ]**

Potential output percentages, s. a.


12

8

4

0

-4

-8

-12

-16

-20

-24


June


s. a. / Seasonally adjusted and trend series. The former is represented by
a solid line and the latter by a dotted line.
Source: Mexico’s System of National Accounts (SCNM, for its Spanish
acronym), INEGI

**Chart 16**

**Industrial Activity [1/]**

Indices 2013 = 100, s. a.

130

120

110

100

90

Total

Mining (22.3%)

80

Manufacturing (49.7%)

70 Construction (23.3%)

Utilities (4.7%)

May

60

J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M

2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022

s. a. / Seasonally adjusted and trend series. The former is represented by
a solid line and the latter by a dotted line.
1/ Figures in parenthesis correspond to their share in the total in 2013.
Source: Mexico’s System of National Accounts (SCNM, for its Spanish
acronym), INEGI.

Regarding the cyclical position of the economy, slack
conditions decreased during the second quarter
(Chart 17). In particular, the estimated negative
output gap declined in relation to the previous
quarter, in line with the behavior of economic activity
during the period. In June, the national

unemployment rate exhibited a level similar to that of
the previous month, while the urban unemployment
rate increased marginally (Chart 18). This took place
in a context in which both the labor participation rate
and the employment rate among the working age
population grew slightly in relation to May. Based on
seasonally adjusted figures, the net creation of
IMSS-insured jobs continued trending upwards
between May and July. Unit labor costs in the
manufacturing sector contracted in May, after having
increased for three consecutive months (Chart 19).


J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J MJ

2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022

s. a. / Calculations based on seasonally adjusted figures.
1/ Output gap estimated with a tail-corrected Hodrick-Prescott filter; see
Banco de México (2009), “Inflation Report, April-June 2009”, p.74.
2/ GDP figures up to the first quarter of 2022 and IGAE up to June 2022.
3/ Output gap confidence interval calculated with a method of unobserved
components.
4/ Excludes both oil and gas extraction, support services for mining, and
petroleum and coal products’ manufacturing.
Source: Prepared by Banco de México with INEGI data.

**Chart 18**

**National and Urban Unemployment Rates**

Percent, s. a.

8.0

National unemployment rate

7.5

Urban unemployment rate

7.0

6.5

6.0

5.5

5.0

4.5

4.0

3.5

3.0

2.5 June

JA J O JA J O JA J O JA J O JA J O JA J O JA J O JA J O JA J O JA J O JA J O JA J O JA J O JA J O J AJ

2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022

s. a. / Seasonally adjusted and trend series. The former is represented by
a solid line and the latter by a dotted line.
Source: Prepared by Banco de México with data from ENOE, ETOE (from
April to June 2020), and ENOE new edition (ENOE[N]) from July to date.

18


-----

**Chart 19**

**Productivity and Unit Labor Costs in the**

**Manufacturing Sector [1/]**

Indices 2013 = 100, s. a.


130

Unit labor costs 157.8

Productivity

120

110

100

90

May

80

J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M

2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022


s. a. / Seasonally adjusted and trend series. The former is represented by
a solid line and the latter by a dotted line.
1/ Productivity based on hours worked.
Source: Prepared by Banco de México with seasonally adjusted data of the
Monthly Manufacturing Industry Survey and industrial activity indicators of
Mexico’s System of National Accounts (Sistema de Cuentas Nacionales de
_México, SCNM), INEGI._

In June 2022, domestic financing to firms continued
moderating its annual rate of contraction in real
terms. Within it, bank credit to firms continued
recovering gradually, exhibiting a positive real
annual variation for the second consecutive month,
thus accumulating three quarters of increases in its
balance. This, in a context in which corporate credit
demand continued recovering, while lending

conditions remained tight compared to those that
prevailed at the beginning of the pandemic, although
these have been easing for smaller firms since the
second half of 2021. Net corporate debt issuance in
the domestic market was negative during the first
half of this year. As for credit to households,
commercial bank housing portfolios expanded at a
pace similar to that of the first quarter of the year. In
turn, outstanding bank consumer credit registered an
increase in its pace of growth with respect to the
previous quarter, mainly as a result of the sustained
dynamism of payroll credit and credit card portfolios,
as well as the recent recovery of the personal credit
portfolio. This has taken place in a context in which
household demand for credit has continued to
increase. Mortgage lending conditions remained
stable, while consumer credit conditions eased
during the second quarter of the year.

Interest rates on bank credit to firms are at levels
similar to those observed prior to the pandemic.
Between January and June 2022, corporate credit
intermediation margins narrowed, and therefore are
generally at levels below those observed prior to the
pandemic. At the same time, mortgage loan interest
rates remained at levels around their historic lows,


although they slightly increased. In February 2022,
credit card interest rates were at levels similar to
those observed during the fourth quarter of 2021.
Regarding portfolio quality, in June 2022, corporate
and housing loan delinquency rates declined, thus
remaining at low levels. Lastly, consumer portfolio
delinquency rates also declined, remaining at levels
lower than those registered prior to the onset of the
pandemic, although they continue to be high.

**A.2.3. Development of inflation and inflation**
**outlook**

Between June and July 2022, annual headline
inflation increased from 7.99 to 8.15% (Chart 20 and
Table 1), thus continuing to reflect the pressures
from the COVID-19 pandemic and the military
conflict between Russia and Ukraine.

**Chart 20**

**Consumer Price Index**

Annual percentage change

14

13 CPI

12 Core

11

10 Non-core

9

8

7

6

5

4

3

2

1

0

-1

-2

July

-3

J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M

2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022

Source: Banco de México and INEGI.

Annual core inflation increased from 7.49 to 7.65%
between June and July 2022, thus remaining on the
same upward trend followed since December 2020
(Chart 21). Within it, in said months annual
merchandise inflation was 9.91 and 10.07%,
respectively, pressured by the persistent disruptions
in production and distribution chains, as well as by
the price increases of several inputs at the
international level, where foods stand out. This has
been particularly noticeable in food merchandise
inflation, which was already at high levels and
increased from 11.84 to 12.09%. Annual non-food
merchandise inflation remained relatively stable at
7.78 and 7.83% in the aforementioned months
(Chart 22). Annual services inflation increased from
4.76 to 4.90% in the same period, driven by the
reopening of activities and the greater operating
costs that had to be faced to avoid infections as well
as those related to the increasing prices of services’

19


-----

inputs. In particular, annual inflation of services other
than education and housing increased from 6.61 to
6.87% in the same dates, being food and
transportation the items with the highest annual price
variations.

**Chart 21**

**Merchandise and Services Core Price Sub-index**

Annual percentage change

11

Merchandise

10

Services

9

8

7

6

5

4

3

2


from 4.34 to 4.50%, while that for core inflation
increased from 4.14 to 4.31%.

**Chart 23**

**Non-core Price Sub-index**

Annual percentage change

25

20

15

10

5

0

Non-core

-5 Agricultural and livestock products

Energy and government-authorized prices

-10

-15 July

J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M

2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022


1

July

0

J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M

2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022


Source: Banco de México and INEGI.

**Chart 22**

**Merchandise Core Price Sub-index**

Annual percentage change

14

12

10

8

6

4

2

Food, beverages and tobacco Non-food merchandise July

0

J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M

2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022

Source: Banco de México and INEGI.

Between June and July 2022, annual non-core
inflation shifted from 9.47 to 9.65% (Chart 23 and
Table 1). This reflected the high levels of annual
inflation of agricultural and livestock products, which
increased from 15.02 to 16.05% in the

aforementioned dates, affected by the price
increases of production inputs, such as fertilizers and
grains. Meanwhile, annual energy inflation

decreased from 5.68 to 4.68% during the same
period.

Regarding inflation expectations from the survey
conducted by Banco de México among private sector
specialists, between May and July the median for
headline inflation for the end of 2022 increased from
6.81 to 7.80%, while that for the core component
rose from 6.38 to 7.08%. The median of headline
inflation expectations at the end of 2023 was revised


Source: Banco de México and INEGI.

The median of headline inflation expectations for the
medium term was adjusted slightly from 3.80 a
3.82%, while that for core inflation was adjusted

from 3.70 to 3.83%. The median of headline inflation
expectations for the long term (5 to 8 years)
remained at 3.60% and for core inflation increased
from 3.50 to 3.57%. Finally, compensation for
inflation and inflationary risk decreased. Within it,
expectations implied by market instruments

continued increasing, while the inflation risk premium
remains at elevated levels.

Convergence to the 3% target is still projected to be
attained in the first quarter of 2024. These
projections are subject to risks. On the upside: i)
persistence of core inflation at high levels; ii) external
inflationary pressures associated with the pandemic;
iii) continued pressures on agricultural and livestock
product prices and on energy prices due to the
ongoing geopolitical conflict; iv) exchange rate
depreciation; and v) cost-related pressures. On the
downside: i) a greater-than-anticipated slowdown in
world economic activity; ii) a decline in the intensity
of the geopolitical conflict; iii) a better functioning of
supply chains; iv) a greater-than-expected effect
from the negative output gap; and v) a larger-thananticipated effect from the Policy Program to Fight
Inflation and High Prices (PACIC, for its acronym in
Spanish). The balance of risks for the trajectory of
inflation within the forecast horizon remains
significantly biased to the upside.

20


-----

**Table 1**

**Consumer Price Index and Components**

Annual percentage change

**Item** **May 2022** **June 2022** **July 2022**

**CPI** **7.65** **7.99** **8.15**

**SubyacenteCore** **7.28** **7.49** **7.65**

**Merchandise** **9.53** **9.91** **10.07**

Food, beverages and tobacco 11.27 11.84 12.09

Non-food merchandise 7.61 7.78 7.83

**Services** **4.74** **4.76** **4.90**

Housing 2.84 2.97 3.02

Education (tuitions) 3.24 3.30 3.27

Other services 6.71 6.61 6.87

**No SubyacenteNon-core** **8.77** **9.47** **9.65**

**Agricultural and livestock products** **13.08** **15.02** **16.05**

Fruits and vegetablesFruits abd vegetables 12.88 14.39 16.16

Livestock productsLivestock 13.24 15.51 15.96

**Energy and government-authorized prices Energéticos y Tarifas Aut. por Gobierno** **5.44** **5.22** **4.76**

Energy productsEnergy 6.30 5.68 4.68

Government-authorized pricesTarifas Autorizadas por Gobierno 3.41 4.12 4.95

Source: INEGI.


-----

-----

