# Central Bank of Egypt

**Press Release**

May 23, 2019

**The Monetary Policy Committee (MPC) decided to keep the Central Bank of Egypt’s (CBE)**
**overnight deposit rate, overnight lending rate, and the rate of the main operation unchanged**
**at 15.75 percent, 16.75 percent, and 16.25 percent, respectively. The discount rate was also**
**kept unchanged at 16.25 percent.**

Annual headline and core inflation declined to 13.0 percent and 8.1 percent in April 2019 from
14.2 percent and 8.9 percent in March 2019, respectively. This decline was supported by
favorable base effects and a lower contribution from food prices, while the contribution of nonfood prices remained broadly unchanged.

Real GDP growth continued to increase slightly to record 5.6 percent in 2019 Q1 compared to 5.5
percent in 2018 Q4, and the unemployment rate continued to decline to record 8.1 percent in
2019 Q1 compared 8.9 percent in 2018 Q4. Available data indicate that net external demand
continued to support economic activity, while private domestic demand remained contained.

The expansion of global economic activity weakened, and the pace of tightening financial
conditions eased, while trade tensions continued to weigh on the global outlook. Meanwhile,
international oil prices continued to increase since the beginning of 2019 and remain subject to
volatility due to geopolitical risks and potential supply-side factors, which pose risks to the
domestic inflation outlook.

The Ministry of Finance is targeting to achieve a primary surplus of 2.0 percent of GDP in fiscal
year 2018/19, up from 0.1 percent in the previous year, and to maintain this surplus thereafter.
Accordingly, the inflation outlook incorporates fiscal consolidation measures, which include
reaching cost recovery for most fuel products and automatic fuel price indexation to underlying
costs.

Against this background, the MPC decided that key policy rates remain appropriate at this
juncture, and consistent with achieving the inflation target of 9 percent (±3 percentage points)
in 2020 Q4 and price stability over the medium term. The MPC closely monitors all economic
developments and will not hesitate to adjust its stance to preserve monetary stability.

**Monetary Policy Sector**
Phone: +20227701315
E-mail: monetary.policy@cbe.org.eg


-----

