**BANK OF ISRAEL**
Office of the Spokesperson and Economic Information

February 11, 2013

**Report to the public on the Bank of Israel’s discussions prior to setting the**
**interest rate for February 2013**

**The discussions took place on January 27 and 28, 2012**

**General**

In the process of making the monthly interest rate decision by the Monetary
Committee, discussions are held at two levels––the first in a broad forum, and the
second in a narrower one.

In the broad-forum discussion, the relevant background economic conditions are
presented, including real, monetary and financial developments in Israel’s economy,
and developments in the global economy. Participants in this discussion include the
three members of the Monetary Committee from the Bank—the Governor, the Deputy
Governor and the Senior Advisor to the Governor—and the three members of the
Monetary Committee from the public. Other participants in the discussion are the
Directors of the Research and Market Operations Departments, and economists from
various departments who prepare and present the material for discussion. The data,
estimates and assessments in this report are those that were available at the time of the
discussions.

In the narrow forum, which consists of the Monetary Committee and the Directors of
the Research and Market Operations Departments, the two Departmental Directors
present their recommendations regarding the interest rate. An open discussion
follows, which ends with a vote on the level of the interest rate. According to the
Bank of Israel Law, 5770-2010, (section 18(c)), the decision on the interest rate is
reached by majority vote of the members of the Monetary Committee who participate
in the voting. If the vote is tied, the chairperson (the Governor) has an additional vote.

A. THE BROAD-FORUM DISCUSSION—THE STATE OF THE ECONOMY

**1. Developments on the real side**

_General assessment_


-----

The development of actual prices and inflation expectations for the coming year,
indicate an inflation environment somewhat below the midpoint of the target range,
and are apparently affected by moderation in domestic demand. Indicators of real
economic activity continue to point toward stability in activity, and even to some
improvement in expectations for growth in the coming year.

_Monthly indices of the economic situation_

Various indicators point toward stability in real economic activity, and signal a slight
improvement in expectations for growth over the coming 12 months. The Composite
State-of-the-Economy Index increased by 0.1 percent in December, similar to its rate
of recent months, and in contrast to the monthly rate of 0.2 percent in the first half of
2012. The Climate Index calculated from the Business Tendency Survey for
December indicates slight improvement in the growth rate, at a low level of activity,
and was affected by a sharp increase in the expectations component and by an
improvement in the assessment of present activity, in contrast to declines registered in
the assessment of past activity. The improvement is prominent in the manufacturing
indices, and can be seen as well in the retail trade and services industries. The
Purchasing Managers Index also increased, though it is still below the 50 point mark,
thus indicating contraction.

_The labor market_

Labor force survey data for the third quarter indicate a continued increase in the
participation rate, the number of employed persons, and, accordingly, in the
employment rate as well, which increased to 74.5 percent, from 73.3 percent in the
second quarter (among 25–64 year olds, the age range which was less affected by
changes in the labor force survey's methodology in the beginning of 2012). Monthly
labor force data, updated to November, indicate stability in the participation rate and
in the employment rate, as well as a slight decline in the unemployment rate, to 5.7
percent from 5.9 percent in October. (The decline was in the 25–64 year old age
range; in the general population the unemployment rate declined from 6.9 percent to
6.7 percent). In addition, the survey indicated stability in the number of people
employed in full-time positions, and an increase in the number of people temporarily
absent from work, but this was attributed mainly to the security situation that month.
Stability in total employment, seen as well in employee posts data, reflects a
continued trend of decline in the number of employee posts in the private sector and
increase in public sector posts. The climate index for employment, calculated from the
Business Tendency Survey, also indicates stability. Compared with September,
nominal wages increased in October by 1.2 percent, and real wages increased by 0.5
percent, based on seasonally adjusted data. Health tax receipts, which provide an
indication of nominal wage payments, were 5.7 percent higher in November–
December than in the corresponding period of the previous year, compared with a
year over year increase of 5.8 percent in October–November (a figure which was
revised upward).


-----

_Foreign Trade_

Foreign trade data for December continued to show a declining trend of imports and
exports, similar to the picture provided by National Accounts data. Goods exports
declined by more than 3 percent in the fourth quarter compared with the third quarter,
with a decline of 4 percent in high technology industries, a decline of 10 percent in
medium-low technology industries, and stability or slight improvement in other
industries. It appears that in the recent period a gap has opened between the index of
US trade in advanced technology products and the index, which is in a trend of
decline, of electronics exports from Israel.

_Budget data_

In 2012, the overall government deficit, excluding net credit, totaled about NIS 39
billion, which is 4.2 percent of GDP, compared with a deficit of 3.4 percent of GDP
which was forecast in the beginning of 2012. Tax receipts in 2012 totaled NIS 218.6
billion. This was about NIS 3 billion lower than forecast at the beginning of 2012. The
accumulated deviation from the original deficit projection derives from revenues
about NIS 6.9 billion below, and expenditure about NIS 2.2 billion above, the original
budget, due to the transfer of unutilized balances from previous years. Until a new
government is formed, and the budget is approved, there will be uncertainty regarding
how the government will deal with the need to align the budget with the limitations of
the deficit target and expenditures.

**2. Developments on the nominal side**

_Inflation_

The Consumer Price Index (CPI) for December increased by 0.2 percent. This was
above forecasts, which projected, on average, no change in the CPI. With that, the CPI
for December was in line with the seasonal path for the month consistent with
attaining the inflation target. Inflation for the full year of 2012 was 1.6 percent, within
the target range. The main contributions to inflation in 2012 derived from prices of
housing, which increased by 3.3 percent, and of energy, which increased by 6.5
percent. Excluding housing and energy, the inflation rate in 2012 was 0.6 percent. The
development of inflation over the course of the year reflects the slowdown in
domestic demand together with one-time effects in the prices of kindergarten services
and cellular communications.

_Expectations and forecasts of inflation and of the Bank of Israel interest rate_

Forecasts of the inflation rate over the next twelve months calculated from the capital
markets (break-even inflation) declined to 1.5 percent, seasonally adjusted, or 2.3
percent without seasonal adjustment. Expectations based on the average of
forecasters' inflation projections were stable this month, at 1.9 percent, as were
inflation expectations based on over-the-counter CPI futures contracts offered by


-----

banks, at 1.8 percent. Inflation expectations for two years and longer increased, and
currently range from 2.5 percent for shorter terms to 2.9 percent for longer terms.
Expectations for the Bank of Israel interest rate one year from now derived from the
Telbor (Tel Aviv Inter-Bank Offered Rate) market, as well as expectations based on
the average projection of forecasters, are for an interest rate of 1.6 percent and 1.7
percent, respectively. The forecasters who provide projections to the Bank of Israel
predict that the interest rate for February will remain unchanged.

_The bond and makam market_

Yields on short-term government bonds declined moderately, in contrast to an
increase of about 5 basis points in medium to long terms. Yields on CPI-indexed
bonds increased by about 5–10 basis points for most maturities. Yields on government
bonds worldwide increased more sharply, by about 20 basis points. _Makam yields_
declined along most of the curve by about 10 basis points, as a result of the interest
rate reduction in December, with one-year yields declining to 1.72 percent during the
period.

_The interest and yield spreads between Israel and abroad_

The yield differential between 10-year Israeli government bonds and equivalent 10year US Treasury securities was unchanged at around 220 basis points. Israel's
sovereign risk premium as measured by the five-year CDS spread declined slightly
during the intermeeting period to 129 basis points. The Tel-Bond 60 Index increased
by about 0.75 percent over the period.

_The monetary aggregates_

In the twelve months ending in December, the M1 monetary aggregate (cash held by
the public and demand deposits) increased by 9.1 percent, and the M2 aggregate (M1
plus unindexed deposits of up to one year) increased by 8.3 percent.

_The credit market_

The outstanding debt of the business sector declined by 0.6 percent in November,
from NIS 795 billion to NIS 790 billion; in the past 12 months the debt has increased
by 1.7 percent. Total outstanding credit to households declined in November by 0.2
percent, to NIS 383 billion. The total volume of new mortgages granted in December
was NIS 4.7 billion, compared with NIS 4.1 billion in November. The balance of
housing debt was NIS 269 billion at the end of November, an increase of 7.3 percent
compared with November 2011. Interest rates on new CPI-indexed mortgages granted
in December remained essentially unchanged, and declined slightly in the unindexed,
floating-rate track. In December, there was a marked increase in issuance volume by
the non-financial business sector, from a monthly average of NIS 1.7 billion in
August–November to NIS 3.6 billion. Most of the offerings in December were by
large companies, mostly in the real estate sector, with high ratings of A and above.


-----

_The housing market_

The housing component of the CPI (based on housing rents) increased by 0.4 percent
in December. In the twelve months ending in December, it increased by 3.3 percent,
compared with an increase of 2.8 percent in the twelve months to November. Home
prices, which are published in the Central Bureau of Statistics survey of home prices
but are not included in the CPI, increased in October–November by 1.1 percent, after
increasing by 0.7 percent in September–October. The rate of increase in home prices
continues to escalate. In the twelve months ending in November, home prices
increased by 5.7 percent, compared with an increase of 4.1 percent in the twelve
months to October.

The number of building starts over the previous 12 months remains elevated—39,626
in the 12 months ending in October—and it is expected to continue to be reflected in
an increased stock of homes. With that, the number of building starts in the January–
October period was about 20 percent lower than the corresponding period in 2011. In
addition, the rate of properties marketed by the Israel Land Administration has
declined sharply.

_The Bank of Israel Research Department assessment (staff forecast)_

Last month, the Bank of Israel Research Department updated its macroeconomic
forecast. According to that assessment, which was published last month, the inflation
rate is expected to be 1.8 percent in 2013. The growth rate for 2013 is projected to be
3.8 percent, assuming that production of natural gas from the Tamar field begins
during the second quarter of 2013, as planned; the growth rate is estimated to be 2.8
percent excluding the production of natural gas.

**3. The foreign currency and stock markets**

_The foreign exchange market_

From the previous monetary policy discussion held on December 23, 2012, through
January 25, 2013, the shekel strengthened against the dollar by about 0.9 percent, a
more moderate rate than the appreciation of most major currencies against the dollar.
Nonresidents' activity was mixed, with foreign exchange sales in the beginning of the
period and purchases later on. This was against the background of events around the
world in the beginning of the period, primarily the concerns regarding the fiscal cliff
in the US. The shekel appreciated by 0.8 percent against the euro, while most major
currencies weakened against the euro. In terms of the nominal effective exchange rate
the shekel appreciated by about 0.6 percent during the period.

_The capital market_
From the previous monetary policy discussion held on December 23, 2012, through
January 25, 2013, the Tel Aviv 25 Index declined by about 0.6 percent. Spreads in the


-----

corporate bond market continued to contract for all ratings, though primarily for lower
ones.

**4. Global economic developments**

For the first time in a while, investment houses assess that the risks in the global
economy have decreased. Thus, the risk of a deterioration in the debt crisis in Europe
declined, and the uncertainty regarding the fiscal cliff issue mostly receded. Yields on
government bonds of Spain and Italy, as well as CDS spreads, continued to decline to
a level that had not been seen in over 2 years, and in Spain, bank deposits in recent
months have once again increased, indicating confidence in the banking system. With
that, the overall debt crisis is far from over—fiscal adjustments in various European
countries are expected to continue in the coming year as well, and it is assessed that
crises are expected with regard to countries meeting their targets. Macro data which
were published this month in the US and emerging markets continued to be positive.
In contrast, data published in Europe indicate that the recession there is continuing.
This was seen this month in a figure published in Germany, showing that its economy
contracted by 0.5 percent in the fourth quarter. Over the past month, most countries
did not register a change in monetary policy, and interest rates in major economies
remained low. In addition, markets are not pricing in an interest rate increase by the
central bank of any major economy this year. Japan's government announced an
additional fiscal incentive plan as well as an increase in the inflation target to 2
percent from 1 percent, and the central bank announced a new open-ended asset
purchase plan. This month, commodity prices were stable, while oil prices increased
by 3.8 percent, against the background of events in Algeria. According to World Bank
assessments, commodity prices are expected to decline over the next two years,
except for the prices of industrial metals which are expected to remain stable.

B. THE NARROW-FORUM DISCUSSION––THE INTEREST RATE DECISION
FOR FEBRUARY 2013

**Main points of discussion**

The six members of the Monetary Committee participating in the discussion decide on
the appropriate rate of interest for the economy. After the discussion on the interest
rate for February 2013, all of the Committee members voted to keep the interest rate
unchanged at 1.75 percent.

The discussion focused on the following main issues: (1) developments in the
domestic and global economies; (2) developments in the exchange rate; (3)
developments in the housing market and the construction industry, and (4) the fiscal
situation.


-----

Committee members noted the stability in the GDP growth rate at around 3 percent, in
unemployment, and in inflation in Israel's economy. They also noted that the level of
pessimism in monthly surveys of economic activity declined, and no longer indicates
a continued slowdown in activity. Committee members assessed that in the global
economy, it appears that the risks of a deterioration in the debt crisis in Europe are
declining, and concerns over the "fiscal cliff" in the US have mostly receded. In their
assessment, the level of activity in Europe does not indicate a recovery, but macro
figures published in the US and in China were mostly positive.

Committee members discussed developments in the exchange rate. It was noted that
the shekel strengthened slightly against the dollar since the last monetary policy
discussion, continuing the appreciation of 2 percent in the full year of 2012.
Committee members assessed that continued quantitative easing in the US, Europe,
and Japan supports the strengthening of the shekel. The assessment was also made
that the beginning of the use of offshore natural gas reservoirs, expected in 2013, will
contribute to an increase in the current account surplus, and thus will also be a factor
supporting the appreciation of the shekel in the coming year. The extent of the impact
on the exchange rate in the future depends on the degree to which this information is
already reflected in the exchange rate.

In the housing sector, Committee members expressed concern in light of the renewed
increase in home prices at a rapid pace, in parallel to a decline in building starts and
an increase in the number of transactions and in mortgage volume. Members noted
that the effect of policy measures taken in the final quarter of 2012 limiting the LTV
ratio should be reflected in new mortgage volume beginning with January 2013 data.
In the discussion, it was emphasized that the policy steps taken by the Bank of Israel
in recent years in the area of mortgages are aimed primarily at maintaining financial
stability and that their moderating effect on the housing market operates only on the
demand side. Committee members are of the opinion that important factors in the
increase in home prices at this time are a slowing of planning processes and the
decline in the rate of marketing properties. Thus, dealing with home prices needs to
focus on expediting the planning processes and increasing the marketing of land,
primarily in high demand areas, which will lead to an increased supply of homes for
residence. The government has tools to increase the supply of homes for residence
which can act to moderate the increase in home prices without negatively impacting
on the level of activity in the industry.

A central issue in the Committee's discussion was fiscal policy. Committee members
expressed their concern of a negative impact on the credibility of fiscal policy in light
of the large government deficit in 2012. The concern stems from the fact that in the
Committee's assessment, supported by, among other things the economy's relatively
low unemployment rate, most of the deficit is structural, not cyclical. Committee
members are of the opinion that dealing with the structural deficit in Israel, which is
also high relative to other advanced economies in the world, requires a significant cut
in expenditure, relative to the government's commitments for 2013 and 2014, along
with increasing taxes. In this regard, it was emphasized that even though Israel's debt


-----

to GDP ratio remains stable and is not high relative to many advanced economies,
Israel's debt burden is high, even relative to those economies, because of the high
interest rate that Israel pays on its debt, compared with the other countries.

Following the discussion, the six members of the Monetary Committee voted on the
Bank of Israel interest rate for February 2013. All Committee members supported
keeping the interest rate unchanged at 1.75 percent. This decision is consistent with
the Bank of Israel's interest rate policy, which is intended to entrench the inflation rate
within the price stability target of 1–3 percent a year over the next twelve months, and
to support growth while maintaining financial stability. The path of the interest rate in
the future depends on developments in the inflation environment, growth in Israel and
in the global economy, the monetary policies of major central banks, and
developments in the exchange rate of the shekel.

In its announcement, the Bank highlighted the following main considerations
underlying the decision to keep the interest rate unchanged at 1.75 percent:

- The development of actual prices and of inflation expectations for the year ahead
continue to indicate an inflation environment below the midpoint of the target
range. Inflation over the previous 12 months was 1.6 percent, and inflation
expectations for the year ahead, based on various sources, are slightly below the
midpoint of the target range. The development of inflation during 2012 reflects the
slowdown in domestic demand. According to World Bank assessments,
commodity prices are expected to decline over the coming 2 years, and thus
support a continued low inflation environment in Israel.

- Various indicators of real economic activity support the assessment that in the past
half year there has been a slowdown in the rate of demand growth, with stability
in the GDP growth rate and a decline in imports. The Research Department
assessment is that the GDP growth remained around 3 percent. Monthly indicators
do not point toward further deterioration in activity, and indicate a slight
improvement in expectations of economic activity.

- The rate of increase in home prices continues to rise, and in the 12 months ending
in November, home prices increased by 5.7 percent, compared with 3.7 percent in
the 12 months to October. The impact on home prices of the LTV ratio
limitations, which were imposed by the Supervisor of Banks and went into effect
at the beginning of November, was not reflected in December mortgage data, but
is expected to be seen beginning in January.

- For the first time in some time, investment houses assess that the risks in the
global economy have decreased. Thus, the risk of a deterioration in the debt crisis
in Europe declined, and the uncertainty regarding the fiscal cliff issue in the US
mostly receded. Macro data published this month in the US and China continued
to be positive. In contrast, data published in Europe indicate that activity has still
not reached a turning point and the recession there continues.

- Over the past month, most major central banks did not change their monetary
policy, and interest rates in major economies remained low. The quantitative
easing programs in the US and UK continue, and the Bank of Japan announced


-----

additional monetary easing plans. Market assessments are that the accommodative
policies of central banks in major advanced economies are expected to continue.

The Bank of Israel will continue to monitor developments in the Israeli and global
economies and in financial markets, particularly in light of the continuing high level
of uncertainty in the global economy. The Bank will use the tools available to it to
achieve its objectives of price stability, the encouragement of employment and
growth, and support for the stability of the financial system, and in this regard will
keep a close watch on developments in the asset markets, including the housing
market.

**Participants in the narrow-forum discussion:**

**Members of the Monetary Committee**
Prof. Stanley Fischer, Governor of the Bank of Israel, Chairperson
Prof. Alex Cukierman
Dr. Karnit Flug, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Israel
Prof. Reuben Gronau
Prof. Rafi Melnick
Mr. Barry Topf, Senior Advisor to the Governor on Monetary Policy Issues

**Other participants in the narrow-forum discussion:**
Mr. Andrew Abir, Director of the Market Operations Department
Prof. Nathan Sussman, Director of the Research Department
Mr. Eddy Azoulay, Chief of Staff to the Governor
Dr. Yossi Saadon, Advisor to the Governor and Bank of Israel Spokesperson
Ms. Merav Shemesh, Head of the Economics Unit, Banking Supervision Department
Mr. Inon Gamrasani, Economist in the Research Department
Ms. Tsila Billet, Assistant to the Monetary Committee Secretary


-----

