**BANK OF ISRAEL**
Office of the Spokesperson and Economic Information

April 7, 2013
**Press Release**

**Report to the public on the Bank of Israel’s discussions prior to setting the**
**interest rate for April–May 2013**

**The discussions took place on March 21 and 24, 2013**

**General**

In the process of making the monthly interest rate decision (which in this case applies
to the next two months) by the Monetary Committee, discussions are held at two
levels––the first in a broad forum, and the second in a narrower one.

In the broad-forum discussion, the relevant background economic conditions are
presented, including real, monetary and financial developments in Israel’s economy,
and developments in the global economy. Participants in this discussion include the
three members of the Monetary Committee from the Bank—the Governor, the Deputy
Governor and the Senior Advisor to the Governor—and the three members of the
Monetary Committee from the public. Other participants in the discussion are the
Directors of the Research and Market Operations Departments, and economists from
various departments who prepare and present the material for discussion. The data,
estimates and assessments in this report are those that were available at the time of the
discussions.

In the narrow forum, which consists of the Monetary Committee and the Directors of
the Research and Market Operations Departments, the two Departmental Directors
present their recommendations regarding the interest rate. An open discussion
follows, which ends with a vote on the level of the interest rate. According to the
Bank of Israel Law, 5770-2010, (section 18(c)), the decision on the interest rate is
reached by majority vote of the members of the Monetary Committee who participate
in the voting. If the vote is tied, the chairperson (the Governor) has an additional vote.

A. THE BROAD-FORUM DISCUSSION—THE STATE OF THE ECONOMY

**1. Developments on the real side**

_General assessment_

POB 780 Jerusalem 91007 Israel

T l 972 2 6552712/3 F 972 2 6528812 b ki l il


-----

Indicators which became available in the past month point toward an entrenchment of
the assessment that there was an improvement in the level of activity in the economy
during the first quarter of 2013. With that, it is too early to tell if this was the
beginning of a positive turning point, or if it was a correction to weak results in the
previous quarter.

_Monthly indices of the economic situation_

Updated indicators of economic activity in February point toward continuation of the
improvement which began to be seen in January. Most indicators which became
available this month are positive—the Business Tendency Survey indicates that there
was improvement in activity in February, continuing that of the previous month.
Similarly, the Climate Index indicates a continuation of the positive trend in the
business sector, and the Composite State of the Economy Index increased in February
at a rate similar to that of the previous month, and its growth rate is relatively high
compared with the final quarter of 2012. The industrial production index increased by
5.7 percent in January, and the Purchasing Managers Index increased and reached the
level indicating expansion in manufacturing industry. Most consumer confidence
indices increased. Tax revenues in January–February were in line with the seasonal
path consistent with the growth estimate of 3.8 percent. With that, it is likely that the
positive picture derives from a correction from the weakness in the final quarter of
2012, following, among other things, security issues, and it is too early to tell if this is
a change in trend.

_The labor market_

Labor market data which became available this month indicate stability in
employment for January. Labor force survey data indicate a decline of 0.3 percentage
points in the unemployment rate, to 6.5 percent, in January, with a decline of 0.2
percentage points in the participation rate. There was a slight decline as well in the
unemployment rate among the main employment ages of 25–64, to 5.5 percent.
Unemployment data are consistent with figures of the Israeli Employment Service,
which reported a decline in the number of unemployed and laid off workers in
January. Employers' expectations in various industries reported in the Business
Tendency Survey for February present a mixed picture for the changes in the number
of employed people in the coming 3 months. This was in line with the decline of 7
percent in February in the number of available posts. Nominal wages increased by 1.3
percent and real wages increased by 0.9 percent in the fourth quarter, based on
seasonally adjusted data. Health tax receipts by the National Insurance Institute,
which provide an indication of nominal wage payments, were 5.4 percent higher in
December–February than in the corresponding period of the previous year, reflecting
a slowdown compared with an average year over year increase of 6.4 percent in the
preceding 3 month period.

_Budget data_

2


-----

In February, the government operated without an approved budget framework and in
accordance with the law allowing it to spend 1/12 of the overall 2012 budget each
month in 2013 (including debt repayments), until a budget framework is approved.
The cumulative deficit from the beginning of the year is about NIS 1.3 billion, about
NIS 4.1 billion greater than the seasonal path consistent with the deficit of 3.6 percent
of GDP derived from the fiscal rule and tax rates set in law. An examination of the
spending commitments for 2013 made in past years indicates that in order to abide by
the expenditure rule, the government must reduce the commitments by about NIS 13
billion (about 1.3 percent of GDP). Even after such cuts, this is still a real expansion
of about 4.5 percent compared with the 2012 budget. Deviation in the government
deficit is liable to lead to increased interest rates in the economy.

**2. Developments on the nominal side**

_Inflation_

The Consumer Price Index (CPI) for February remained unchanged, in line with
forecasts. The rate of increase in the CPI over the past 12 months remained essentially
unchanged compared to recent months, at 1.5 percent.

_Expectations and forecasts of inflation and of the Bank of Israel interest rate_

Forecasters' inflation projections for the next twelve months, as well as inflation
expectations based on over-the-counter CPI futures contracts offered by banks, were
1.8 percent on average, similar to their level last month. Inflation expectations for the
next twelve months calculated from the capital markets (breakeven inflation),
seasonally adjusted, remained stable at 2 percent. Inflation expectations for short
terms (2–3 years) were unchanged at 2.4 percent, while expectations for the medium
term declined slightly from the previous two months. Expectations for longer terms
declined from 2.4 percent to 2.3 percent, continuing the marked decline of last month
(from 2.8 percent to 2.4 percent). Expectations for the Bank of Israel interest rate one
year from now derived from the Telbor (Tel Aviv Inter-Bank Offered Rate) market,
and expectations based on the average projection of forecasters, are for an interest rate
of 1.6 percent and 1.75 percent, respectively.

_The monetary aggregates_

In the twelve months ending in February, the M1 monetary aggregate (cash held by
the public and demand deposits) increased by 12.9 percent, and the M2 aggregate (M1
plus unindexed deposits of up to one year) increased by 6.9 percent.

_The credit market_

The outstanding debt of the business sector declined by 0.3 percent in January, from
NIS 779 billion to NIS 776 billion. Total outstanding credit to households increased in
January by 0.3 percent, to NIS 386 billion. The total volume of new mortgages

3


-----

granted in February was NIS 3.9 billion, similar to January. The balance of housing
debt was NIS 271 billion in January, an increase of 7.1 percent compared with
January 2012. Interest rates on new mortgages taken out in January remained
unchanged. The decline in the LTV ratio for housing loans continued in February,
against the background of directives issued by the Supervisor of Banks. There was
also a decline in the proportion of mortgages granted to finance homes purchased for
investment purposes. The decline in the average LTV ratio and in the proportion of
mortgages for investment purposes apparently indicate the increasing influence of
constraints imposed by the Banking Supervision Department.

_The housing market_

The housing component of the CPI (based on housing rents) declined by 0.4 percent
in February. In the twelve months ending in February, it increased by 2.5 percent,
compared with an increase of 2.9 percent in the twelve months to January. Home
prices, which are published in the Central Bureau of Statistics survey of home prices
but are not included in the CPI, increased in December–January by 1.7 percent, after
increasing by 1.1 percent in November–December. The rate of increase in home
prices continues to rise. In the twelve months ending in January, home prices
increased by 8.6 percent, compared with an increase of 6.7 percent in the twelve
months to December.

There were 39,794 building starts in the 12 months ending in December, and this is
expected to continue to support a high level of stock of homes. With that, the number
of building starts in 2012 was about 13 percent lower than in 2011. In addition, the
rate of properties marketed by the Israel Lands Administration has declined sharply.

_The Bank of Israel Research Department staff forecast_

This month, the Bank of Israel Research Department updated its macroeconomic
forecast. According to its projection, the inflation rate over the next 4 quarters will be
1.7 percent, the Bank of Israel interest rate, which was 1.75 percent when the forecast
was formulated, is expected to remain at that level in the coming year, and GDP,
following the beginning of natural gas production from the Tamar field, is expected to
grow by 3.8 percent in 2013 (similar to the previous forecast). Excluding the effect of
natural gas production from Tamar, growth is projected to be 2.8 percent. In 2014,
growth, impacted by the expected recovery worldwide, is forecast to accelerate to 4.0
percent (3.3 percent excluding the effect of natural gas production from Tamar). Gas
production requires a small number of workers, so that the developments expected in
employment and unemployment will primarily be affected by growth of GDP
excluding gas production.

**3. The foreign currency and stock markets**

_The foreign exchange market_

4


-----

From February 24, 2013, through March 20, 2013, the shekel appreciated by about
0.84 percent against the dollar, and by 2.9 percent against the euro. In terms of the
nominal effective exchange rate, the shekel appreciated by about 1.95 percent during
the period. The shekel's strength against the dollar during the month was in contrast to
the dollar's trend worldwide.

_The capital market_

From February 24, 2013, through March 20, 2013, the Tel Aviv 25 Index increased by
about 2.3 percent. Yields on government bonds increased moderately, and the yield
differential between 10-year Israeli government bonds and equivalent 10-year US
Treasury securities widened by about 5 basis points, to 209 basis points. Makam
yields increased slightly along most of the curve by up to 6 basis points, with one-year
yields increasing to 1.66 percent during the period. Israel's sovereign risk premium as
measured by the five-year CDS spread was unchanged at 122 basis points. The TelBond 60 Index increased moderately by about 0.1 percent over the period. Spreads in
the corporate bond market widened for companies with lower ratings.

**4. Global economic developments**

The global macroeconomic picture was mixed in the past month. In the US, macro
data continued to be mostly positive, and indicated continued recovery in the
economy, despite the fiscal tightening measures which went into effect in the
beginning of the year and in March. With that, the consequences of those measures,
together with the debt ceiling issue, present a risk to the continued process of
improvement, as already expressed in the decline in the consumer confidence index
there. In the eurozone, macro data continued to be weak and indicated continued
recession. Against this background, the European Commission and the ECB recently
revised their eurozone growth forecasts for 2013 downward, with neither entity
forecasting positive growth until 2014. In China, recent macro data indicated some
loss of momentum in the growth rate. In the eurozone, there were two factors in the
recent month which increased concern of a return of the debt crisis in Europe—
election results in Italy which raised doubts about continued implementation of
reforms in the country, and developments in Cyprus. Over the period, stock market
indices of advanced economies increased. Oil and metals prices declined during the
period, and agricultural commodity prices were stable. Monetary policy at most
central banks did not change during the past month, and interest rates in major
economies remained low, with expectations for accommodative monetary policy to
continue.

B. THE NARROW-FORUM DISCUSSION––THE INTEREST RATE DECISION
FOR APRIL–MAY 2013

**Main points of discussion**

5


-----

The six members of the Monetary Committee participating in the discussion decide on
the appropriate rate of interest for the economy. After the discussion on the interest
rate for April–May 2013, the Committee members voted unanimously to keep the
interest rate unchanged at 1.75 percent.

The discussion focused on the following main issues: (1) the inflation environment;
(2) the level of economic activity; (3) the fiscal situation; (4) the foreign exchange
market, and (5) the housing market.

The Committee discussed the inflation environment—actual inflation and
expectations for the coming year are around the midpoint of the target range. There
was agreement among Committee members that the current inflation environment
does not pose a limitation on reducing the interest rate should that be necessary.

Committee members agreed that an analysis of macroeconomic data and the results of
surveys indicate an improvement in economic activity in the first quarter of 2013.
With that, it is still too early to tell if results of the current quarter are a positive
turning point in the level of economic activity which is expected to continue to
expand, or if it is a temporary correction following weak growth in the previous
quarter due to one-time circumstances, including, among other things, operation Pillar
of Defense. As support for the viewpoint that we are at a turning point, it was noted
that the effect of security occurrences on the economy's activity was relatively
constrained, and thus it is difficult to attribute the entire improvement in economic
activity to a correction following operation Pillar of Defense. Furthermore, indicators
of private consumption and survey results signal optimism about expected
developments. Yet in contrast, there were no major changes in the global economy in
recent months, particularly in world trade, which would support a change in trend,
thus it is possible that the increase in exports is a correction and not a turning point.

Committee members discussed developments in fiscal policy as well. Members
expressed their concern about a negative impact on fiscal credibility as a result of not
meeting deficit targets in the coming two years. The negative impact is liable to be
expressed in an increase in funding costs of the government debt in the future. This
concern derives from, among other things, the fact that the deficit in 2012 was, for the
most part, structural, in a year in which the level of economic activity, as evidenced
by the low unemployment rate, was not far from its potential level. Overcommitments in 2013, relative to the government's expenditure rule, total around NIS
13 billion. In order to meet the deficit target and the expenditure rule, the new
government will have to significantly reduce its expenditures, and at the same time,
increase its revenues. Committee members noted that even if such a cut is
implemented, fiscal policy will not be restraining, since it reflects a real increase of
4.5 percent in expenditures relative to the 2012 budget.

The discussion also covered the foreign exchange market and the appreciation of the
shekel in recent months. The Committee noted that the recent months' appreciation

6


-----

brought the exchange rate to a level slightly more appreciated than the level it was in
the summer, before the depreciation it experienced in light of the security-related
tensions.

Committee members agree that the rate of increase of home prices in recent months
continues to be high, and that signs of moderation of activity in the market for homes
are not seen, based on updated figures. With that, it was noted that home prices have
not yet been fully affected by the most recent measure of the Supervisor of Banks
which requires banks to increase their capital buffers in respect of mortgages.
Committee members emphasized that monetary policy is limited in its ability, on its
own, to affect this market, through its effect on demand for homes. Thus, the new
government will need to adopt measures to expand the supply (accelerating planning
processes and increased marketing of land, primarily in areas in demand), as well as
possibly to restrain demand (such as taxation measures).

Following the discussion, the six members of the Monetary Committee voted on the
Bank of Israel interest rate for April–May 2013. All Committee members supported
keeping the interest rate unchanged at 1.75 percent.

The decision to keep the interest rate for April–May 2013 unchanged at 1.75 percent
is consistent with the Bank of Israel's interest rate policy, which is intended to
entrench the inflation rate within the price stability target of 1–3 percent a year over
the next twelve months, and to support growth while maintaining financial stability.
The path of the interest rate in the future depends on developments in the inflation
environment, growth in Israel and in the global economy, the monetary policies of
major central banks, and developments in the exchange rate of the shekel.

In its announcement, the Bank highlighted the following main considerations
underlying the decision to keep the interest rate unchanged at 1.75 percent:

- The inflation environment reflected in increased actual prices and expectations for
one year ahead remains stable. Inflation over the previous 12 months was 1.5
percent, and forecasters' inflation projections for the next year are 1.8 percent, on
average.

- Updated indicators of economic activity in February point toward continuation of
the signs of improvement which began to be seen in January, but it is still too
early to determine if this is a positive turning point. According to the Research
Department's staff forecast, GDP growth is expected to be 3.8 percent in 2013,
and 4 percent in 2014. Excluding the effects of natural gas production from
"Tamar" drilling, GDP growth is expected to be 2.8 percent in 2013 and 3.3
percent in 2014.

- One of the sources of uncertainty regarding developments in the economy is the
government's fiscal policy. An examination of the budget commitments which are
already in place indicates that in order to abide by the expenditure rule, the

7


-----

government must reduce commitments this year by about NIS 13 billion (about
1.3 percent of GDP). Even after such a reduction, the budget would reflect a real
expansion of about 4.5 percent compared with the 2012 budget. Deviation in the
government deficit is liable to lead to increased interest rates in the economy.

- The global macroeconomic picture is mixed. There are signs of recovery in the US
economy, while in Europe, the slowdown continues. With that, it appears that the
there has been a decline in the probability of a crisis occurring, a development
which has reduced the high level of uncertainty that prevailed in the past year.

- In terms of the effective exchange rate, the shekel continued its appreciation this
month, following its strengthening in recent months.

- The rate of increase in home prices continues to rise, and in the 12 months which
ended in January, home prices increased by 8.6 percent, compared with an
increase of 6.7 percent in the 12 months which ended in December.

- During the past month, the expansionary policies of major central banks
continued, and interest rates in those economies remained near zero. The
accommodative policies of central banks in major advanced economies, based on
their announcements, are expected to continue during the rest of the year.

The Bank of Israel will continue to monitor developments in the Israeli and global
economies and in financial markets, particularly in light of the continuing high level
of uncertainty in the global economy. The Bank will use the tools available to it to
achieve its objectives of price stability, the encouragement of employment and
growth, and support for the stability of the financial system, and in this regard will
keep a close watch on developments in the asset markets, including the housing
market.

The decision was reached and published on March 24, 2013.

**Participants in the narrow-forum discussion:**

**Members of the Monetary Committee**
Prof. Stanley Fischer, Governor of the Bank of Israel, Chairperson
Prof. Alex Cukierman
Dr. Karnit Flug, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Israel
Prof. Reuben Gronau
Prof. Rafi Melnick
Mr. Barry Topf, Senior Advisor to the Governor on Monetary Policy Issues

**Other participants in the narrow-forum discussion:**
Mr. Andrew Abir, Director of the Market Operations Department

8


-----

Prof. Nathan Sussman, Director of the Research Department
Mr. Eddy Azoulay, Chief of Staff to the Governor
Dr. Yossi Saadon, Advisor to the Governor and Bank of Israel Spokesperson
Mr. Itamar Caspi, Economist in the Research Department
Ms. Esti Schwartz, Secretary of the Monetary Committee

9


-----

