Not to be released until 8:50 a.m.
Japan Standard Time on Wednesday,
July 18, 2012.

July 18, 2012

Bank of Japan

# Minutes of the Monetary Policy Meeting
## on June 14 and 15, 2012

(English translation prepared by the Bank's staff based on the Japanese original)


-----

Please contact the Bank of Japan at the address below in advance to request permission

when reproducing or copying the content of this document for commercial purposes.

Secretariat of the Policy Board, Bank of Japan

P.O. Box 30, Nihonbashi, Tokyo 103-8660, Japan

Please credit the source when quoting, reproducing, or copying the content of this

document.


-----

A Monetary Policy Meeting of the Bank of Japan Policy Board was held in the

Head Office of the Bank of Japan in Tokyo on Thursday, June 14, 2012, from 2:00 p.m. to

4:14 p.m., and on Friday, June 15, from 9:00 a.m. to 11:47 a.m.[1]

**Policy Board Members Present**

**Mr. M. Shirakawa, Chairman, Governor of the Bank of Japan**

**Mr. H. Yamaguchi, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Japan**

**Mr. K. G. Nishimura, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Japan**

**Mr. R. Miyao**

**Mr. Y. Morimoto**

**Ms. S. Shirai**

**Mr. K. Ishida**

Government Representatives Present

Mr. Y. Fujita, Senior Vice Minister of Finance, Ministry of Finance[2]

Mr. S. Sato, Deputy Vice Minister for Policy Planning and Coordination, Ministry of

Finance[3]

Mr. K. Ishida, Senior Vice Minister, Cabinet Office[2 ]

Mr. K. Matsuyama, Vice Minister for Policy Coordination, Cabinet Office[3 ]

Reporting Staff

Mr. H. Nakaso, Executive Director (Assistant Governor)

Mr. H. Hayakawa, Executive Director

Mr. N. Kinoshita, Executive Director

Mr. K. Momma, Executive Director

Mr. S. Uchida, Director-General, Monetary Affairs Department

Mr. K. Kamiyama, Head of Policy Planning Division, Monetary Affairs Department

1 The minutes of this meeting were approved by the Policy Board at the Monetary Policy Meeting
held on July 11 and 12, 2012 as "a document describing an outline of the discussion at the meeting"
stipulated in Article 20, paragraph 1 of the Bank of Japan Act of 1997. Those present are referred
to by their titles at the time of the meeting.
2 Messrs. Y. Fujita and K. Ishida were present on June 15.
3 Messrs. S. Sato and K. Matsuyama were present on June 14.

1


-----

Mr. S. Aoki, Director-General, Financial Markets Department

Mr. E. Maeda, Director-General, Research and Statistics Department

Mr. K. Kamada, Head of Economic Research Division, Research and Statistics

Department

Mr. H. Ono, Director-General, International Department

Secretariat of the Monetary Policy Meeting

Mr. Y. Iino, Director-General, Secretariat of the Policy Board

Mr. T. Tachibana, Director, Deputy Head of Planning and Coordination Division,

Secretariat of the Policy Board

Mr. M. Kasai, Senior Economist, Monetary Affairs Department

Mr. T. Kawamoto, Senior Economist, Monetary Affairs Department

2


-----

**I. Summary of Staff Reports on Economic and Financial Developments[4]**

**A. Money Market Operations in the Intermeeting Period**

The Bank, in accordance with the guideline decided at the previous meeting on

May 22 and 23, 2012, had been providing ample funds sufficient to meet demand in

financial markets and was doing its utmost to ensure stability in the markets.[5] In this

situation, the uncollateralized overnight call rate had been in the range of 0.070 to 0.095

percent.

With regard to the Bank's operations, undersubscription had occurred in its

fixed-rate funds-supplying operation against pooled collateral (hereafter the fixed-rate

operation) with a six-month term on a continuous basis, as well as in the fixed-rate

operation with a three-month term, as the sense of an abundance of liquidity continued to be

strong in the money market amid the Bank's provision of ample funds. In this situation,

with the aim of operating the Asset Purchase Program (hereafter the Program) smoothly, the

Bank raised the maximum bidding amount for each counterparty and set the date of

repayment flexibly in order to increase market participants' incentive to bid in the Bank's

fixed-rate operation.

**B. Recent Developments in Financial Markets**

Money market rates, including longer-term ones, had been stable at low levels.

General collateral (GC) repo rates, which had temporarily risen somewhat, had generally

been at around 0.1 percent. As for interest rates on term instruments, yields on treasury

discount bills (T-Bills), including those with longer maturities, had been stable at around 0.1

percent. Rates on longer-term interbank instruments had been more or less unchanged.

Amid the continued risk aversion among global investors caused by concern over

the European debt problem, the closing price of the Nikkei 225 Stock Average temporarily

dropped to the range of 8,200-8,300 yen -- the lowest level since the start of 2012.

However, as risk aversion among investors abated somewhat, due mainly to the

announcement of financial assistance to Spain by the Eurogroup, the Nikkei 225 Stock

Average recovered to around 8,500 yen. Prices for Japan real estate investment trusts

4 Reports were made based on information available at the time of the meeting.
5 The guideline was as follows:
The Bank of Japan will encourage the uncollateralized overnight call rate to remain at
around 0 to 0.1 percent.

3


-----

(J-REITs) had also declined temporarily and recovered thereafter, in line with movements in

stock prices. The benchmark long-term interest rate was seesawing around 0.8-0.9 percent

after temporarily falling below the 0.8 percent level. Yield spreads between corporate

bonds and Japanese government bonds (JGBs) continued to be more or less unchanged on

the whole, reflecting solid demand from investors for corporate bonds. The yen

temporarily appreciated to the 77-78 yen range against the U.S. dollar, and to the 95-96 yen

range against the euro -- the latter representing the highest level since December 2000. It

subsequently depreciated, however, and had recently been in the range of 79-80 yen against

the dollar and at around 100 yen against the euro.

**C. Overseas Economic and Financial Developments**

Overseas economies on the whole still had not emerged from a deceleration phase,

but had shown some, albeit moderate, improvement.

The U.S. economy continued to recover at a moderate pace. Private consumption

was increasing, reflecting a modest improvement in the employment situation, but the pace

of recovery was generally moderate partly because the balance-sheet repair continued to

weigh on the economy. Housing investment remained at a depressed level with weakness

in housing prices. Exports continued to gain momentum, and business fixed investment

maintained its uptrend. Under these circumstances, production continued to increase

moderately. As for prices, while slack in supply and demand conditions in the goods and

labor markets continued to exert downward pressure on prices, the year-on-year rate of

increase in the consumer price index (CPI) for all items decelerated due to a gradual decline

in energy prices, such as those of gasoline.

Economic activity in the euro area had been sluggish. Signs of a pick-up in

exports were seen mainly in those to the United States and emerging economies. On the

other hand, business fixed investment had been declining, and private consumption was

more or less unchanged. In some countries, such as Germany and France, household

sentiment continued picking up, but business sentiment was weakening, albeit moderately.

On the other hand, in some peripheral countries, both household and business sentiment

remained weak. Under these circumstances, production was declining moderately. As

for prices, in a situation where slack in supply and demand conditions was exerting

downward pressure on prices, the year-on-year rate of increase in the Harmonized Index of

4


-----

Consumer Prices (HICP) for all items decelerated somewhat, reflecting the decline in

gasoline prices. Meanwhile, economic activity in the United Kingdom had been sluggish

as well.

With regard to Asia, although the Chinese economy continued to show relatively

high growth, the pace was slowing. Signs of a pick-up in exports were seen mainly in

those to the United States. In terms of domestic demand, the rates of increase in fixed

asset investment and private consumption had decelerated, although they remained at

relatively high levels. These slowdowns resulted from the deceleration in private real

estate investment for the former and in the consumption of durable goods such as electrical

appliances for the latter. Given such developments, the rate of increase in production was

decelerating. Regarding the NIEs and the ASEAN countries, the pace of economic growth

had begun to pick up. As for domestic demand, business fixed investment had been

increasing moderately and private consumption had been firm. Exports and production

were picking up, reflecting the restoration following the damage caused by the flooding in

Thailand, but the pace remained only moderate, mainly due to sluggish growth in exports to

Europe and China. As for prices, in many of the NIEs and the ASEAN countries, core

inflation rates had been at relatively high levels, mainly reflecting the wage inflation caused

by tight labor market conditions. On the other hand, inflation rates for all items had

declined at a moderate pace, due mainly to a halt in the surge in food prices. In India, the

deceleration of economic growth had come to a halt.

In global financial markets, some nervousness continued to be seen, mainly

reflecting concern over the European debt problem. With regard to the yield spreads of

government bonds issued by European countries over German government bonds, those for

Greece remained at high levels on the back of the political turmoil. Those for Spain had

been widening due to increased concern over the financial system and resurgence of the

problem regarding local government finance, and those for Italy had also been widening

accordingly. U.S. and European stock prices declined substantially following increased

concern over the European debt problem and the release of some economic indicators that

turned out to be weaker than market expectations, such as the employment statistics in the

United States. They had recovered, however, due to the announcement of financial

assistance to Spain by the Eurogroup and heightened expectations for additional monetary

easing. Long-term interest rates in the United States and Germany had been more or less

5


-----

unchanged after they marked new record lows due to the prolonged monetary easing and

heightened demand for safe assets. With regard to corporate bond markets in the United

States and Europe, credit spreads on corporate bonds had been widening somewhat,

particularly for those issued by firms with low credit ratings. Developments in stock

prices and currencies in emerging and commodity-exporting economies had differed among

countries and regions, but had declined noticeably in China, as well as in Hong Kong,

Taiwan, and Singapore, where economic ties with China were strong. While risk aversion

continued globally, the funding conditions of European financial institutions had been

stable on the whole, due in part to the various measures taken by central banks so far.

Spreads between interest rates on euro-denominated term instruments and overnight index

swap (OIS) rates had been more or less unchanged. Spreads between interest rates on U.S.

dollar-denominated term instruments and OIS rates had been virtually unchanged, and the

U.S. dollar funding premium in the foreign exchange swap markets was also more or less

unchanged from the level at the time of the previous meeting, after having risen

temporarily.

**D. Economic and Financial Developments in Japan**

1. Economic developments

Exports had shown signs of a pick-up. Real exports registered high growth of 6.2

percent in April 2012 relative to the January-March quarter, after having been more or less

flat. Exports were expected to increase moderately as overseas economies emerged from

the deceleration phase.

Public investment had been increasing, primarily in that related to reconstruction

following the earthquake disaster, and was expected to be on the rise.

Business fixed investment had been on a moderate increasing trend, with corporate

profits improving. It was expected to continue on this uptrend, partly due to efforts by

firms to restore and reconstruct disaster-stricken facilities as well as to strengthen

earthquake resistance and business continuity systems, as corporate profits improved.

The employment and income situation, although it remained severe, had generally

been improving, as evidenced partly by the fact that (1) the ratio of job offers to applicants

continued to improve and (2) the unemployment rate had been trending downward.

6


-----

Against the background of improvement in consumer sentiment, private

consumption continued to increase moderately due to the effects of measures to stimulate

demand for automobiles. It was expected to remain firm as the employment situation was

on an improving trend.

Housing investment had generally been picking up, supported in part by

reconstruction of disaster-stricken homes, and was expected to continue to do so.

Production had started picking up moderately and was expected to increase

moderately as domestic demand stayed firm and as exports picked up gradually.

According to interviews with firms, although many continued to hold conservative views on

their production plans for the time being, production was expected to increase moderately

both in the April-June and July-September quarters of 2012.

As for prices, international commodity prices had been falling back recently. The

three-month rate of increase in the domestic corporate goods price index (CGPI) was

slowing, mainly because international commodity prices had been falling back. The CGPI

was expected to be somewhat weak for the time being, mainly reflecting movements in

international commodity prices. The year-on-year rate of change in the corporate services

price index (CSPI) for all items excluding international transportation, having seen a

deceleration in the pace of decline, turned positive in April 2012 for the first time in three

and a half years. The year-on-year rate of change in the CPI (all items less fresh food) was

currently around 0 percent and was expected to stay at this level for the time being.

2. Financial environment

Financial conditions continued to ease.

The overnight call rate remained at an extremely low level, and firms' funding

costs declined moderately. The short-term real interest rate -- calculated by subtracting the

CPI inflation rate from the call rate -- had recovered to a more or less neutral level relative

to the growth rate of the real GDP trend or the potential growth rate. With regard to credit

supply, firms continued to see financial institutions' lending attitudes as being on an

improving trend. Issuing conditions for CP continued to be favorable. Those for

corporate bonds also remained favorable on the whole. As for credit demand, firms

showed signs of increasing their demand mainly for working capital and funds related to

mergers and acquisitions. Against this backdrop, the year-on-year rate of change in the

7


-----

amount outstanding of bank lending had been positive. The year-on-year rate of change in

the total amount outstanding of corporate bonds and CP had been moving around 0 percent,

while that of corporate bonds had been slightly negative. In these circumstances, firms

retained their recovered financial positions on the whole. Meanwhile, the year-on-year

rate of change in the money stock had been positive at around 2 percent.

3. The fund-provisioning measure to support strengthening the foundations for economic

growth

On June 8, 2012, the Bank carried out a new loan disbursement, amounting to

289.6 billion yen, under the main rules for the fund-provisioning measure to support

strengthening the foundations for economic growth. The outstanding balance of loans

disbursed by the Bank under these rules amounted to 3,131.4 billion yen after the new loan

disbursement, thus exceeding 3 trillion yen for the first time, following the Bank's decision

to increase the ceiling for the outstanding balance of loans from 3 trillion yen to 3.5 trillion

yen in March 2012. Under the special rules for equity investments and asset-based lending

(ABL), the Bank's new loan disbursement was 21.4 billion yen, and the outstanding balance

of loans came to 106.9 billion yen, thus slightly exceeding 100 billion yen. Regarding the

newly introduced special rules for small-lot investments and loans, the first loan

disbursement was only 3 billion yen, partly due to the fact that financial institutions had not

completed preparations for applying to the Bank for loans under the special rules. The

breakdown by area of loans provided by financial institutions that had received the Bank's

loans under the special rules for small-lot investments and loans showed that "business

reorganization" and "setting up a new business" accounted for large proportions. This

suggested that the Bank's provision of loans under the special rules could be effective in

terms of exploring new sources of demand for funds, aside from the major areas covered by

the loans provided under the main rules.

**II. Summary of Discussions by the Policy Board on Economic and Financial**

**Developments**

**A. Economic Developments**

In terms of global financial markets, members agreed that some nervousness

continued to be seen on the back of concern about Spanish banks' impaired assets and the

8


-----

Greek political situation, and therefore particular attention should be paid to developments

in these markets for the time being. Many members commented that, although risk

aversion among investors had temporarily eased following the announcement of financial

assistance to Spain by the Eurogroup, the likelihood that tensions in the markets could

further intensify was not small, as there remained a high degree of uncertainty about the

European debt problem -- including how fiscal consolidation and economic structural

reforms in Greece following its election in June would develop -- and consequently the

global economy. On this point, a few members expressed the view that tensions in the

markets regarding the European debt problem had intensified and eased repeatedly, and that

this cycle was shortening gradually. Regarding the policy conditionality for financial

assistance to Spain, one member noted that it was not easy to strike a balance between the

conditionalities for Spain and those for countries that were already receiving assistance.

Some members commented that heightened risk aversion among investors was partly

attributable to somewhat more cautious views on the outlook for the global economy.

Meanwhile, members noted that the situation of interbank funding markets was of

importance in terms of ensuring the stability of the financial system, and shared the

recognition that the markets remained generally stable at present, mainly due to the effects

of the provision of a large amount of funds by the European Central Bank (ECB). On this

basis, some members said that due attention needed to be paid to the risk that stability of the

financial markets, including funding markets, would deteriorate suddenly, triggered by an

unforeseeable event.

With regard to overseas economies, members concurred that the pace of recovery

had been somewhat delayed. They were of the view that these economies on the whole

still had not emerged from a deceleration phase, but had shown some, albeit moderate,

improvement. As for the outlook, they shared the view that overseas economies were

likely to gradually emerge from this deceleration phase. Some members expressed the

opinion that, rather than emerging and commodity-exporting economies being the sole

driving force of global recovery, there was a possibility that the U.S. economy as well as

emerging economies would become driving forces.

As for the U.S. economy, members agreed that it continued to recover at a

moderate pace and was likely to continue to do so. A few members commented that the

economic assessments of each district presented in the Federal Reserve's June Beige Book

9


-----

were generally positive, suggesting that the economy continued to recover moderately.

Regarding the fact that the growth in nonfarm payroll employment had slowed and the

decline in the unemployment rate had paused, many members expressed the view that the

employment situation could be viewed as maintaining a modest improving trend, judged

together with the average of these figures over the past six months or so and other

employment indicators. A few of these members expressed the opinion that private

consumption would be firm for the time being, as the employment situation improved

moderately and real income increased reflecting a decline in gasoline prices. On this basis,

many members said that, in addition to the adverse impact of the European debt problem, it

was necessary to carefully monitor the situation surrounding the "fiscal cliff" -- a state in

which fiscal spending cuts and tax increases would be implemented simultaneously at the

beginning of 2013 -- and its effects on the U.S. economy amid persisting strains from

balance-sheet adjustments.

As for the economic activity in the euro area, members shared the view that it had

been sluggish, despite signs of a pick-up in exports, because domestic demand in the area

had been stagnant. In terms of the outlook, they agreed that the economy was likely to

remain sluggish for the time being given that fiscal austerity continued and financial

conditions were unlikely to improve. Some members -- noting the pronounced disparities

observed until recently regarding economic sentiment between peripheral countries and

core countries such as Germany -- pointed out that weak domestic demand and a

deterioration in financial conditions in peripheral countries were starting to exert downward

pressure on production and business sentiment in core countries. Some members noted

that a vicious cycle of a worsening fiscal balance, increasing tensions in the financial

system, and a dampening of economic activity had been operating in peripheral countries.

These members expressed the view that, if no effective measures were taken to prevent this

cycle from intensifying, not only was there a risk that European economies, especially

peripheral countries, would weaken further but also that this would have an extremely

adverse impact on the global economy through instability in financial markets. Many

members pointed to the risk that a weakening in the euro area economy would exert

downward pressure not only on economic activity in countries that were largely dependent

on exports to the euro area -- such as China -- but also on Japan and other countries that

were indirectly linked with the euro area through exports and imports with the former set of

10


-----

countries.

Members shared the view that, although the Chinese economy continued to show

relatively high growth, the pace was slowing. Most members, referring to economic

indicators released recently, expressed the view that, while signs of a pick-up were observed

in external trade and in provision of new loans, the growth rates in domestic demand-related

indicators such as fixed asset investment and retail sales were slowing. As for the outlook,

members agreed that the economy was likely to gradually show clear signs of recovery

through the second half of 2012 on the back of the implementation of a range of policy

measures, although the timing of such recovery was being delayed slightly. On this basis,

some members added that implementation of drastic stimulus measures might be difficult

given that the pace of increase in labor supply was slowing and the growth rate in wages

stood at an elevated level despite the ongoing economic slowdown. These members

expressed the view that, even in the longer run, the economy was unlikely to return to the

high growth path observed in the recent past. One of these members expressed the opinion

that fixed asset investment could continue to increase, especially in the inland area, but the

effects of developments in such investment on the entire economy were diminishing.

Based on the above deliberations on economic and financial conditions abroad,

members discussed the state of Japan's economy.

Regarding recent developments in the economy, members agreed that, although a

recovery in overseas demand was somewhat delayed, Japan's economic activity had started

picking up moderately as domestic demand remained firmer than expected, mainly

supported by reconstruction-related demand. They concurred that public investment had

been increasing with the progress in the execution of the budget related to the earthquake

disaster, and business fixed investment had been on a moderate increasing trend with

corporate profits improving. Members shared the recognition that, against the background

of improvement in consumer sentiment, private consumption had continued to increase

moderately due to the effects of measures to stimulate demand for automobiles, and that

housing investment had generally been picking up. As the background to the firmness in

domestic demand, many members cited (1) reconstruction-related demand, (2) the effects of

policy measures such as subsidies for purchasers of environmentally friendly cars, and (3)

the effects of the improvement in corporate profits and the employment and income

situation. One of these members added that the fact that firms' efforts to explore new

11


-----

sources of demand from the elderly were producing results, and that real purchasing power

was increasing due to the appreciation of the yen, could also be considered as factors behind

the firmness in domestic demand. This member said that reconstruction-related demand

varied widely, ranging not only over public investment, pent-up demand following the

earthquake disaster, and demand related to the rebuilding of daily lives in the disaster areas,

but also over firms' and households' demand related to the establishment of premises for

business continuity plans, strengthening of the earthquake resistance of buildings and

houses, and purchasing of disaster kits. Members shared the recognition that exports had

shown signs of a pick-up. As for the high growth in real exports registered in April, most

members expressed the view that, although it was likely that the figure had been relatively

strong due to a statistical anomaly, a confirmed increase without large regional disparities

was nevertheless a positive development. Members shared the recognition that production

had started picking up moderately, reflecting these developments in demand at home and

abroad.

As for the outlook for the economy, members agreed that it was likely to return to

a moderate recovery path as domestic demand remained firm and overseas economies

emerged from the deceleration phase. Many members expressed the recognition that the

key factor was whether domestic demand would remain firm until a recovery in external

demand became evident. On this point, some members expressed the view that further

improvement in corporate profits was likely to lead to an increase in business fixed

investment and an improvement in the employment and income situation, thereby

underpinning private consumption. A few members, however, said that it was necessary to

pay attention to whether private consumption would be dampened by the following factors:

(1) the budget allocated for subsidies for purchasers of environmentally friendly cars would

run out before long, (2) the cuts in the salaries of government employees were likely to

exert negative effects, and (3) the level of summer bonus payments in 2012 was projected to

be somewhat weak. One of these members added that, while the ratio of job offers to

applicants was improving recently, the number of unemployed persons remained at an

elevated level, suggesting the possibility of a growing mismatch between supply and

demand of labor in some industries. This member continued that there should be close

monitoring of whether such a mismatch would delay an improvement in household income

and private consumption. Regarding business fixed investment, one member pointed out

12


-----

that, in the Business Outlook Survey, plans for investment in plant and equipment for fiscal

2012 were solid in both the manufacturing and nonmanufacturing industries. On this basis,

this member said that it was necessary to closely monitor whether such a positive attitude

toward investment would also be observed in the June _Tankan_ (Short-Term Economic

Survey of Enterprises in Japan), and whether these plans would indeed be implemented.

With regard to risks to the outlook for Japan's economy, members concurred that

there remained a high degree of uncertainty about the global economy, including the

prospects for the European debt problem, the momentum toward recovery for the U.S.

economy, and the likelihood of emerging and commodity-exporting economies

simultaneously achieving price stability and economic growth. Regarding the European

debt problem, they shared the view that instability in global financial markets and a

deceleration in overseas economies stemming from the worsening of the problem were risks

that should be of the most concern. Some members, noting that concern about the

European debt problem was becoming chronic and that the effects of such a development

tended to result in an appreciation of the yen and a fall in stock prices, said that this might

negatively affect business and household sentiment, thereby exerting downward pressure on

business fixed investment and private consumption in Japan.

Members agreed that the year-on-year rate of change in the CPI (all items less

fresh food) was currently around 0 percent and likely to stay at this level for the time being.

Some members said that there was a possibility that the rate of change in the CPI (all items

less fresh food) would be around 0 percent for a longer period than expected, partly

reflecting the recent decline in international commodity prices. A few members added that

the rate of change in the CPI (all items less fresh food) for the Tokyo metropolitan area for

May suggested the possibility that the decline in prices of liquid crystal display televisions

could be a downside factor for prices for the time being. Some members expressed the

view that, even if prices were somewhat weak for the time being due to the decline in

international commodity prices, the outlook was unchanged, in that the price situation was

likely to be on a moderate improving trend while the negative output gap narrowed steadily.

With regard to risks to the outlook for prices, members shared the recognition that

careful attention should be paid to future developments in international commodity prices

and in medium- to long-term inflation expectations. A few members said that, if

international commodity prices continued to follow the current downtrend, this could cause

13


-----

a weakening in prices, even in the longer run. One of these members, noting that the

short-term inflation expectations remained at a low level, expressed the opinion that careful

attention should be paid to the effects of this situation on future price developments.

**B. Financial Developments**

Members agreed that financial conditions in Japan continued to ease.

Members agreed that the money market had been extremely stable, as the Bank

had been pursuing powerful monetary easing and the soundness of financial institutions'

balance sheets had been maintained. They shared the view that issuing conditions for CP

remained favorable, as did those for corporate bonds on the whole. They were of the view

that firms' funding costs had declined moderately, and that the availability of funds

remained on an improving trend. A few members noted that it was necessary to pay

attention to the fact that the most recently released statistics showed that the funding

conditions of small firms remained favorable but had deteriorated slightly, and the number

of corporate bankruptcies, although at a low level, had come to exceed the year-ago figure.

**III. Summary of Discussions on Monetary Policy for the Immediate Future**

Regarding the guideline for money market operations for the intermeeting period

ahead, members agreed that it was appropriate to maintain the current guideline that the

Bank would encourage the uncollateralized overnight call rate to remain at around 0 to 0.1

percent.

In relation to monetary policy for the immediate future, members shared the view

that Japan's economy faced the critical challenge of overcoming deflation and returning to a

sustainable growth path with price stability. They continued that, based on the recognition

that this challenge would be met through efforts by a wide range of economic agents to

strengthen the economy's growth potential and support from the financial side, the Bank had

been providing support to strengthen the foundations for economic growth and pursuing

powerful monetary easing. They agreed that the Bank would continue to conduct

monetary policy in an appropriate manner. On this basis, they reaffirmed the view that it

was necessary for the Bank to do its utmost to ensure the stability of Japan's financial

system while paying particular attention to developments in global financial markets, where

some nervousness persisted, reflecting the European debt problem. A few members raised

14


-----

the possibility that Japan's economy would be adversely affected through various channels

if a substantial risk materialized, stemming from the European debt problem, for example.

These members said that the Bank should therefore stand ready to take appropriate actions

without ruling out any options in advance.

With regard to the fact that the long-term interest rate in Japan had temporarily

fallen below the 0.8 percent level, many members expressed the view that this was

attributable to the heightening of demand for JGBs that were regarded as safe assets,

reflecting concern over the European debt problem. A few of these members noted that

demand for safe assets could decline with the progress in addressing the European debt

problem, although concern over the problem would not dissipate immediately. These

members continued that, in such a case, long-term interest rates in the United States,

Germany, and Japan could rebound.

In terms of the Program, members agreed that it was appropriate at this point to

steadily implement the purchases of financial assets under the Program, which was

expanded as a result of the decision made at the April 27 meeting, and to monitor the effects

of these purchases. Some members said that the effects of monetary easing had been

permeating the financial markets steadily as the Bank proceeded with asset purchases

within the current total size of the Program. Regarding the fact that undersubscription -
where the total amount of bids fell short of the amount the Bank offered -- had been

occurring frequently in the fixed-rate operation, many members expressed the view that,

although undersubscription indicated that the effects of the Bank's powerful monetary

easing had been permeating the financial markets, it was necessary for the operation desk to

continue to make operational adjustments that would allow the Bank to accumulate the

outstanding amount of the Program as scheduled. A few of these members added that

undersubscription had been expected to occur as the effects of monetary easing transmitted.

These members continued that, bearing in mind that undersubscription might be possible,

the Bank decided at the April 27 meeting to extend the remaining maturity of JGBs and

corporate bonds to be purchased under the Program, and to reduce the maximum

outstanding amount of the fixed-rate operation.

Regarding the main rules for the fund-provisioning measure to support

strengthening the foundations for economic growth, some members said that there was a

reasonable amount of demand for the Bank's new loan disbursement in accordance with the

15


-----

increase in the ceiling for the outstanding balance of loans, and therefore the intended

effects were being generated. Regarding the special rules for small-lot investments and

loans, many members noted that, although the amount of loans at the first disbursement was

relatively small, the breakdown by area of loans provided by financial institutions that had

received the Bank's loans showed that the proportions were large for areas such as "medical

and nursing care," "business reorganization," "setting up a new business," "agriculture,

forestry, and fisheries business," and "business serving the needs of senior citizens."

These members continued that, since these areas were not pronounced in the loans provided

under the main rules, such large proportions were an encouraging sign that the Bank's

provision of loans under the special rules was contributing to the exploration of new sources

of demand for funds unique to small-lot investments and loans. One member said that the

Bank's loan disbursement under the special rules for small-lot investments and loans was

more accessible to regional financial institutions. This member expressed hope that the

use of this type of fund-provisioning measure would therefore promote these institutions'

efforts to stimulate regional economies.

**IV. Remarks by Government Representatives**

The representative from the Ministry of Finance made the following remarks.

(1) The government was currently making its best efforts to work on the comprehensive

reform of the social security and taxation systems. It would continue to do its utmost

to promptly obtain the Diet's approval of bills related to the comprehensive reform,

which were being deliberated in the Diet.

(2) The Japanese economy was on the way to recovery at a moderate pace, partly supported

by reconstruction demand. As for the outlook, movement toward sound recovery was

expected to take hold. However, against the background of heightened concern over

the European debt problem, downside risks to the Japanese economy had increased as a

result of sharp swings between risk-on and risk-off in financial markets, such as the

stock and foreign exchange markets, and because of growing concern over the further

slowdowns in overseas economies including emerging and commodity-exporting

economies. The government regarded the European debt problem as a risk that

warranted the most attention, and was greatly concerned about this issue. It expected

the Bank to carefully monitor how this risk would affect the Japanese economy and

16


-----

make every effort to avoid a slowdown. Furthermore, the government expected the

Bank to fully communicate such efforts to the public at home and abroad.

(3) The government and the Bank shared the view that overcoming deflation was the

top-priority task in Japan, and had been making policy efforts while sufficiently

exchanging views and keeping close contact; however, Japan had not yet overcome

deflation. The government expected the Bank -- under its policy stance that, for the

time being, it would pursue powerful monetary easing with the aim of achieving the

goal of 1 percent in terms of the year-on-year rate of increase in the CPI, and continue

to do so until it judged the 1 percent goal to be in sight -- to continue to conduct

monetary policy vigorously and decisively while closely monitoring developments in

financial markets at home and abroad and working sufficiently on its communication -
including the dissemination of information -- to the public in an effort to make its policy

stance fully understood.

The representative from the Cabinet Office made the following remarks.

(1) The Japanese economy had recently been facing severe conditions, such as sharp

fluctuations in the financial markets stemming from uncertainty about the prospects for

the European sovereign debt crisis. Nevertheless, it was on the way to recovery at a

moderate pace, reflecting the effects of a range of policy measures. As for the outlook,

many private research institutes projected that the real GDP growth rate would remain

at around slightly less than 2 percent for the time being. The current circumstances

provided a good opportunity for the economy to overcome deflation, since the rate of

decline in prices was moderating and the negative output gap was expected to continue

to narrow.

(2) The government deemed it extremely important to seize this opportunity and deal with

the structural factors in the Japanese economy that tended to generate deflation, while

making its best efforts to avoid an economic slowdown through the appropriate conduct

of macroeconomic management. With the aim of overcoming deflation by enhancing

the flow of goods, people, and capital, the government had been proceeding with

discussions on policy areas and other issues to be considered at the ministerial-level

Council on the Economic Situation including the Issue of Overcoming Deflation, and

would conduct an interim review in the near future.

17


-----

(3) The government expected the Bank to make its utmost efforts in the conduct of

monetary policy in parallel with the government measures, taking account of the

downside risks to the Japanese economy. The government deemed it important for the

Bank to promptly achieve a CPI inflation rate of 1 percent and produce visible results.

In order to ensure completion of the asset purchases as scheduled, it also expected the

Bank to conduct monetary policy flexibly and decisively by, for example, deliberating

on the portfolio of assets being purchased under the Program while taking account of

the market situation of heightened risk aversion among investors.

(4) The government hoped that the Bank would conduct policy with vigilance, giving due

consideration to the fact that the risks of turmoil in global financial markets and a global

economic downturn -- both stemming from the European sovereign debt crisis,

including the problems in Greece and Spain -- were increasing significantly.

**V. Votes**

Based on the above discussions, members shared the view that it was appropriate

to maintain the current guideline for money market operations, which encouraged the

uncollateralized overnight call rate to remain at around 0 to 0.1 percent.

To reflect this view, the chairman formulated the following proposal and put it to a

vote.

**The Chairman's Policy Proposal on the Guideline for Money Market Operations:**

1. The guideline for money market operations for the intermeeting period ahead will be as

follows.

The Bank of Japan will encourage the uncollateralized overnight call rate

to remain at around 0 to 0.1 percent.

2. A public statement will be decided separately.

18


-----

Votes for the proposal: Mr. M. Shirakawa, Mr. H. Yamaguchi, Mr. K. G. Nishimura,

Mr. R. Miyao, Mr. Y. Morimoto, Ms. S. Shirai, and Mr. K. Ishida.

Votes against the proposal: None.

**VI. Discussion on the Statement on Monetary Policy**

Members discussed the Statement on Monetary Policy, and it was put to a vote.

The Policy Board decided the text by a unanimous vote. It was confirmed that the

statement would be released immediately after the meeting (see Attachment 1).

**VII. Approval of the Minutes of the Monetary Policy Meeting**

The Policy Board approved unanimously the minutes of the Monetary Policy

Meeting of May 22 and 23, 2012 for release on June 20, 2012.

**VIII. Approval of the Scheduled Dates of the Monetary Policy Meetings in July**

**2012-June 2013**

At the end of the meeting, the Policy Board approved the dates of the Monetary

Policy Meetings to be held in the period of July 2012-June 2013 for immediate release (see

Attachment 2).

19


-----

Attachment 1

June 15, 2012

Bank of Japan

**Statement on Monetary Policy**

1. At the Monetary Policy Meeting held today, the Policy Board of the Bank of Japan

decided, by a unanimous vote, to set the following guideline for money market

operations for the intermeeting period:

The Bank of Japan will encourage the uncollateralized overnight call rate

to remain at around 0 to 0.1 percent.

2. Overseas economies on the whole still have not emerged from a deceleration phase, but

have shown some, albeit moderate, improvement. In global financial markets, some

nervousness continues to be seen, mainly due to concern about the European debt

problem. Particular attention should therefore be given to developments in these

markets for the time being.

3. Japan's economic activity has started picking up moderately as domestic demand

remains firm mainly supported by reconstruction-related demand. Public investment

has been increasing. Business fixed investment has been on a moderate increasing

trend with corporate profits improving. Against the background of improvement in

consumer sentiment, private consumption has continued to increase moderately due to

the effects of measures to stimulate demand for automobiles. Housing investment has

generally been picking up. Exports have shown signs of a pick-up. Reflecting these

developments in demand at home and abroad, production has started picking up

moderately. Meanwhile, financial conditions in Japan have continued to ease. On

20


-----

the price front, the year-on-year rate of change in the CPI (all items less fresh food) is

around 0 percent.

4. As for the outlook, Japan's economy is expected to return to a moderate recovery path

as domestic demand remains firm and overseas economies emerge from the

deceleration phase. The year-on-year rate of change in the CPI is expected to remain

at around 0 percent for the time being.

5. Regarding risks to the economic outlook, there remains a high degree of uncertainty

about the global economy, including the prospects for the European debt problem, the

momentum toward recovery for the U.S. economy, and the likelihood of emerging and

commodity-exporting economies simultaneously achieving price stability and

economic growth. Regarding risks to the price outlook, careful attention should be

paid to future developments in international commodity prices and in medium- to

long-term inflation expectations.

6. The Bank recognizes that Japan's economy faces the critical challenge of overcoming

deflation and returning to a sustainable growth path with price stability. This

challenge will be met through efforts by a wide range of economic agents to strengthen

the economy's growth potential and support from the financial side. Based on this

recognition, the Bank has been providing support to strengthen the foundations for

economic growth and pursuing powerful monetary easing. The Bank continues to

conduct monetary policy in an appropriate manner. The Bank will also do its utmost

to ensure the stability of Japan's financial system, while giving particular attention to

developments in global financial markets.

21


-----

Attachment 2

June 15, 2012

Bank of Japan


**Scheduled Dates of Monetary Policy Meetings in July 2012-June 2013**


(Reference)
Publication of
Monthly Report


Publication of
Date of MPM
MPM Minutes


Publication of
Outlook Report
(The Bank's View)


July 2012 11 (Wed.), 12 (Thurs.) Aug. 14 (Tues.) -- 13 (Fri.)

Aug. 8 (Wed.), 9 (Thurs.) Sep. 24 (Mon.) -- 10 (Fri.)

Sep. 18 (Tues.), 19 (Wed.) Oct. 11 (Thurs.) -- 20 (Thurs.)

Oct. 4 (Thurs.), 5 (Fri.) Nov. 2 (Fri.) -- 9 (Tues.)

30 (Tues.) Nov. 26 (Mon.) 30 (Tues.) -
Nov. 19 (Mon.), 20 (Tues.) Dec. 26 (Wed.) -- 21 (Wed.)

Dec. 19 (Wed.), 20 (Thurs.) Jan. 25 (Fri.) -- 21 (Fri.)

Jan. 2013 21 (Mon.), 22 (Tues.) Feb. 19 (Tues.) -- 23 (Wed.)

Feb. 13 (Wed.), 14 (Thurs.) Mar. 12 (Tues.) -- 15 (Fri.)

Mar. 6 (Wed.), 7 (Thurs.) Apr. 9 (Tues.) -- 8 (Fri.)

Apr. 3 (Wed.), 4 (Thurs.) May 2 (Thurs.) -- 5 (Fri.)

26 (Fri.) May 27 (Mon.) 26 (Fri.) -
May 21 (Tues.), 22 (Wed.) June 14 (Fri.) -- 23 (Thurs.)

June 10 (Mon.), 11 (Tues.) To be announced -- 12 (Wed.)

Note: The time of release will be, in principle, as follows.
MPM Minutes will be released at 8:50 a.m.
_Outlook for Economic Activity and Prices (Outlook Report):_
"The Bank's View" in the Outlook Report will be released at 3:00 p.m., and the full text at 2:00 p.m. on the next
business day. As an exception to this principle, the full text of the April 2013 Outlook Report will be released at 2:00
p.m. on April 27 (Sat.), 2013.
_Monthly Report of Recent Economic and Financial Developments (Monthly Report):_
The Japanese original and the English translation for summary will be released at 2:00 p.m. (the English translation for
the full text will be published at 4:30 p.m. on the next business day).

22


-----

