Not to be released until 8:50 a.m.
Japan Standard Time on Wednesday,
June 20, 2012.

June 20, 2012

Bank of Japan

# Minutes of the Monetary Policy Meeting
## on May 22 and 23, 2012

(English translation prepared by the Bank's staff based on the Japanese original)


-----

Please contact the Bank of Japan at the address below in advance to request permission

when reproducing or copying the content of this document for commercial purposes.

Secretariat of the Policy Board, Bank of Japan

P.O. Box 30, Nihonbashi, Tokyo 103-8660, Japan

Please credit the source when quoting, reproducing, or copying the content of this

document.


-----

A Monetary Policy Meeting of the Bank of Japan Policy Board was held in the

Head Office of the Bank of Japan in Tokyo on Tuesday, May 22, 2012, from 2:00 p.m. to

4:25 p.m., and on Wednesday, May 23, from 9:00 a.m. to 11:32 a.m.[1]

**Policy Board Members Present**

**Mr. M. Shirakawa, Chairman, Governor of the Bank of Japan**

**Mr. H. Yamaguchi, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Japan**

**Mr. K. G. Nishimura, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Japan**

**Mr. R. Miyao**

**Mr. Y. Morimoto**

**Ms. S. Shirai**

**Mr. K. Ishida**

Government Representatives Present

Mr. Y. Fujita, Senior Vice Minister of Finance, Ministry of Finance[2]

Mr. S. Sato, Deputy Vice Minister for Policy Planning and Coordination, Ministry of

Finance[3]

Mr. K. Ishida, Senior Vice Minister, Cabinet Office[2 ]

Mr. K. Matsuyama, Vice Minister for Policy Coordination, Cabinet Office[3 ]

Reporting Staff

Mr. H. Nakaso, Executive Director (Assistant Governor)

Mr. H. Hayakawa, Executive Director

Mr. N. Kinoshita, Executive Director[4]

Mr. K. Momma, Executive Director

Mr. S. Uchida, Director-General, Monetary Affairs Department

1 The minutes of this meeting were approved by the Policy Board at the Monetary Policy Meeting
held on June 14 and 15, 2012 as "a document describing an outline of the discussion at the meeting"
stipulated in Article 20, paragraph 1 of the Bank of Japan Act of 1997. Those present are referred
to by their titles at the time of the meeting.
2 Messrs. Y. Fujita and K. Ishida were present on May 23.
3 Messrs. S. Sato and K. Matsuyama were present on May 22.
4 Mr. N. Kinoshita was present on May 22.

1


-----

Mr. K. Kamiyama, Head of Policy Planning Division, Monetary Affairs Department

Mr. S. Aoki, Director-General, Financial Markets Department

Mr. E. Maeda, Director-General, Research and Statistics Department

Mr. T. Sekine, Head of Economic Research Division, Research and Statistics Department

Mr. H. Ono, Director-General, International Department

Secretariat of the Monetary Policy Meeting

Mr. Y. Iino, Director-General, Secretariat of the Policy Board

Mr. T. Tachibana, Director, Deputy Head of Planning and Coordination Division,

Secretariat of the Policy Board

Mr. T. Kawamoto, Senior Economist, Monetary Affairs Department

Mr. K. Hamano, Senior Economist, Monetary Affairs Department

2


-----

**I. Summary of Staff Reports on Economic and Financial Developments[5]**

**A. Money Market Operations in the Intermeeting Period**

The Bank, in accordance with the guideline decided at the previous meeting on

April 27, 2012, had been providing ample funds sufficient to meet demand in financial

markets and was doing its utmost to ensure stability in the markets.[6] In this situation, the

uncollateralized overnight call rate had been in the range of 0.075 to 0.090 percent.

The sense of an abundance of liquidity continued to be strong in the money market,

and yields on government bonds with short- to medium-term maturities had declined further,

affected by the recent flight to quality. Under such circumstances, undersubscription had

occurred in the fixed-rate funds-supplying operation against pooled collateral with a

six-month term and the outright purchases of treasury discount bills (T-Bills) and Japanese

government bonds (JGBs) under the Asset Purchase Program (hereafter the Program), and

also in the regular purchases of JGBs to meet an increase in banknote demand.

**B. Recent Developments in Financial Markets**

Money market rates, including longer-term ones, had been stable at low levels.

General collateral (GC) repo rates had been at around 0.1 percent. As for interest rates on

term instruments, yields on T-Bills, including those with longer maturities, had been stable

at around 0.1 percent. Rates on longer-term interbank instruments had been more or less

unchanged.

Amid the global heightening of risk aversion among investors caused by concern

over the European debt problem, the benchmark long-term interest rate had declined to

around 0.85 percent and the Nikkei 225 Stock Average dropped to the range of 8,500-9,000

yen. Prices for Japan real estate investment trusts (J-REITs) had also declined. Yield

spreads between corporate bonds and JGBs continued to be more or less unchanged on the

whole, reflecting solid demand from investors for corporate bonds. The yen had been at

around 80 yen against the U.S. dollar, basically the same level as the previous month.

5 Reports were made based on information available at the time of the meeting.
6 The guideline was as follows:
The Bank of Japan will encourage the uncollateralized overnight call rate to remain at
around 0 to 0.1 percent.

3


-----

**C. Overseas Economic and Financial Developments**

Overseas economies on the whole still had not emerged from a deceleration phase,

but some improvement had been observed.

The U.S. economy continued to recover at a moderate pace. Private consumption

was increasing, reflecting a modest improvement in the employment situation, but the pace

of recovery was generally moderate partly because the balance-sheet repair continued to

weigh on the economy. Housing investment remained at a depressed level with weakness

in housing prices. On the other hand, exports continued to gain momentum, and business

fixed investment maintained its uptrend. Under these circumstances, production continued

to increase moderately. As for prices, while slack in supply and demand conditions in the

goods and labor markets continued to exert downward pressure on prices, the year-on-year

rate of increase in the consumer price index (CPI) for all items decelerated, partly due to a

gradual decline in energy prices, such as those of gasoline, and to the dissipating effects of

the significant rise in energy prices a year earlier. The year-on-year rate of increase in the

CPI for all items less food and energy, or the core CPI, had been in the range of 2.0-2.5

percent as the shelter index continued to rise moderately.

Economic activity in the euro area had been sluggish. Signs of a pick-up in

exports were seen mainly in those to the United States and emerging economies. On the

other hand, business fixed investment had been declining, and private consumption was

more or less unchanged. Household and business sentiment remained weak in some

peripheral countries, but showed signs of a pick-up mainly in Germany and France. Under

these circumstances, production was declining but the pace of decline had moderated

somewhat. As for prices, although slack in supply and demand conditions was exerting

downward pressure on prices, the year-on-year rate of increase in the Harmonized Index of

Consumer Prices (HICP) for all items remained at a relatively high level due mainly to the

effects of the earlier rise in energy prices, such as those of gasoline. Meanwhile, economic

activity in the United Kingdom had been sluggish as well.

With regard to Asia, the Chinese economy continued to show relatively high

growth, although the pace had slowed somewhat. The rate of increase in exports was

slowing. In terms of domestic demand, the rates of increase in fixed asset investment and

private consumption had decelerated to some extent, although they remained at relatively

high levels. These slowdowns resulted from the deceleration in private real estate

4


-----

investment for the former and slower growth in the consumption of durable goods such as

electrical appliances for the latter. Nevertheless, a favorable employment and income

situation and a declining trend in inflation rates were underpinning private consumption.

Given such developments in demand, the rate of increase in production was decelerating to

some extent. Regarding the NIEs and the ASEAN countries, the pace of economic growth

had begun to pick up. As for domestic demand, business fixed investment had been

increasing moderately and private consumption had been firm. Exports and production

were picking up, reflecting the restoration following the damage caused by the flooding in

Thailand, but the pace of the pick-up remained only moderate. As for prices, in many of

the NIEs and the ASEAN economies, core inflation rates were at relatively high levels,

mainly reflecting the higher wage inflation caused by tight labor market conditions. On

the other hand, inflation rates for all items had fallen at a moderate pace, due mainly to a

halt in the surge in food prices. In India, the deceleration of economic growth had come to

a halt.

In global financial markets, some nervousness had recently been seen amid the

heightening of risk aversion among global investors, mainly reflecting concern over the

European debt problem. The yield spreads of government bonds issued by European

countries over German government bonds had been widening for Greece and Spain in

particular, on the back of the political turmoil in Greece and deepening concern about

banks' impaired assets in Spain. U.S. and European stock prices had been declining

substantially, and long-term interest rates in the United States and Germany had declined to

historically low levels due to the heightening of demand for safe assets. With regard to

corporate bond markets in the United States and Europe, credit spreads on corporate bonds

had been widening somewhat, particularly in the financial sectors of some peripheral

European countries. Stock prices and currencies in emerging and commodity-exporting

economies had been declining considerably, particularly in Russia, Brazil, and Australia,

due in part to weakness in international commodity prices. Regardless of these

developments, the funding conditions of European financial institutions had been stable on

the whole, due in part to the various measures taken by central banks so far. Spreads

between interest rates on euro-denominated term instruments and overnight index swap

(OIS) rates had been more or less unchanged. With regard to U.S. dollar funding

conditions, spreads between interest rates on U.S. dollar-denominated term instruments and

5


-----

OIS rates had been more or less unchanged, and the U.S. dollar funding premium in the

foreign exchange swap markets had also been essentially flat. Nevertheless, interest rates

futures, which indicated the outlook for interest rates on U.S. dollar-denominated term

instruments, as well as the U.S. dollar funding premium in the longer-term basis swaps, had

recently been on an increasing trend.

**D. Economic and Financial Developments in Japan**

1. Economic developments

Exports so far remained more or less flat. They were expected to gradually

emerge from the current phase of flat growth and increase moderately, mainly reflecting a

pick-up in the pace of recovery in overseas economies.

Public investment had been increasing. Public investment in real terms, based on

the GDP statistics, and the amount of public construction completed -- both of which

reflected the progress of public works -- increased in the January-March quarter of 2012 on

a quarter-on-quarter basis. Looking ahead, public investment was expected to be on the

rise, mainly due to the restoration of damaged social capital. The value of public works

contracted -- a measure that reflected public works orders -- had risen in the January-March

quarter on a quarter-on-quarter basis, and also registered an increase in April relative to that

quarter.

Business fixed investment had been on a moderate increasing trend with some

improvement in business sentiment. It was expected to continue on this uptrend, partly

due to efforts by firms to restore and reconstruct disaster-stricken facilities as well as to

strengthen earthquake resistance and business continuity systems, as corporate profits

improved gradually.

The employment and income situation continued to be severe, although there were

signs of improvement.

Against the background of improvement in consumer sentiment, private

consumption had been increasing moderately due to the effects of measures to stimulate

demand for automobiles. On a GDP basis, real private consumption registered relatively

high growth in the January-March quarter of 2012 from the previous quarter, after having

increased for three consecutive quarters. Private consumption was expected to remain

firm as the employment situation gradually headed toward improvement.

6


-----

Housing investment had generally been picking up and was expected to continue

to do so, mainly due to the reconstruction of disaster-stricken homes.

Production, while remaining more or less flat, had shown some signs of picking up.

It was expected to increase moderately as domestic demand stayed firm and as exports

picked up gradually. Although the production forecast index suggested a decline in May

2012, production showed some signs of picking up in the months ahead, as evidenced by

the fact that (1) the shipment-inventory balance, especially in electronic parts and devices,

had improved gradually; and (2) according to interviews with firms, many of them expected

production to register a marginal increase in the April-June quarter of 2012.

As for prices, international commodity prices had been falling back slightly within

their high ranges. The three-month rate of increase in the domestic corporate goods price

index (CGPI) was rising moderately, mainly due to the earlier increase in international

commodity prices. The CGPI was expected to increase at a reduced pace for the time

being, mainly reflecting movements in international commodity prices. The year-on-year

rate of change in the CPI (all items less fresh food) was currently around 0 percent and was

expected to stay at this level for the time being.

2. Financial environment

Financial conditions continued to ease.

The overnight call rate remained at an extremely low level, and firms' funding

costs declined moderately. Stimulative effects from low interest rates were still partly

constrained given current developments in economic activity and prices. With regard to

credit supply, firms continued to see financial institutions' lending attitudes as being on an

improving trend. Issuing conditions for CP continued to be favorable. Those for

corporate bonds also remained favorable on the whole. As for credit demand, firms

showed signs of increasing their demand mainly for working capital and funds related to

mergers and acquisitions. Against this backdrop, the year-on-year rate of change in the

amount outstanding of bank lending had been positive. The year-on-year rate of change in

the total amount outstanding of corporate bonds and CP had been moving around 0 percent,

while that of corporate bonds had been slightly negative. In these circumstances, firms

retained their recovered financial positions on the whole. Meanwhile, the year-on-year

rate of change in the money stock had been positive at around 2.5 percent.

7


-----

**II. Summary of Discussions by the Policy Board on Economic and Financial**

**Developments**

**A. Economic Developments**

In terms of global financial markets, members agreed that some nervousness had

recently been seen mainly due to concern about the European debt problem, and therefore

close attention should be paid to developments in these markets for the time being. Many

members noted that, once again, yields on government bonds issued by some peripheral

European countries had risen and credit spreads of bank debentures and credit default swap

(CDS) premiums for European financial institutions had been widening on the back of

concern about the political situation in Greece and banks' impaired assets in Spain. While

noting that uncertainty regarding the outlook for the global economy was increasing

somewhat, triggered by the European debt problem, many members said that risk aversion

among investors was heightening and consequently causing considerable declines in stock

prices and weakness in international commodity prices -- mainly crude oil prices. A few

members commented that the considerable declines in stock prices and currencies in

emerging and commodity-exporting economies were attributable to the heightened risk

aversion and a fall in international commodity prices. Meanwhile, most members noted

that, due to investors' preference for safe assets, long-term interest rates in Japan, the United

States, and Germany had declined further, and that the yen and the U.S. dollar had been

appreciating in the foreign exchange market. Some of these members commented that, as

background to the further declines in long-term interest rates, cautious views regarding the

outlook for economic activity and prices, as well as powerful monetary easing measures

such as the purchases of government bonds conducted by central banks, were exerting

non-negligible influence. Some members noted that, in view of ensuring the stability of

the financial system, interbank funding markets needed to be stable. On this basis, these

members said that, although funding markets were generally stable at present, mainly due to

the effects of the provision of a large amount of funds by the European Central Bank (ECB),

some developments warranted attention, such as an increasing trend in the U.S. dollar

funding premium in the longer-term basis swaps and the continued outflow of deposits from

Greek banks. In this situation, members shared the view that it was necessary for

governments and relevant authorities in their respective countries to proceed with fiscal and

8


-----

economic structural reforms, bearing firmly in mind that measures such as the provision of

a large amount of funds were policies that could only be used to buy time. Some members

noted that such reforms involved political difficulties and therefore would not proceed

without hindrance.

Members concurred that overseas economies on the whole still had not emerged

from a deceleration phase, but some improvement had been observed, including the

continued recovery, albeit at a moderate pace, of the U.S. economy. As for the outlook,

they shared the view that the pace of growth was likely to pick up, led by emerging and

commodity-exporting economies.

With regard to the U.S. economy, members agreed that business fixed investment

maintained its uptrend, supported by firming exports, and private consumption was also

increasing moderately. They also agreed that the economy was likely to continue to

recover at a moderate pace. Some members said that a modest improving trend in the

employment situation continued as a whole, although the effects of the boost from a

record-breaking warm winter were starting to dissipate somewhat. Regarding adjustments

in households' balance sheets, a few members noted that some positive developments had

been observed compared with the past. These members pointed out that households' debt

relative to income was decreasing moderately, although it remained at a high level, and that

the interest burden was waning. In relation to this point, a few other members added that it

would take more time for balance-sheet adjustments to be completed given that (1) even if

their debts declined as a result of debt restructuring, households would still face difficulties

in applying for new loans that would lead to an increase in spending; and (2) housing prices

continued to be weak.

As for the economic activity in the euro area, members agreed that it had been

sluggish despite signs of a pick-up in exports, because domestic demand in the area had

been stagnant and acted as a drag on economic activity. They continued that the economy

was likely to remain sluggish for the time being, mainly on the back of continuing fiscal

austerity and relatively tight financial conditions. Some members noted that, while the

German economy had been firm, as seen in the fact that the unemployment rate had

registered a historically low level since the reunification of East and West Germany, a

deterioration in economic sentiment continued in Italy and Spain due to the severe credit

conditions and continuing fiscal austerity, and continued that disparities among countries

9


-----

regarding economic sentiment were widening further. Some members were of the view

that European governments facing debt problems were confronted with a critical challenge

of simultaneously achieving the medium- to long-term task of fiscal consolidation and

structural reforms and promoting short-term economic growth.

Regarding the Chinese economy, most members expressed the view that the rate of

increase in exports, especially to Europe, was slowing and -- due in part to the effects of the

earlier monetary tightening -- the rates of increase in durable goods consumption and

private real estate investment had decelerated to some extent. These members continued,

however, that the employment and income situation was favorable and, although the pace of

economic growth had slowed somewhat, the economy as a whole continued to show

relatively high growth, led mainly by domestic demand. Some members noted that the

slower increases in electricity production and consumption, freight transport volume, and

tax revenues for April 2012 were signs that the pace of Chinese economic growth continued

to slow. As for the outlook, members shared the view that the growth rate of the economy

would increase gradually as a decline in inflation rates and a favorable employment and

income situation were likely to underpin private consumption, although the slower growth

in fixed asset investment, primarily real estate investment, could become prolonged. With

regard to price developments, a few members noted that the Chinese authorities had not

embarked on decisive monetary easing despite the clear decline in inflation rates, and

pointed out that this might be because the authorities believed that inflationary pressure did

persist. Against this view, some members said that recent remarks by the officials

suggested their clearer stance toward supporting economic activity. A few members added

that, although there was no evidence that the growth potential of the Chinese economy was

declining, attention should be paid to the possibility that the effects of monetary easing had

become less pronounced than before, as substantiated by the fact that an increase in bank

lending had been less evident these days despite the easing of the authorities' guidance

toward banks.

With regard to emerging and commodity-exporting economies including China,

members shared the view that the pace of growth in these economies as a whole was no

longer on a decelerating trend. As for the outlook, they continued that the growth rates of

these economies would increase as the virtuous circle of production, income, and spending

was likely to gradually strengthen.

10


-----

Based on the above deliberations on economic and financial conditions abroad,

members discussed the state of Japan's economy.

Regarding recent developments in the economy, members agreed that it had

become increasingly evident that Japan's economy was shifting toward a pick-up phase,

although its economic activity had remained more or less flat. They shared the recognition

that exports so far remained more or less flat. Members concurred that public investment

had been increasing with the progress in the execution of the budget related to the

earthquake disaster, and business fixed investment had been on a moderate increasing trend

with some improvement in business sentiment as firms projected profit improvements.

They shared the recognition that, against the background of improvement in consumer

sentiment, private consumption had been increasing moderately due to the effects of

measures to stimulate demand for automobiles. With regard to the fact that real private

consumption on a GDP basis had registered relatively high growth in the January-March

quarter of 2012, a few members said that this was mainly attributable to the effects of the

leap year and subsidies for purchasers of environmentally friendly cars. However, these

members continued that it was noteworthy that the growth in consumption in the

January-March quarter represented a fourth consecutive quarterly increase, and that

categories of consumption other than durable goods had marked relatively high growth.

Members shared the view that production, while remaining more or less flat, had shown

some signs of picking up.

As for the outlook for the economy, members agreed that it was likely to return to

a moderate recovery path as the pace of recovery in overseas economies picked up, led by

emerging and commodity-exporting economies, and as reconstruction-related demand after

the earthquake disaster gradually strengthened. They shared the view that exports and

production were likely to gradually emerge from the current phase of flat growth and

recover moderately. On this basis, many members said that, while overseas demand could

remain somewhat weak, domestic demand, especially post-earthquake

reconstruction-related demand and private consumption, would likely stay firm for some

time. One member commented that autonomous movements, in addition to the effects of

policy measures, had started to support private consumption. This member continued that,

for example, a move to delay summer discount sales in the department store industry was a

positive phenomenon that had been observed for the first time in recent years. A different

11


-----

member said that private consumption remained firm mainly due to the following factors:

(1) pent-up demand following the earthquake disaster and demand related to the rebuilding

of daily lives in the disaster areas; (2) the effects of policy measures such as subsidies for

purchasers of environmentally friendly cars; and (3) firms' efforts to explore new sources of

demand from the elderly. This member added that the effects of the first and second

factors were likely to wane, and there was considerable uncertainty regarding the

quantitative impact and sustainability of the third factor.

With regard to risks to the outlook for Japan's economy, members concurred that

there remained a high degree of uncertainty about the global economy, including the

prospects for the European debt problem, the momentum toward recovery for the U.S.

economy amid lingering strains from balance-sheet adjustments, and the likelihood of

emerging and commodity-exporting economies simultaneously achieving price stability and

economic growth. Regarding the European debt problem, they shared the view that the

tail risk that disturbances in global financial markets would cause a significant downturn in

the global economy had waned compared to around the end of 2011. They continued,

however, that the European debt problem was a risk that should be of the most concern

given the heightening uncertainty over the situation surrounding fiscal and economic

structural reforms in European countries. On this basis, a few members said that the risk

of the European debt problem having a global adverse effect through the financial channel

could not be ruled out, depending on how the problem would be resolved, and that it was

therefore necessary to pay due attention to how the European situation would play out.

One member expressed concern over the impact of the recent appreciation of the yen and

fall in stock prices -- both stemming from the European debt problem -- on domestic

business fixed investment, mainly resulting from changes in business sentiment. Some

members added that, if the pace of growth in the Chinese economy were to decelerate

noticeably as a result of, for example, the decrease in exports to Europe, then this would

affect the Bank's economic outlook presented in the April 2012 _Outlook for Economic_

_Activity and Prices, which assumed a rise in overseas economic growth, although such a_

scenario would still depend on the prospects for the U.S. economy. A few members

pointed to the uncertainty regarding electric power supply for this summer as a risk factor

unique to Japan's economy.

Members agreed that the year-on-year rate of change in the CPI (all items less

12


-----

fresh food) was currently around 0 percent and likely to stay at this level for the time being.

Some members highlighted the following as recent changes in the price situation: (1) there

were signs that firms were regaining their pricing power as a result of the restructuring of

industries; and (2) there was a shift, mainly by convenience stores, to more value-added

activities in response to changes in the demand structure due to the aging of the population.

With regard to the fact that the domestic demand deflator for the January-March quarter of

2012 had turned positive on a quarter-on-quarter basis, a few members commented that it

was notable that steady improvement had been observed across a wide range of demand

components, such as consumption and business fixed investment. A few members said

that it was important for the Bank to explain in detail such positive developments in the

current price situation with a view to preventing deflationary expectations from

intensifying.

With regard to risks to the outlook for prices, members shared the recognition that

careful attention should be paid to future developments in international commodity prices

and in medium- to long-term inflation expectations. A few members said that, if

international commodity prices continued to follow the current downtrend, this could cause

a weakening in prices. One of these members, noting that short-term inflation

expectations remained at a low level, expressed the opinion that careful attention should be

paid to such developments, since they could lead to a slowdown in the pace at which the

rate of inflation converged with the level considered stable from a medium- to long-term

perspective -- that is, the inflation anchor. A different member added that it was necessary

to pay attention to the risk that crude oil prices might rise depending on developments in the

Middle East.

**B. Financial Developments**

Members agreed that financial conditions in Japan continued to ease.

Members agreed that the money market had been extremely stable, as the Bank

had been pursuing powerful monetary easing and the soundness of financial institutions'

balance sheets had been maintained. They shared the view that issuing conditions for CP

remained favorable, as did those for corporate bonds on the whole. They were of the view

that firms' funding costs had declined moderately, and that the availability of funds,

including the funding conditions of small firms, remained on an improving trend. While

13


-----

the year-on-year rate of increase in the amount outstanding of bank lending had declined, a

few members explained that this was because the positive contribution from large-scale

loans that were extended after the earthquake disaster a year ago had dissipated. These

members continued that credit demand, mainly for working capital and funds related to

mergers and acquisitions, remained on an increasing trend.

**III. Summary of Discussions on Monetary Policy for the Immediate Future**

Regarding the guideline for money market operations for the intermeeting period

ahead, members agreed that it was appropriate to maintain the current guideline that the

Bank would encourage the uncollateralized overnight call rate to remain at around 0 to 0.1

percent.

In relation to monetary policy for the immediate future, members shared the view

that Japan's economy faced the critical challenge of overcoming deflation and returning to a

sustainable growth path with price stability. They continued that, based on the recognition

that this challenge would be met through efforts to strengthen the economy's growth

potential and support from the financial side, the Bank had been pursuing powerful

monetary easing and providing support to strengthen the foundations for economic growth.

They agreed that the Bank would continue to conduct policy in an appropriate manner. A

few members raised the possibility that Japan's economy would be adversely affected if a

substantial risk materialized, stemming from the European debt problem. These members

commented that the Bank should therefore stand ready to take appropriate actions without

ruling out any options in advance. One member noted the following points: (1) Japan's

deflation was influenced by structural factors; and (2) the effects of monetary policy were

transmitted with a considerable lag. This member was of the view that, if the Bank

overlooked these points and proceeded with further monetary easing by automatically

responding only to short-term price developments, there was a risk that the stability in

economic activity and prices in the medium to long term would be jeopardized should

unexpected events occur in financial markets.

Members shared the view that, given that the Bank was pursuing powerful

monetary easing in a severe fiscal situation, it was extremely important that the credibility

of fiscal sustainability in financial markets be maintained to ensure the effectiveness of

monetary policy transmission, as well as the stability of the financial system and sustainable

14


-----

growth of Japan's economy. Some members, noting that long-term interest rates had

declined further, said that attention needed to be paid to a risk of an abrupt jump in these

rates, which could be triggered by future events. One of these members commented that

the effects of monetary easing would be curtailed if a rise in longer-term interest rates

adversely affected the financial conditions of financial institutions.

In terms of the Program, members agreed that, at this point, it was appropriate to

steadily implement the purchases of financial assets under the Program, which was

expanded as a result of the decision made at the April 27 meeting, and to monitor the effects

of these purchases. One member said that, given that market participants and the mass

media were paying particular attention to whether the Bank would increase the total size of

the Program, it was important for the Bank to explain more thoroughly that proceeding with

asset purchases within the current total size of the Program would still enhance monetary

easing.

As for the undersubscription that occurred in the Bank's JGB purchases, members

shared the view that this indicated that the effects of the Bank's powerful monetary easing

had been permeating the financial markets. A few members added that undersubscription

was expected to occur if the Bank conducted further large-scale asset purchases and

provided a large amount of funds. These members continued that, given that

undersubscription might be possible, the Bank decided at the April 27 meeting to extend the

remaining maturity of JGBs and corporate bonds to be purchased under the Program from

"one to two years" to "one to three years," and to reduce the maximum outstanding amount

of the fixed-rate funds-supplying operation against pooled collateral. Many members,

including these members, expressed the view that it was necessary for the operation desk to

make the operational adjustment required for completing the asset purchases under the

Program.

**IV. Remarks by Government Representatives**

The representative from the Ministry of Finance made the following remarks.

(1) The Japanese economy was on the way to recovery at a moderate pace, reflecting

emerging demand for reconstruction. As for the outlook, movement toward sound

recovery was expected to take hold. However, the government was seriously

concerned about the downside risks to the Japanese economy that could stem from

15


-----

sharp fluctuations in the financial markets and the further slowdowns in overseas

economies as concern over the European debt problem heightened.

(2) The government was currently making its best efforts to work on the comprehensive

reform of the social security and taxation systems, in order to secure stable financial

resources for social security functions and at the same time achieve fiscal consolidation.

It would continue to do its utmost to promptly obtain the Diet's approval of related bills,

including those recently being deliberated in the Diet for the fundamental reform of the

tax system, which primarily aimed to secure stable financial resources for social

security functions and contained provisions to raise the consumption tax rate in a

phased manner.

(3) The government and the Bank shared the view that overcoming deflation was the

top-priority task in Japan. At the Council for the Promotion of Growth and Finance

held recently, the government, with the aim of strengthening growth potential, compiled

the mid-term report on the set of measures to expand the supply of growth money -- that

is, funds that would lead to economic growth. The government would delve deeper

into discussions to formulate the "Strategy for Rebirth of Japan" that would be drawn up

at midyear.

(4) The government and the Bank had been making policy efforts while sufficiently

exchanging views and keeping close contact, but Japan had not yet overcome deflation.

The government expected the Bank -- under its policy stance that, for the time being, it

would pursue powerful monetary easing with the aim of achieving the goal of 1 percent

in terms of the year-on-year rate of increase in the CPI, and continue to do so until it

judged the 1 percent goal to be in sight -- to conduct monetary policy vigorously and

decisively while continuing to closely monitor developments in financial markets at

home and abroad, as well as work sufficiently on its communication -- including the

dissemination of information -- to the public in an effort to make its policy stance fully

understood.

The representative from the Cabinet Office made the following remarks.

(1) The first preliminary estimate of real GDP for the January-March quarter of 2012

indicated a relatively high rate of growth, at 4.1 percent on an annualized basis. This

was primarily attributable to the growth in domestic demand that had been supported by

16


-----

emerging demand for reconstruction and the effects of policy measures such as

subsidies for purchasers of environmentally friendly cars, and to the pick-up in exports

brought about by the rebound from the plunge caused by the effects of the flooding in

Thailand and the recovery of the U.S. economy. A solid income environment seemed

to be underpinning the increase in consumption.

(2) The Japanese economy was on the way to recovery at a moderate pace, reflecting

emerging demand for reconstruction. As for the outlook, movement toward sound

recovery was expected to take hold, reflecting the effects of a range of policy measures.

However, there was growing uncertainty about the prospects for the European sovereign

debt crisis, for example, and thus downside risks to the economy required strong

vigilance.

(3) Although the rate of decline in prices was moderating recently, the Japanese economy

remained in a mild deflationary situation. In order to overcome deflation -- a

challenge Japan had confronted for over a decade -- it was important to address the

structural problem that tended to generate deflation, while simultaneously working on

macroeconomic management. To this end, at the ministerial-level Council on the

Economic Situation including the Issue of Overcoming Deflation, the government, with

the aim of overcoming deflation and stimulating economic activity, was holding active

discussions on the basic policy direction and policy areas to be considered -- in view of,

for example, changes in the economic phases -- while remaining particularly aware of

the economic situation through fiscal 2013.

(4) The government expected the Bank to continue to make its utmost efforts in the conduct

of monetary policy in parallel with the government measures, taking account of the

downside risks to the outlook for the Japanese economy. Specifically, the government

deemed it particularly important to produce visible results by achieving as promptly as

possible an inflation rate of 1 percent, the rate the Bank aimed to achieve for the time

being in terms of the year-on-year rate of increase in the CPI. In order to do so, the

government expected the Bank to conduct monetary policy flexibly and decisively.

**V. Votes**

Based on the above discussions, members shared the view that it was appropriate

to maintain the current guideline for money market operations, which encouraged the

17


-----

uncollateralized overnight call rate to remain at around 0 to 0.1 percent.

To reflect this view, the chairman formulated the following proposal and put it to a

vote.

**The Chairman's Policy Proposal on the Guideline for Money Market Operations:**

1. The guideline for money market operations for the intermeeting period ahead will be as

follows.

The Bank of Japan will encourage the uncollateralized overnight call rate

to remain at around 0 to 0.1 percent.

2. A public statement will be decided separately.

Votes for the proposal: Mr. M. Shirakawa, Mr. H. Yamaguchi, Mr. K. G. Nishimura,

Mr. R. Miyao, Mr. Y. Morimoto, Ms. S. Shirai, and Mr. K. Ishida.

Votes against the proposal: None.

**VI. Discussion on the Statement on Monetary Policy**

Members discussed the Statement on Monetary Policy, and it was put to a vote.

The Policy Board decided the text by a unanimous vote. It was confirmed that the

statement would be released immediately after the meeting (see Attachment).

**VII. Approval of the Minutes of the Monetary Policy Meeting**

The Policy Board approved unanimously the minutes of the Monetary Policy

Meeting of April 27, 2012 for release on May 28, 2012.

18


-----

Attachment

May 23, 2012

Bank of Japan

**Statement on Monetary Policy**

1. At the Monetary Policy Meeting held today, the Policy Board of the Bank of Japan

decided, by a unanimous vote, to set the following guideline for money market

operations for the intermeeting period:

The Bank of Japan will encourage the uncollateralized overnight call rate

to remain at around 0 to 0.1 percent.

2. Overseas economies on the whole still have not emerged from a deceleration phase, but

some improvement has been observed, including the continued recovery, albeit at a

moderate pace, of the U.S. economy. In global financial markets, some nervousness

has recently been seen, mainly due to concern about the European debt problem.

Close attention should therefore be paid to developments in these markets for the time

being.

3. It has become increasingly evident that Japan's economy is shifting toward a pick-up

phase, although its economic activity has remained more or less flat. Exports have so

far remained more or less flat. As for domestic demand, public investment has been

increasing. Business fixed investment has been on a moderate increasing trend with

some improvement in business sentiment. Against the background of improvement in

consumer sentiment, private consumption has been increasing moderately due to the

effects of measures to stimulate demand for automobiles. Housing investment has

generally been picking up. Production has shown some signs of picking up reflecting

these developments in demand at home and abroad, although it has remained more or

19


-----

less flat. Meanwhile, financial conditions in Japan have continued to ease. On the

price front, the year-on-year rate of change in the CPI (all items less fresh food) is

around 0 percent.

4. As for the outlook, Japan's economy is expected to return to a moderate recovery path

as the pace of recovery in overseas economies picks up, led by emerging and

commodity-exporting economies, and as reconstruction-related demand after the

earthquake disaster gradually strengthens. The year-on-year rate of change in the CPI

is expected to remain at around 0 percent for the time being.

5. Regarding risks to the economic outlook, there remains a high degree of uncertainty

about the global economy, including the prospects for the European debt problem, the

momentum toward recovery for the U.S. economy, and the likelihood of emerging and

commodity-exporting economies simultaneously achieving price stability and

economic growth. Regarding risks to the price outlook, careful attention should be

paid to future developments in international commodity prices and in medium- to

long-term inflation expectations.

6. The Bank recognizes that Japan's economy faces the critical challenge of overcoming

deflation and returning to a sustainable growth path with price stability. This

challenge will be met through efforts to strengthen the economy's growth potential and

support from the financial side. The Bank continues to conduct policy in an

appropriate manner.

20


-----

