Not to be released until 8:50 a.m.
Japan Standard Time on Monday,
November 26, 2012.

November 26, 2012

Bank of Japan

# Minutes of the Monetary Policy Meeting
## on October 30, 2012

(English translation prepared by the Bank's staff based on the Japanese original)


-----

Please contact the Bank of Japan at the address below in advance to request permission

when reproducing or copying the content of this document for commercial purposes.

Secretariat of the Policy Board, Bank of Japan

P.O. Box 30, Nihonbashi, Tokyo 103-8660, Japan

Please credit the source when quoting, reproducing, or copying the content of this

document.


-----

A Monetary Policy Meeting of the Bank of Japan Policy Board was held in the

Head Office of the Bank of Japan in Tokyo on Tuesday, October 30, 2012, from 9:00 a.m. to

2:41 p.m.[1]

**Policy Board Members Present**

**Mr. M. Shirakawa, Chairman, Governor of the Bank of Japan**

**Mr. H. Yamaguchi, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Japan**

**Mr. K. G. Nishimura, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Japan**

**Mr. R. Miyao**

**Mr. Y. Morimoto**

**Ms. S. Shirai**

**Mr. K. Ishida**

**Mr. T. Sato**

**Mr. T. Kiuchi**

Government Representatives Present

Mr. K. Takemasa, Senior Vice Minister of Finance, Ministry of Finance

Mr. S. Maehara, Minister of State for Economic and Fiscal Policy, Cabinet Office[2]

Mr. K. Matsuyama, Vice Minister for Policy Coordination, Cabinet Office[2 ]

Reporting Staff

Mr. H. Nakaso, Executive Director (Assistant Governor)

Mr. H. Hayakawa, Executive Director

Mr. N. Kinoshita, Executive Director

Mr. K. Momma, Executive Director

Mr. S. Uchida, Director-General, Monetary Affairs Department

Mr. T. Umemori, Deputy Director-General, Monetary Affairs Department

1 The minutes of this meeting were approved by the Policy Board at the Monetary Policy Meeting
held on November 19 and 20, 2012 as "a document describing an outline of the discussion at the
meeting" stipulated in Article 20, paragraph 1 of the Bank of Japan Act of 1997. Those present are
referred to by their titles at the time of the meeting.
2 Messrs. S. Maehara and K. Matsuyama were present from 10:25 a.m. to 2:41 p.m. and from 9:00
a.m. to 10:24 a.m., respectively.

1


-----

Mr. K. Kamiyama, Head of Policy Planning Division, Monetary Affairs Department

Mr. S. Aoki, Director-General, Financial Markets Department

Mr. E. Maeda, Director-General, Research and Statistics Department

Mr. K. Kamada, Head of Economic Research Division, Research and Statistics

Department

Mr. H. Ono, Director-General, International Department

Secretariat of the Monetary Policy Meeting

Mr. Y. Iino, Director-General, Secretariat of the Policy Board

Mr. T. Tachibana, Director, Deputy Head of Planning and Coordination Division,

Secretariat of the Policy Board

Mr. H. Kanno, Head of Policy Infrastructure Division, Monetary Affairs Department

Mr. T. Kawamoto, Senior Economist, Monetary Affairs Department

Mr. K. Imakubo, Senior Economist, Monetary Affairs Department

2


-----

**I. Summary of Staff Reports on Economic and Financial Developments[3]**

**A. Money Market Operations in the Intermeeting Period**

The Bank, in accordance with the guideline decided at the previous meeting on

October 4 and 5, 2012, had been providing ample funds sufficient to meet demand in

financial markets and was doing its utmost to ensure stability in the markets.[4] In this

situation, the uncollateralized overnight call rate had been in the range of 0.075-0.095

percent.

With regard to the operation of the Asset Purchase Program, there was a sufficient

amount of bids in the Bank's outright purchases of both Japanese government bonds (JGBs)

and treasury discount bills (T-Bills) even into the second half of fiscal 2012, mainly

reflecting the effects of financial institutions' profit-taking sales. As for the Bank's

fixed-rate funds-supplying operation against pooled collateral, a sufficient amount of bids

had generally been observed, as evidenced by the fact that undersubscription had occurred

only once since the previous meeting.

**B. Recent Developments in Financial Markets**

Money market rates, including longer-term ones, had been stable at low levels.

General collateral (GC) repo rates had been at around 0.1 percent. As for interest rates on

term instruments, yields on T-Bills, including those with longer maturities, had been stable

at around 0.1 percent. Issuance rates on T-Bills, meanwhile, had been marginally below

0.1 percent. Rates on longer-term interbank instruments had been more or less unchanged.

With regard to long-term interest rates, yields on 2-year JGBs had been stable at

0.1 percent. Yields on 10-year JGBs continued to move within a narrow range of

0.75-0.80 percent. The Nikkei 225 Stock Average had risen somewhat, due in part to a

depreciation of the yen, but remained in the range of 8,500-9,000 yen. Prices for Japan

real estate investment trusts (J-REITs) had continued to rise. Yield spreads between

corporate bonds and JGBs had continued to be more or less unchanged on the whole,

reflecting solid demand from investors for corporate bonds. The yen had depreciated

somewhat against the U.S. dollar and had recently been in the range of 79-80 yen. The

3 Reports were made based on information available at the time of the meeting.
4 The guideline was as follows:
The Bank of Japan will encourage the uncollateralized overnight call rate to remain at
around 0 to 0.1 percent.

3


-----

yen had also depreciated against the euro.

**C. Overseas Economic and Financial Developments**

Overseas economies had moved deeper into a deceleration phase.

The U.S. economy generally continued to recover at a moderate pace, particularly

in the household sector, although signs of weakness were observed in the corporate sector.

The pace of increase in production and business fixed investment had slowed as growth in

exports had been sluggish and business sentiment had become cautious. On the other hand,

in the household sector, while the balance-sheet repair weighing on the economy had

gradually been mitigated, private consumption was increasing moderately, reflecting a

modest improving trend in the employment situation. Housing investment had also

continued to pick up, albeit at a depressed level, partly supported by the low interest rate.

As for prices, the year-on-year rate of increase in the consumer price index (CPI) for all

items picked up due to the effects of the rise in gasoline prices, whereas the year-on-year

rate of increase in the CPI for all items less food and energy, or the core CPI, had been more

or less flat.

Economic activity in the euro area had receded slowly. Amid the situation of the

protracted European debt problem, the weakening of sentiment had been spreading from

firms to households and from peripheral countries to core countries. Under these

circumstances, business fixed investment had been declining and signs of weakness were

observed in private consumption, particularly of durable goods. Growth in exports was

slow. Given such developments in demand, production was on a declining trend. As for

prices, although slack in supply and demand conditions was exerting downward pressure on

prices, the year-on-year rate of increase in the Harmonized Index of Consumer Prices

(HICP) for all items had been relatively large, partly reflecting the rise in gasoline prices.

Meanwhile, economic activity in the United Kingdom had been sluggish.

With regard to Asia, the state of economic slowdown in China had been prolonged.

Private consumption had been firm on the whole. The slowdown in the pace of increase in

fixed asset investment was coming to a halt due to an increase in infrastructure investment.

Meanwhile, exports continued to be somewhat weak, reflecting the decrease in those bound

for Europe. Given such developments in demand, the growth momentum in production

continued to be slow as inventory adjustment pressures persisted. Regarding the NIEs and

4


-----

the ASEAN countries, although the pace of economic growth had picked up, it was

moderating, particularly in the corporate sector. Exports and production continued to be

somewhat weak, mainly due to the decline in exports bound for Europe, and business

sentiment had become cautious. Under these circumstances, growth in business fixed

investment had been sluggish. On the other hand, private consumption had been firm.

As for prices, in many of these Asian economies, there was still upward pressure on prices,

mainly reflecting the continued wage inflation caused by tight labor market conditions, but

inflation rates remained more or less flat. In India, the economy continued to be in a state

of deceleration.

In global financial markets, while investors had remained somewhat less risk

averse on the back of the European debt problem, particular attention should be paid to

developments in these markets. Yield spreads of Spanish and Italian government bonds

over German government bonds had clearly tightened, reflecting market participants'

positive response to the fact that the credit rating of Spanish government bonds was

unchanged. U.S. and European stock prices -- mainly in reflection of the developments in

Europe and the release of economic indicators -- were showing large fluctuations and had

been declining recently. In this situation, long-term interest rates in the United States and

Germany were rising marginally, although they remained at low levels. With regard to

corporate bond markets in the United States and Europe, credit spreads had been more or

less unchanged. The funding conditions of European financial institutions continued to be

stable on the whole. Spreads between interest rates on euro-denominated term instruments

and overnight index swap (OIS) rates had been on a moderate narrowing trend. Spreads

between interest rates on U.S. dollar-denominated term instruments and OIS rates had been

on a narrowing trend, and the U.S. dollar funding premium in the foreign exchange swap

markets had been more or less unchanged at a low level. Meanwhile, stock prices and

currencies in emerging and commodity-exporting economies had been weakening compared

with the levels at the time of the previous meeting.

**D. Economic and Financial Developments in Japan**

1. Economic developments

Real exports in the July-September quarter of 2012 had decreased noticeably, due

in part to the increase in the April-June quarter. Monthly figures showed that they had

5


-----

declined for five straight months through September. In the July-September quarter,

meanwhile, industrial production had fallen for the second consecutive quarter, and its rate

of decline had widened.

According to monthly surveys on business sentiment, it had become somewhat

evident that business sentiment at firms in the manufacturing sector had turned cautious.

Under such circumstances, although the ratio of small firms making business fixed

investments in the July-September quarter and the results of the survey on business fixed

investment plans for fiscal 2012 remained firm, signs of weakness were observed in

machinery orders, which were susceptible to export-related business.

Although public investment continued to increase, as seen in the statistics on the

amount of public construction completed, the value of public works contracted -- a measure

that reflected public works orders -- remained flat in the July-September quarter from the

previous quarter, which might suggest slower growth in future public investment.

As for the employment situation, a decline in the number of new job offers and

sluggish growth in non-scheduled hours worked had recently been seen, mainly in the

manufacturing sector.

Private consumption seemed to remain resilient, but it had become increasingly

evident that the growth momentum observed through the first half of 2012 had come to a

pause.

As for prices, the three-month rate of change in the domestic corporate goods price

index (CGPI) had been negative, but the pace of decline had slowed, reflecting the earlier

movements in international commodity prices. The year-on-year rate of change in the CPI

(all items less fresh food) was currently around 0 percent.

2. Financial environment

Financial conditions were accommodative.

With regard to credit supply, firms continued to see financial institutions' lending

attitudes as being on an improving trend. Issuing conditions for CP and corporate bonds

remained favorable on the whole. As for credit demand, firms showed signs of increasing

their demand mainly for working capital and funds related to mergers and acquisitions.

The year-on-year rate of increase in the amount outstanding of bank lending had risen

somewhat. Firms retained their recovered financial positions on the whole.

6


-----

**II. Summary of Discussions by the Policy Board on Economic and Financial**

**Developments and the October 2012 Outlook for Economic Activity and Prices**

**A. Economic Developments**

In terms of global financial markets, members shared the recognition that investors

had been somewhat less risk averse on the back of the European debt problem. On this

basis, they shared the view that particular attention should be paid to developments in the

markets as a number of issues still involved a high degree of uncertainty, including progress

in Greece's fiscal and economic structural reform, Spain's potential request for financial

support from the European Stability Mechanism (ESM), and efforts to establish the single

banking supervisory mechanism.

With regard to overseas economies, members concurred that the negative effects

stemming from the European debt problem had spread globally through a trade channel as

well as a business sentiment channel since the second half of 2011. They continued that,

in fact, many countries and regions had recently moved deeper into a deceleration phase,

especially in their manufacturing sectors. As for the outlook, they shared the view that

overseas economies were likely to remain in the deceleration phase for the time being but

would gradually emerge from that phase and turn to a moderate recovery thereafter, on the

assumption that global financial markets would remain stable on the whole. One member

said that attention should be paid to the possibility of either a delay in the timing of

recovery in these economies or moderation in the pace of their recovery.

Members shared the recognition that economic activity in the euro area had

receded slowly. A few members said that the sluggish European economy was dampening

the Chinese economy through trade channels, and was considerably suppressing growth in

the volume of global trade. As for the outlook, members shared the view that the euro area

economy would likely still lack momentum for recovery on the whole as fiscal austerity

measures continued to be implemented in peripheral countries, although core countries were

likely to post higher growth gradually due to an increase in exports to outside the area.

Members shared the recognition that, although infrastructure investment in China

had been showing signs of an increase, the Chinese economy had been decelerating at a

somewhat faster pace during the past few months as inventory accumulation had continued

in a wide range of industries, including materials industries, thereby prolonging the

7


-----

inventory adjustment phase. As for the outlook, they concurred that the economy was

likely to remain in a deceleration phase for the time being, but would register higher growth

gradually as positive effects of economic stimulus measures on both the monetary and fiscal

fronts started to appear and inventory adjustment progressed. Some members said that,

given the persisting inventory adjustment pressures and uncertainty regarding policy effects,

it would likely take time for the economic growth rate to see a clear recovery.

Members shared the view that, against the background of weakness in final

demand in Europe and China, the pick-up in the NIEs and the ASEAN economies had

moderated, particularly in the corporate sector -- namely, business fixed investment in

manufacturing and exports. As for the outlook, they concurred that this pick-up was likely

to become more evident as exports gradually started increasing while domestic demand -
especially private consumption -- maintained firmness.

Members agreed that the U.S. economy had been on a moderate recovery trend on

the whole, as was evident in the modest increase in private consumption and signs of a

pick-up in the housing market. They continued that, nevertheless, the pace of increase in

business fixed investment, exports, and production had slowed as business sentiment had

become cautious on the back of heightened uncertainties associated with the deceleration in

the global economy and the "fiscal cliff." They concurred that the U.S. economy was

likely to continue recovering at a moderate pace, mainly against the background of

accommodative financial conditions, albeit with the effects of fiscal austerity policy. One

member noted that the member was closely monitoring whether the U.S. economy could

continue to recover in a situation where the global economy, including the European and

Chinese economies, had moved deeper into a deceleration phase. A few members added

that U.S. economic activity might be significantly restrained in the first half of 2013 due to

the effects of the "fiscal cliff."

Members concurred that financial conditions in Japan had been accommodative in

a situation where the Bank pursued powerful monetary easing in a continuous manner.

They shared the view that firms' funding costs had been hovering at low levels, and that

issuing conditions for CP and corporate bonds remained favorable on the whole. In terms

of the outlook, members concurred that these accommodative financial conditions were

likely to support a transition toward a self-sustaining recovery in domestic private demand.

8


-----

Based on the above deliberations on economic and financial conditions abroad, as

well as Japan's financial conditions, members discussed the state of Japan's economy.

They concurred that, reflecting the fact that overseas economies had moved deeper into the

deceleration phase, exports and industrial production had decreased, and this was starting to

affect some areas of domestic demand. One member expressed the view that the

deceleration in overseas economies was starting to exert influence on business fixed

investment in the manufacturing sector. Members shared the recognition that the economy

had weakened further since the Monetary Policy Meeting held in September 2012. One

member expressed the view that, although not fully confirmed by hard data, anecdotal

information, for example, reported at the meeting of general managers of the Bank's

branches suggested that recent developments in the relations between Japan and China were

having effects on exports, production, and tourism demand. A few members said that,

given developments in production and the Indexes of Business Conditions, there was a

possibility that the economy would be acknowledged retroactively to have entered a

recessionary phase. Based on this discussion, members concurred that the economy had

been weakening somewhat and was likely to level off more or less for the time being.

Members agreed that the year-on-year rate of change in the CPI (all items less

fresh food) was currently around 0 percent and likely to stay at this level for the time being.

**B. Outlook for Economic Activity and Prices**

With regard to the baseline scenario of the outlook for Japan's economic activity,

members agreed that growth rates were likely to be lower than those presented in the

interim assessment in July 2012, mainly due to the effects of the deceleration of overseas

economies. On this basis, they shared the view that, were the Bank to enhance monetary

easing further at this meeting, Japan's economy would gradually return to a moderate

recovery path underpinned by a pick-up in the pace of recovery in overseas economies and

by reconstruction-related demand in a broad sense. Some members stressed that, as efforts

proceeded to strengthen the economy's growth potential, such as those by the government,

the sustainability of economic recovery was likely to gain momentum.

Regarding developments in economic activity from the second half of fiscal 2012

toward fiscal 2013, members shared the view that both exports and industrial production

were likely to remain relatively weak over that period against the background of prolonged

9


-----

deceleration in overseas economies. They agreed that, in fiscal 2013, Japan's economy

was likely to grow at a pace that was clearly above its potential as a pick-up in overseas

economies gradually became evident and domestic private demand increased at a robust

pace, coupled with rising corporate profits and labor income, whereas support from

reconstruction-related demand -- in particular, public demand -- would diminish slowly.

Members concurred that, in fiscal 2014, the underlying trend of the economy -- that is, the

trend excluding the fluctuations stemming from the scheduled hike in the consumption tax

-- was projected to grow at a rate somewhat higher than its potential, as overseas economies

were likely to register growth above the historical long-term average and the stimulative

effects of low interest rates would strengthen on the back of improvement in corporate

profits and higher growth expectations, all of which would underpin domestic private

demand. With regard to the effects of the consumption tax hike, members shared the

recognition that, in the second half of fiscal 2013, a front-loaded increase in demand prior to

the hike was likely to take place on a large scale, generating a considerably higher growth

rate temporarily. They continued that, nonetheless, the subsequent decline in demand

following the front-loaded increase was likely to be seen mostly in the first half of fiscal

2014; thus, the growth rate in fiscal 2014 as a whole would probably be at a somewhat low

level, slightly above 0 percent.

In terms of the outlook for prices, excluding the direct effects of the consumption

tax hike, most members expressed the view that, based on the assumption that medium- to

long-term inflation expectations would remain stable, the year-on-year rate of change in the

CPI was likely to hover around 0 percent for the time being and start rising gradually

thereafter as the aggregate supply and demand balance improved. These members

continued that, in fiscal 2014, it appeared likely that the rate of change would move steadily

closer toward the Bank's "price stability goal in the medium to long term" of 1 percent for

the time being. As for international commodity prices, which formed the basis of the

outlook for the CPI, these members noted that, on average, prices were likely to remain

more or less flat for the time being, reflecting the deceleration of overseas economies.

These members continued that, thereafter, the prices were likely to follow a moderate rising

trend against the background of an increase in demand for food and energy arising from

growth in emerging economies. One member pointed to the possibility that the rising

trend in unit prices of goods and services consumed by households and the improving trend

10


-----

in the employment conditions for part-time workers could generate a rise in the CPI. In

response to such views, a few members pointed out that, considering that the correlation

between the aggregate supply and demand balance and the rate of change in the CPI

remained mild, the influence of improvement in the aggregate supply and demand balance

on the inflation rate should be viewed in a conservative manner. These members

continued that, therefore, it might be difficult to assess that the rate of change in the CPI

would move steadily closer toward 1 percent. One of these members added that, in

considering the outlook for prices, an improvement in the supply and demand balance in the

labor market was crucial. This member continued that, taking into account that the unit

labor cost had clearly declined in the most recent two quarters, a cautious view regarding

the outlook for prices was inevitable.

Members also discussed upside and downside risk factors to the baseline scenario.

Regarding the outlook for economic activity, members noted the following upside

and downside risk factors: (1) developments in global financial markets and overseas

economies; (2) uncertainty with regard to firms' and households' medium- to long-term

growth expectations; (3) uncertainty with regard to the effect of the consumption tax hike;

and (4) various problems regarding Japan's fiscal sustainability. As risks stemming from

developments in overseas economies, many members pointed to the possibility that strains

in global financial markets would intensify once again in the case of reemerging concern

over the implementation of fiscal, financial system, and economic structural reforms in the

individual countries in Europe, thereby acting as a downside risk not only to the European

economy, but also to the global economy and consequently to Japan's economy. With

regard to the U.S. economy, these members -- noting the current situation in which strains

from households' balance-sheet adjustments persisted -- commented that, in addition to the

negative effects stemming from the European debt problem, it was possible that uncertainty

surrounding the future course of fiscal policy, including the issue of the "fiscal cliff," would

exert significant restraining pressure on economic activity. As a medium- to long-term

risk factor to the Chinese economy, some members pointed to the issue of whether it would

manage to succeed in making the transition from a high growth phase to a sustainable stable

growth phase by overcoming the problem of excess capacity. In addition, many members

noted that, while the effects of recent developments in the relations between Japan and

China had already been observed, the risk that these would have widening implications was

11


-----

a matter of concern. Some members pointed out that, while greater attention should be

paid to downside risks on the whole, there were also some upside risks. Specifically, these

members said that, in the United States, there were upside risks to the economy: (1) an

acceleration in the pace of recovery in the housing sector could stimulate private

consumption; and (2) the removal of uncertainty surrounding fiscal policy could invigorate

corporate activity. These members continued that, in Japan, the better-than-expected

results from the government's efforts aimed at raising the economy's growth potential could

act as an upside risk.

Members pointed to the following as upside and downside risk factors specific to

the outlook for prices: (1) uncertainty associated with the responsiveness of prices to the

aggregate supply and demand balance; (2) developments in firms' and households' medium
to long-term inflation expectations; and (3) developments in import prices. With regard to

the first factor, some members said that particular attention should be paid to the possibility

that firms' low pricing strategies, households' preference for inexpensive goods and services,

and weak short-term inflation expectations would lessen the extent to which prices

responded to changes in the aggregate supply and demand balance.

Based on this discussion on upside and downside risk factors to the outlook for

Japan's economic activity and prices, members shared the recognition that it was necessary

to pay greater attention to downside risks in terms of risk balance. Furthermore, they

shared the recognition that attention should continue to be paid to the effects of financial

and foreign exchange market developments on economic activity and prices.

Based on the above considerations, members assessed the economic and price

situation from two perspectives.

Members made an assessment in terms of the first perspective; that is, an

assessment of the baseline scenario of the outlook for economic activity and prices through

fiscal 2014. Most members expressed the following view: (1) Japan's economy was likely

to level off for the time being and return to a moderate recovery path as domestic demand

remained resilient on the whole and overseas economies gradually emerged from the

deceleration phase; (2) the year-on-year rate of change in the CPI, excluding the direct

effects of the consumption tax hike, was likely to hover around 0 percent for the time being

and start rising gradually thereafter as the aggregate supply and demand balance improved;

in fiscal 2014, it appeared likely that it would move steadily closer toward the Bank's "price

12


-----

stability goal in the medium to long term" of 1 percent for the time being; and (3) therefore,

in assessing comprehensively the baseline scenario considered to be the most likely, these

members expected that Japan's economy would return to a sustainable growth path with

price stability in the longer run.

Members then made an assessment in terms of the second perspective; namely, the

examination of the risks considered most relevant to the conduct of monetary policy,

including those that had a longer time horizon than the first perspective. In terms of

economic activity, they shared the following view: (1) although tail risks arising from the

European debt problem were waning somewhat, a high degree of uncertainty remained

concerning global financial markets and overseas economies, and this was still an important

downside risk; (2) medium- to long-term growth expectations could move in either the

upside or downside direction depending on the outcome of the efforts to strengthen growth

potential; (3) the effects of the consumption tax hike on economic activity were highly

uncertain in view of experience gained from similar past occurrences at home and abroad;

and (4) efforts to ensure fiscal sustainability could also significantly affect economic

developments. Members also shared the recognition that, on the price front, careful

attention should be paid to the responsiveness of prices to the aggregate supply and demand

balance as well as future developments in medium- to long-term inflation expectations and

international commodity prices. They examined financial imbalances from the viewpoint

of longer-term risks that would significantly impact economic activity and prices when they

materialized, although the probability of their appearance was low. Specifically, they

reaffirmed that, while the amount outstanding of government debt had accumulated to a

substantially high level, financial institutions' lending remained lackluster and their holding

of government bonds tended to increase significantly. They continued that due attention

therefore needed to be paid to a possibility that some events might trigger a pick-up in

long-term interest rates, which would have significant effects on financial institutions and

consequently on Japan's economy as a whole.

**III. Summary of Discussions on Monetary Policy for the Immediate Future**

Based on the examination from the two perspectives described above, members

discussed monetary policy for the immediate future.

13


-----

Regarding the guideline for money market operations for the intermeeting period

ahead, members agreed that it was appropriate to maintain the current guideline that the

Bank would encourage the uncollateralized overnight call rate to remain at around 0 to 0.1

percent.

Regarding the Bank's outlook for economic activity and prices, members

concurred that overseas economies, exports, production, and some areas of domestic

demand had deteriorated further from that presented in September 2012 when the Bank

decided to enhance monetary easing. They continued that it was necessary for the Bank to

undertake further aggressive monetary easing policies in order to prevent Japan's economy

from deviating from its course of return to a sustainable growth path with price stability.

On this basis, members shared the recognition that it was appropriate to substantially

increase the total size of the Asset Purchase Program at this meeting, following the increase

made in September. With regard to the size of increase in the Asset Purchase Program,

many members said that it was appropriate to increase the total size of the Asset Purchase

Program by about 10 trillion yen for the purchases of financial assets, including risk assets,

in order to make financial conditions for economic entities such as firms and households

even more accommodative by further encouraging a decline in longer-term market interest

rates and a reduction in risk premiums. One member expressed the recognition that it

might be necessary for the Bank to devise further ways to boost inflation expectations, such

as exerting influence on foreign exchange rates.

Regarding the effects of the comprehensive monetary easing measures, members

discussed the transmission mechanism in which comprehensive monetary easing fed

through into economic activity. They shared the recognition that, in terms of the first stage

of the transmission mechanism -- namely, the effects of monetary easing permeating

financial conditions -- financial conditions surrounding firms and households were

accommodative. Meanwhile, in terms of the second stage -- namely, financial conditions

permeating economic activity -- they shared the view that, despite the extremely

accommodative financial conditions, these were not fully utilized. In order to encourage

further permeation of monetary easing effects in the second stage of the transmission

mechanism, members shared the recognition that it was necessary for the Bank to devise

ways to promote financial institutions' more aggressive action and help increase proactive

credit demand of firms and households. A few members added that, although room for a

14


-----

further decline in interest rates was becoming limited, should the current financial

conditions be fully utilized, the effects of monetary easing on economic activity and prices

could be expected to strengthen.

Based on this discussion, in order to examine the specifics of an increase in the

total size of the Asset Purchase Program and of the fund-provisioning measure to stimulate

bank lending, the chairman requested that the staff explain the amount of risk and the

market size of those financial assets for which purchases could be increased, as well as the

framework for the new fund-provisioning measure.

In response to the chairman's direction, the staff provided the following

explanation.

(1) In light of the Bank's risk tolerance and the market size, increases in the amount of

purchases of T-Bills and JGBs would pose no significant problem. As for risk assets,

increases in the amount of purchases of CP, corporate bonds, and J-REITs would face

constraints due to their market sizes. Moreover, purchases of exchange-traded funds

(ETFs) and J-REITs would entail a relatively large amount of risk.

(2) As for the new fund-provisioning measure, if the Bank were to support financial

institutions' efforts by utilizing its functions as a central bank, it would be appropriate to

provide long-term funds -- up to an amount equivalent to the net increase in lending -
at a low interest rate to financial institutions, at their request. In doing so, it would be

appropriate for the Bank to avoid setting an upper limit to the total amount of funds it

provided under this measure -- that is, the total amount should be unlimited.

Assuming that the Bank conducted provision of funds under this framework for about

one year, the amount was estimated at approximately 15 trillion yen based on past data.

In response to the staff's explanation, members first discussed an increase in the

total size of the Asset Purchase Program. They concurred that it was appropriate to

increase the total size of the Asset Purchase Program by about 10 trillion yen, in order to

make financial conditions for economic entities such as firms and households even more

accommodative by further encouraging a decline in longer-term market interest rates and a

reduction in risk premiums. Many members said that, together with the increase in the

total size of the Asset Purchase Program of about 10 trillion yen decided in September, the

size of the overall increase would be quite drastic. As for financial assets purchased under

the Asset Purchase Program, members shared the recognition that it would be appropriate to

15


-----

earmark the increase in the Asset Purchase Program for the purchases not only of T-Bills

and JGBs but also of a wide range of risk assets, considering the Bank's risk tolerance.

One member said that it was appropriate to earmark the increase in the Asset Purchase

Program mainly for the purchases of government securities, which could exert wide-ranging

influence on lending rates, for example. Some members expressed the view that it was

appropriate for the Bank to continue to purchase a wide range of risk assets given that

Japan's economy had been weakening somewhat, while the time of completion of the

increase in purchases of risk assets was approaching, at end-December 2012. One of these

members added that, if the Bank were to earmark the increase in the Asset Purchase

Program for the purchases of risk assets, this would be expected to restrain excessive

concerns. A few members commented that attention should be paid to the possibility that,

if the Bank were to purchase a large amount of risk assets, this would incur losses at the

Bank and ultimately result in an increased burden on the taxpayer. One member said that,

to make these powerful monetary easing measures more widely recognized, the Bank

should explain them to the public thoroughly.

Members next discussed the fund-provisioning measure to stimulate bank lending

(hereafter the Stimulating Bank Lending Facility). They agreed that it was appropriate for

the Bank to provide long-term funds -- up to an amount equivalent to the net increase in

lending -- at a low interest rate to financial institutions, at their request, with a view to

promoting their more aggressive action and helping increase proactive credit demand of

firms and households. They also shared the recognition that there should be no upper limit

-- unlimited -- to the total amount of funds provided by the Bank under this facility, as this

would offer substantial support for financial institutions' efforts to increase lending. One

member expected that this new facility would encourage financial institutions to explore

potential demand for funds through their vigorous efforts. As for the specifics of the

framework for the facility, members concurred that, in order to effectively support financial

institutions' efforts, it was appropriate to set the period of loan disbursements under the

facility at about one year and make depository institutions eligible for the facility. They

also agreed that it was appropriate for the purpose of this facility to calculate the net

increases in lending, based on credit extended to the nonfinancial private sector, and to

include both yen and foreign currency-denominated lending. One member added that, if

yen-denominated lending to nonresidents were to be included in calculating the net

16


-----

increases in lending eligible for the facility, this would be expected to produce the side

effect of mitigating upward pressure on the yen. Members shared the view that the interest

rate charged by the Bank should be a fixed rate -- for up to three years -- equivalent to the

Bank's target for the uncollateralized overnight call rate at the time of loan disbursements,

and each loan could be rolled over up to four years. They continued that this would enable

financial institutions to raise long-term funds at a low interest rate, thereby facilitating these

institutions' efforts. In relation to the fund-provisioning measure to support strengthening

the foundations for economic growth (hereafter the Growth-Supporting Funding Facility),

members concurred that the efforts to strengthen the foundations for economic growth and

financial institutions' initiatives to increase the total amount of lending were mutually

complementary; therefore, with a view to clarifying the Bank's policy stance, it was

appropriate to designate the to-be-established Stimulating Bank Lending Facility, combined

with the existing Growth-Supporting Funding Facility, as the Loan Support Program. A

few members added that, although the functions of these two facilities overlapped each

other to some extent, they would have value in playing their different respective roles.

One member said that the criticism of the Growth-Supporting Funding Facility at the early

phase of its introduction -- namely, that it intensified lending competition among financial

institutions -- had faded as the Bank's policy intentions permeated the markets. This

member continued that, given this experience, the Bank needed to clearly explain its policy

intentions, as it had done previously.

In order to establish the Loan Support Program, it was necessary to examine

specifics such as its terms and conditions, and thus the chairman instructed the staff to

examine such specifics and report back at a later Monetary Policy Meeting.

With regard to the wording of the Bank's policy commitment, a few members

raised the issue of whether it was possible to further exert influence on interest rates and

demonstrate the Bank's clearer stance on monetary easing by changing the current wording

-- namely, that the Bank aimed to achieve its goal of 1 percent for the time being in terms of

the year-on-year rate of increase in the CPI through the pursuit of powerful monetary easing,

conducting its virtually zero interest rate policy and implementing the Asset Purchase

Program mainly through the purchase of financial assets, and would continue with this

powerful easing until it judged the 1 percent goal to be in sight -- and then presenting a new

wording in the statement, which was to be released immediately after the meeting. On the

17


-----

other hand, most members expressed a cautious view regarding making changes to the

wording of the policy commitment at this point. These members noted that market rates

were at very low levels, even at the medium zone of the yield curve, and it seemed unlikely

that the continuation of the Bank's monetary easing was being questioned in the markets;

thus, there was no need to change the wording of the policy commitment. A few members

said that the time might come when a change in wording would have some positive effects,

but this was not the case at this point. In terms of the operation of the Asset Purchase

Program, these members added that, under the current policy commitment, it was difficult

to imagine that any market participants were projecting that the Bank would reduce the

amount outstanding of the Asset Purchase Program immediately after the completion of

increased purchases. Some members commented that, if there was any misunderstanding

in the markets about the operation of the Asset Purchase Program, the Bank should correct

such misunderstanding by reemphasizing to the public that it would implement the Asset

Purchase Program in line with its commitment to continuing with powerful monetary easing

aiming at achieving the goal of 1 percent even after the completion of increased purchases

under the Asset Purchase Program. A few members added that, with the aim of

communicating the Bank's recognition of the current situation accurately, it was important

to thoroughly explain that the Bank had not yet judged the 1 percent goal to be in sight.

Regarding measures aimed at overcoming deflation, the chairman proposed the

following.

(1) Both the Bank and the government had been making efforts to address the critical

challenge for Japan's economy of overcoming deflation as early as possible and

returning to a sustainable growth path with price stability. However, the economy had

recently been weakening somewhat and new risk factors had arisen, such as the

widening implications of recent developments in the relations between Japan and

China.

(2) The government and the Bank, based on their recognition of severe economic

conditions, could take this opportunity to state clearly to the public both the intention to

make their utmost efforts to address this challenge and the shared understanding of their

respective roles.

In response to the proposal, members agreed that the effectiveness of the Bank's

and the government's respective policy measures would be enhanced by the Bank's

18


-----

reaffirmation of its stance of pursuing powerful monetary easing and the government's

concurrent presentation of its recognition that -- in order to overcome deflation -- it was

essential to reform an economic structure that was predisposed to deflation, as well as

conduct appropriate macroeconomic policy management. One member expressed the

view that it was important to make public that the Bank and the government had

reconfirmed their respective roles in addressing the challenge for the economy of

overcoming deflation as early as possible and returning to a sustainable growth path with

price stability. A different member said that the Bank would reaffirm its stance of

pursuing powerful monetary easing, and at the same time expect the government to

vigorously promote measures for strengthening Japan's growth potential. These two

members added that it should be ensured that this would not raise any doubt with respect to

the Bank's independence.

**IV. Remarks by Government Representatives**

The representative from the Cabinet Office made the following remarks.

(1) The Japanese economy was in a weak tone recently due to deceleration of the world

economy, although some components still exhibited steady movements. It was likely

that progress toward economic recovery would remain paused for the time being. The

government judged that uncertainty about the prospects for overseas economies was

high, and therefore it was necessary to monitor the situation with great vigilance.

Although the rate of decline in prices was moderating, recent price developments

indicated that the Japanese economy remained in a mild deflationary situation.

(2) The government welcomed the chairman's proposal to release the "Measures Aimed at

Overcoming Deflation," which stated clearly the government's and the Bank's

determination and their concerted efforts toward overcoming deflation. In particular, it

was unprecedented for the government and the Bank to confirm that overcoming

deflation as early as possible was a common challenge, and -- to make this clear to the

public at home and abroad -- to announce and release this in the form of a document

carrying both entities' names. This would be an important step toward overcoming

deflation, which was a challenge Japan had confronted for over a decade.

(3) Setting a course toward the revitalization of the Japanese economy was the greatest task

the current Cabinet needed to undertake at present. In order to counter risks of an

19


-----

economic downturn and to accelerate measures for overcoming deflation as early as

possible and realizing economic revitalization, the Cabinet decided on October 26, 2012

to release contingency funds first of all for measures that urgently needed to be

implemented. Moreover, the government would formulate economic policy measures

by no later than the end of November 2012. Under these measures, it would bring

forward the implementation of measures in the three key policy areas presented in the

"Comprehensive Strategy for the Rebirth of Japan."

(4) In the October 2012 _Outlook for Economic Activity and Prices, the forecasts for the_

year-on-year rate of change in the CPI, excluding the effects of the consumption tax

hike, were still below 1 percent over the projection period, and therefore further efforts

by the Bank were required. The government, focusing on the period through fiscal

2013, would mobilize optimal policy measures to overcome deflation based on the

"Comprehensive Strategy for the Rebirth of Japan." Considering this plan of action,

the government expected the Bank to make its utmost efforts in the conduct of monetary

policy in order to achieve the price stability goal as promptly as possible. The

government deemed the Bank's proposal made at this meeting to increase the total size

of the Asset Purchase Program to be a timely action. It expected the Bank to continue

with powerful monetary easing until the exit from deflation was ensured.

The representative from the Ministry of Finance made the following remarks.

(1) For the third consecutive month, the government had revised downward its assessment

of the state of the Japanese economy, judging that it was in a weak tone recently due to

deceleration of the world economy. As for the outlook, uncertainty about the

prospects for overseas economies, including those of the euro area and Asia -- notably

China -- remained high. In this situation, a further slowing down of overseas

economies and sharp fluctuations in the financial markets were downside risks to the

Japanese economy.

(2) Based on the recognition that countering risks of an economic downturn and

accelerating measures for overcoming deflation as early as possible and realizing

economic revitalization were pressing challenges, the Cabinet had recently decided to

release contingency funds for measures that urgently needed to be implemented, as the

20


-----

first portion of the economic policy measures. The government would work to

formulate the economic policy measures by no later than the end of November 2012.

(3) The government deemed it important that the Bank take appropriate actions without

delay. It welcomed the Bank's proposal made at this meeting to increase the total size

of the Asset Purchase Program by 11 trillion yen as a timely and appropriate action.

Meanwhile, the timing of achieving a CPI inflation rate of 1 percent was highly

uncertain. The government expected the Bank to continue to conduct monetary policy

vigorously and decisively for the purpose of swiftly achieving the goal of 1 percent -
the rate the Bank aimed to achieve for the time being -- while monitoring developments

in economic activity and financial markets at home and abroad as well as working

sufficiently on its communication to the public in an effort to make its policy stance

fully understood.

(4) Overcoming deflation as early as possible would be achieved only through the

combination of (1) the government's macroeconomic policy management and reforming

of the economic structure and (2) the Bank's monetary policy conduct. The joint

release of the document by the government and the Bank -- stating clearly that

overcoming deflation as early as possible was their common challenge, and that they

would work together and make their utmost efforts to address this challenge -- would be

an important step toward overcoming deflation. The government welcomed this

proposal for the joint release, and would steadily carry out its measures as laid out in the

document.

**V. Votes**

**A. Vote on the Guideline for Money Market Operations**

Based on the above discussions, members shared the view that it was appropriate

to maintain the current guideline for money market operations, which encouraged the

uncollateralized overnight call rate to remain at around 0 to 0.1 percent.

To reflect this view, the chairman formulated the following proposal and put it to a

vote.

21


-----

**The Chairman's Policy Proposal on the Guideline for Money Market Operations:**

1. The guideline for money market operations for the intermeeting period ahead will be as

follows.

The Bank of Japan will encourage the uncollateralized overnight call rate

to remain at around 0 to 0.1 percent.

2. A public statement will be decided separately.

Votes for the proposal: Mr. M. Shirakawa, Mr. H. Yamaguchi, Mr. K. G. Nishimura,

Mr. R. Miyao, Mr. Y. Morimoto, Ms. S. Shirai, Mr. K. Ishida, Mr. T. Sato, and

Mr. T. Kiuchi.

Votes against the proposal: None.

**B. Vote on "Amendment to 'Principal Terms and Conditions for the Asset Purchase**

**Program'"**

With a view to further pursuing aggressive monetary easing, members shared the

recognition that it was appropriate to increase the size for each asset category under the

Asset Purchase Program as follows: about 5 trillion yen for JGBs; about 5 trillion yen for

T-Bills; about 0.1 trillion yen for CP; about 0.3 trillion yen for corporate bonds; about 0.5

trillion yen for ETFs; and about 0.01 trillion yen for J-REITs. "Amendment to 'Principal

Terms and Conditions for the Asset Purchase Program'" was then put to a vote. Members

voted unanimously to approve the amendment and agreed that the decision should be made

public accordingly.

**C. Decision regarding the Outlook for Economic Activity and Prices**

Members discussed the draft of "The Bank's View" in the Outlook for Economic

_Activity and Prices (consisting of "The Bank's View" and "The Background"), and formed a_

majority view. One member, however, proposed changing the expressions regarding (1)

the Bank's outlook for prices -- namely, that the year-on-year rate of change in the CPI

would move steadily closer toward 1 percent in fiscal 2014 -- and (2) the Bank's policy

stance -- namely, that the Bank would continue with powerful monetary easing until it

22


-----

judged the 1 percent goal in terms of the year-on-year rate of increase in the CPI to be in

sight. As a result, the following two proposals were submitted.

Mr. T. Sato formulated a proposal to make the following changes. First, with

regard to the outlook for prices, he proposed to change the current expression that "the

year-on-year rate of change in the CPI is expected to hover around 0 percent for the time

being and start rising gradually thereafter as the aggregate supply and demand balance

improves. In fiscal 2014, it appears likely that it will move steadily closer toward the

Bank's 'price stability goal in the medium to long term' of 1 percent for the time being" to a

new expression that "the year-on-year rate of change in the CPI is expected to hover around

0 percent for the time being and start rising gradually thereafter as the aggregate supply and

demand balance improves." Second, with regard to the Bank's policy stance, Mr. Sato

proposed changing the current expression that "the Bank will continue with this powerful

easing until it judges the 1 percent goal to be in sight" to a new expression that "the Bank

will continue with this powerful easing until it judges that the 1 percent has been steadily

maintained." The proposal was defeated by a majority vote.

Votes for the proposal: Mr. T. Sato and Mr. T. Kiuchi.

Votes against the proposal: Mr. M. Shirakawa, Mr. H. Yamaguchi, Mr. K. G.

Nishimura, Mr. R. Miyao, Mr. Y. Morimoto, Ms. S. Shirai, and Mr. K. Ishida.

To reflect the majority view, the chairman formulated a proposal on "The Bank's

View" and put it to a vote. The Policy Board decided the text of "The Bank's View" by a

majority vote. It was confirmed that "The Bank's View" would be made public on October

30, 2012 and the whole report on October 31, 2012.

Votes for the proposal: Mr. M. Shirakawa, Mr. H. Yamaguchi, Mr. K. G. Nishimura,

Mr. R. Miyao, Mr. Y. Morimoto, Ms. S. Shirai, and Mr. K. Ishida.

Votes against the proposal: Mr. T. Sato and Mr. T. Kiuchi.

Mr. T. Sato and Mr. T. Kiuchi dissented for the following reasons: (1) they held a

more cautious view of the outlook for prices compared with the expression in the October

2012 Outlook for Economic Activity and Prices; and (2) they considered that, in addition to

23


-----

the enhancement of monetary easing decided at this meeting, the wording of the Bank's

policy commitment should be changed.

**D. Discussion on the Statement Entitled Measures Aimed at Overcoming Deflation**

Members then discussed the statement Measures Aimed at Overcoming Deflation,

and it was put to a vote. The Policy Board decided the text by a unanimous vote. It was

confirmed that the statement would be released immediately after the meeting (see

Attachment 4).

**E. Discussion on the Statement Entitled Enhancement of Monetary Easing**

On the basis of the above discussions, members discussed the statement

Enhancement of Monetary Easing, and it was put to a vote. The Policy Board decided the

text by a unanimous vote. It was confirmed that the statement would be released

immediately after the meeting (see Attachment 1).

**VI. Approval of the Minutes of the Monetary Policy Meeting**

The Policy Board approved unanimously the minutes of the Monetary Policy

Meeting of October 4 and 5, 2012 for release on November 2, 2012.

24


-----

Attachment 1

October 30, 2012

Bank of Japan

**Enhancement of Monetary Easing**

1. At the Monetary Policy Meeting held today, the Policy Board of the Bank of Japan

made the following decisions with a view to further pursuing aggressive monetary

easing.

(1) Increase in the total size of the Asset Purchase Program (hereafter referred to as

"the Program"): unanimous vote

The Bank decided to increase the total size of the Program by about 11 trillion yen,

from about 80 trillion yen to about 91 trillion yen in order to make financial

conditions for such economic entities as firms and households even more

accommodative by further encouraging a decline in longer-term market interest

rates and a reduction in risk premiums. The increase in the size of respective

assets under the Program is as follows, and the Bank intends to complete the

increased purchases by around end-2013 (see Attachment 2 for an overview of the

Program).[5]

Japanese government bonds (JGBs): about 5 trillion yen

Treasury discount bills (T-Bills): about 5 trillion yen

CP: about 0.1 trillion yen

Corporate bonds: about 0.3 trillion yen

Exchange-traded funds (ETFs): about 0.5 trillion yen

Japan real estate investment trusts (J-REITs): about 0.01 trillion yen

5 The increases in the purchases of ETFs and J-REITs are conditional on obtaining authorization in
accordance with the Bank of Japan Act.

25


-----

(2) Establishment of the Framework for the Fund-Provisioning Measure to Stimulate

Bank Lending ("Stimulating Bank Lending Facility"): unanimous vote

The Bank decided to provide long-term funds -- up to the amount equivalent to the

net increase in lending -- at a low interest rate to financial institutions at their

request, with the view to promoting their aggressive action and helping increase

proactive credit demand of firms and households. There shall be no upper limit -
unlimited -- to the total amount of funds provided by the Bank under this facility.

The Chairman instructed the staff to examine the specifics of establishing the

framework for this new facility and report back at a Monetary Policy Meeting (see

Attachment 3 for the outline of the preliminary framework).

2. The Policy Board also decided, by a unanimous vote, to set the following guideline for

money market operations for the intermeeting period:

The Bank of Japan will encourage the uncollateralized overnight call rate to remain at

around 0 to 0.1 percent.

3. Overseas economies have moved deeper into a deceleration phase. In global financial

markets, while investors' risk aversion on the back of the European debt problem has

abated somewhat, particular attention should be given to developments in these

markets. Under such circumstances, exports and industrial production have decreased,

starting to affect domestic demand which has remained firm thus far. As such, Japan's

economy has been weakening somewhat. Meanwhile, the year-on-year rate of change

in the CPI (all items less fresh food) is around 0 percent.

Going forward, there remains a high degree of uncertainty concerning Japan's economy,

including the prospects for the European debt problem, the momentum toward recovery

for the U.S. economy, the possibility of emerging and commodity-exporting economies

making a smooth transition to the sustainable growth path, and the spreading effects of

the recent bilateral relationship between Japan and China. Furthermore, attention

26


-----

should continue to be paid to the effects of financial and foreign exchange market

developments on economic activity and prices.

4. Based on these economic and price developments, the Bank of Japan judged it

appropriate to undertake further aggressive monetary easing policies in order to prevent

Japan's economy from deviating from the path of returning to a sustainable growth path

with price stability.

5. The Bank recognizes that Japan's economy faces the critical challenge of overcoming

deflation as early as possible and returning to the sustainable growth path with price

stability. This challenge will be met through the combination of (i) efforts by a wide

range of economic agents -- such as business firms and financial institutions -- to

strengthen the economy's growth potential and (ii) support from the financial side.

6. In order to address this challenge, it is necessary for the Government and the Bank of

Japan to play their respective roles. The Bank, based on the aforementioned

recognition, will pursue powerful monetary easing. It strongly expects the

Government to vigorously promote measures for strengthening Japan's growth

potential, based on the Government's recognition that in order to overcome deflation

reforming the economic structure predisposed to deflation is essential in addition to

appropriate macroeconomic policy management. In order to state clearly the shared

understanding concerning the roles of the Government and the Bank, the Bank decided

to release today "Measures Aimed at Overcoming Deflation" along with the

Government (see Attachment 4). The Bank believes that this release will contribute to

enhancing the effectiveness of respective policy measures.

27


-----

Attachment 2

**Size of the Asset Purchase Program**

(trillion yen)

Amount
outstanding Program size

Change in

(as of (Figures in parentheses represent

amount

end-September the size before today's decision.)
2012)

End-December End-June End-December End-December
2012 2013 2013 2013

**About 78** **About 91**
**Total size [[Notes 1,2]]** **About 61.8** **About 65** **About +11**
**(About 75)** **(About 80)**

53 66

Asset purchases 31. 1 40 +11

(50) (55)

31. 5 39. 0
JGBs [[Note 3]] 18. 1 24. 0 +5. 0
(29. 0) (34. 0)

14. 5 19. 5
T-Bills 7. 4 9. 5 +5. 0
(14. 5) (14. 5)

2. 2
CP 1. 4 2. 1 --> +0. 1
(2. 1)

3. 2
Corporate bonds 2. 7 2. 9 --> +0. 3
(2. 9)

Exchange-traded funds 2. 1

1. 4 1. 6 --> +0. 5
(ETFs)[ [Note 4]] (1. 6)

Japan real estate

0. 13

investment trusts 0. 10 0. 12 --> +0. 01

(0. 12)
(J-REITs)[ [Note 4]]

Fixed-rate funds-supplying

25. 0 25. 0

operation against pooled 30. 7 25. 0 

(25. 0) (25. 0)

collateral

Notes: 1. The size of the Program at the time of its introduction in October 2010 was about 35 trillion yen.
2. The amount outstanding of the Program is 62.7 trillion yen as of October 20, 2012.
3. In addition to purchases under the Program, the Bank regularly purchases JGBs at the pace of 21.6 trillion yen per year.
4. The increases in the purchases of ETFs and J-REITs are conditional on obtaining authorization in accordance with
the Bank of Japan Act.

28

|Col1|Col2|Col3|Col4|Col5|Col6|(trillion yen)|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|||Amount outstanding (as of end-September 2012)|Program size (Figures in parentheses represent the size before today's decision.)|||Change in amount|
||||End-December 2012|End-June 2013|End-December 2013|End-December 2013|
|Total size [Notes 1,2]||About 61.8|About 65|About 78 (About 75)|About 91 (About 80)|About +11|
|Asset purchases JGBs [Note 3] T-Bills CP Corporate bonds Exchange-traded funds (ETFs) [Note 4] Japan real estate investment trusts (J-REITs) [Note 4]||31. 1|40|53 (50)|66 (55)|+11|
||JGBs [Note 3]|18. 1|24. 0|31. 5 (29. 0)|39. 0 (34. 0)|+5. 0|
||T-Bills|7. 4|9. 5|14. 5 (14. 5)|19. 5 (14. 5)|+5. 0|
||CP|1. 4|2. 1|-->|2. 2 (2. 1)|+0. 1|
||Corporate bonds|2. 7|2. 9|-->|3. 2 (2. 9)|+0. 3|
||Exchange-traded funds (ETFs) [Note 4]|1. 4|1. 6|-->|2. 1 (1. 6)|+0. 5|
||Japan real estate investment trusts (J-REITs) [Note 4]|0. 10|0. 12|-->|0. 13 (0. 12)|+0. 01|
|Fixed-rate funds-supplying operation against pooled collateral||30. 7|25. 0|25. 0 (25. 0)|25. 0 (25. 0)||


-----

Attachment 3

**Framework for the Fund-Provisioning Measure to Stimulate Bank Lending**

**("Stimulating Bank Lending Facility")**

1. The Bank shall fulfill any request for funds from each counterparty up to the amount

equivalent to the net increase in lending from the designated date.

2. The total amount of loans provided by the Bank under this facility shall be "unlimited"

(i.e., no upper limit).

3. The interest rate charged by the Bank shall be a long-term fixed rate equivalent to the

Bank's target for the uncollateralized overnight call rate at the time of loan disbursement.

It is currently 0.1 percent per annum.

4. Duration of loans shall be 1 year, 2 years, or 3 years, at the request of each counterparty.

Loans can be rolled over up to 4 years.

5. For about 1 year after the introduction of this facility, the Bank shall provide loans at an

interval it deems appropriate.

6. Loans shall be provided against pooled collateral.

7. Counterparties eligible for this facility will be depository institutions.

8. In the calculation of net increases in lending for the purpose of this facility, only credit

extended to the non-financial private sector shall be counted and it can be either yen

denominated or foreign-currency denominated.

9. Loans under this facility, combined with those under the "Growth-Supporting Funding

Facility" (Fund-Provisioning Measure to Support Strengthening the Foundations for

Economic Growth) shall constitute the "Loan Support Program."

29


-----

**(Appendix) Outline of the "Loan Support Program"**

### Loan Support Program
 Total Amount: "unlimited"

3.5 trillion yen

Recent Data: 15 trillion yen

0.5 trillion yen

amount of

0.5 trillion yen

financial institutions

increased.

U.S. dollar funds equivalent

30


-----

Attachment 4

October 30, 2012

**Measures Aimed at Overcoming Deflation**

The Government and the Bank of Japan will carry out the following measures aimed at

overcoming deflation in Japan at this juncture.

1. The Government and the Bank share the recognition that the critical challenge for Japan's

economy is to overcome deflation as early as possible and to return to a sustainable growth

path with price stability. The Government and the Bank will work together and make their

utmost efforts to address this challenge.

2. The Bank recognizes that the challenge mentioned above will be met through the

combination of (i) efforts by a wide range of economic agents to strengthen the economy's

growth potential and (ii) support from the financial side. The Bank strongly expects the

Government to vigorously promote measures for strengthening Japan's growth potential.

The Bank judges "the price stability goal in the medium to long term" to be within a

positive range of 2 percent or lower in terms of the year-on-year rate of change in the CPI.

The Bank aims to achieve its goal of 1 percent for the time being in terms of the year-on-year

rate of increase in the CPI through the pursuit of powerful monetary easing, conducting its

virtually zero interest rate policy and implementing the Asset Purchase Program mainly

through the purchase of financial assets. The Bank will continue with this powerful easing

until it judges the 1 percent goal to be in sight. In doing so, it will ascertain whether there is

any significant risk to the sustainability of economic growth, including from the

accumulation of financial imbalances.

In the October 2012 issue of the _Outlook for Economic Activity and Prices released on_

October 30, 2012, the Bank presented the projections for the CPI. The Bank will continue

with this powerful easing aiming at achieving the goal of 1 percent. The Bank will report

the outlook for prices regularly at the Ministerial Council on Exiting Deflation.

The Bank will also continue to make efforts to explain its thinking on the conduct of

monetary policy clearly to the market.

3. The Government strongly expects the Bank to continue powerful easing as outlined in section

2 until deflation is overcome.

31


-----

In order to overcome deflation, the Government recognizes that reforming the economic

structure predisposed to deflation is essential in addition to appropriate macroeconomic

policy management. Therefore, based on the Prime Minister's instruction on October 17,

2012, the Government will promptly formulate economic policy measures to counter risks of

a downturn that Japan's economy faces at this juncture and to accelerate measures for

realizing economic revitalization. In addition, based on the "Comprehensive Strategy for

the Rebirth of Japan," which was decided by the Cabinet on July 31, 2012, the Government,

focusing on through fiscal 2013, will mobilize optimal policy measures including regulatory

and institutional reforms, budget, fiscal investment and loan program, and tax in order to

dynamically mobilize "goods," "people," and "money."

The Government will assess the economic developments including the state of deflation

and the macroeconomic management regularly at the Ministerial Council on Exiting

Deflation.

Masaaki Shirakawa Seiji Maehara

Governor of the Bank of Japan Minister of State for Economic and Fiscal Policy

Koriki Jojima

Minister of Finance

Note: English translation is prepared by the Bank's staff based on the Japanese original.

32


-----

