Not to be released until 8:50 a.m.
Japan Standard Time on Friday,
September 25, 2009.

September 25, 2009

Bank of Japan

# Minutes of the Monetary Policy Meeting
## on August 10 and 11, 2009

(English translation prepared by the Bank's staff based on the Japanese original)


-----

Please contact the Bank of Japan at the address below in advance to request permission

when reproducing or copying the content of this document for commercial purposes.

Secretariat of the Policy Board, Bank of Japan

P.O. Box 30, Nihonbashi, Tokyo 103-8660, Japan

Please credit the source when quoting, reproducing, or copying the content of this

document.


-----

A Monetary Policy Meeting of the Bank of Japan Policy Board was held in the

Head Office of the Bank of Japan in Tokyo on Monday, August 10, 2009, from 2:00 p.m. to

4:13 p.m., and on Tuesday, August 11, from 9:00 a.m. to 11:46 a.m.[1]

**Policy Board Members Present**

**Mr. M. Shirakawa, Chairman, Governor of the Bank of Japan**

**Mr. H. Yamaguchi, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Japan**

**Mr. K. G. Nishimura, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Japan**

**Ms. M. Suda**

**Mr. A. Mizuno**

**Mr. T. Noda**

**Mr. S. Nakamura**

**Mr. H. Kamezaki**

Government Representatives Present

Mr. S. Kagawa, Deputy Vice Minister for Policy Planning and Coordination, Ministry of

Finance

Mr. K. Umetani, Deputy Director-General, Economic and Fiscal Management, Cabinet

Office

Reporting Staff

Mr. A. Horii, Executive Director (Assistant Governor)

Mr. K. Ido, Executive Director

Mr. H. Nakaso, Executive Director[2]

Mr. M. Amamiya, Director-General, Monetary Affairs Department

1 The minutes of this meeting were approved by the Policy Board at the Monetary Policy Meeting
held on September 16 and 17, 2009 as "a document describing an outline of the discussion at the
meeting" stipulated in Article 20, paragraph 1 of the Bank of Japan Act of 1997. Those present are
referred to by their titles at the time of the meeting.
2 Mr. H. Nakaso was present on August 10 for the whole of the session, and on August 11 from 9:00
a.m. to 9:56 a.m. and from 11:27 a.m. to 11:46 a.m.

1


-----

Mr. T. Kato, Associate Director-General, Monetary Affairs Department[3]

Mr. H. Toyama, Director-General, Financial Markets Department

Mr. K. Momma, Director-General, Research and Statistics Department

Mr. T. Sekine, Associate Director-General, Research and Statistics Department

Mr. H. Ono, Director-General, International Department

Secretariat of the Monetary Policy Meeting

Mr. Y. Iino, Director-General, Secretariat of the Policy Board

Mr. K. Shigyoh, Director, Deputy Head of Secretarial Services for the Board, Secretariat

of the Policy Board

Mr. T. Tachibana, Director, Deputy Head of Secretarial Services for the Board,

Secretariat of the Policy Board

Mr. K. Nishizaki, Senior Economist, Monetary Affairs Department

Mr. M. Nakashima, Senior Economist, Monetary Affairs Department

3 Mr. T. Kato was present on August 10 for the whole of the session, and on August 11 from 11:27
a.m. to 11:46 a.m.

2


-----

**I. Summary of Staff Reports on Economic and Financial Developments[4]**

**A. Money Market Operations in the Intermeeting Period**

The Bank conducted money market operations in accordance with the guideline

decided at the previous meeting on July 14 and 15, 2009.[5] The uncollateralized overnight

call rate had been at around 0.1 percent.

With a view to ensuring market stability, the Bank continued to conduct money

market operations in a flexible manner in response to changes in the market situation, as

evidenced by its active purchases of Japanese government securities (JGSs) and CP under

repurchase agreements. The Bank also continued to conduct outright purchases of CP and

corporate bonds, special funds-supplying operations to facilitate corporate financing, and

U.S. dollar funds-supplying operations against pooled collateral. In outright purchases of

CP and corporate bonds and in U.S. dollar funds-supplying operations against pooled

collateral, bidding was sluggish, as financial institutions' demand for liquidity had declined

reflecting a recovery in market functioning.

**B. Recent Developments in Financial Markets**

In Japan's money market, interest rates had been stable at low levels as there was a

growing sense of an abundance of liquidity in the market. Nevertheless, the market as a

whole had remained nervous, as seen in the continuation of low liquidity in some segments

of it. General collateral (GC) repo rates had been in the range of 0.10-0.15 percent.

Interest rates on term instruments showed the following developments. Yields on

government bills, including those with a one-year maturity, had been stable in the range of

0.1-0.2 percent recently. Euroyen rates had declined slightly but had remained at

relatively elevated levels, especially those with longer maturities, amid the continued lower

volume of transactions. In the CP market, issuing conditions had been improving and

issuance rates on some CP with high ratings had been below yields on government bills.

CP maturing beyond end-September 2009 -- the end of a semiannual book closing period

for many Japanese firms -- had been issued at the usual pace, and issuance rates on such CP

4 Reports were made based on information available at the time of the meeting.
5 The guideline was as follows:
The Bank of Japan will encourage the uncollateralized overnight call rate to remain at
around 0.1 percent.

3


-----

had not risen noticeably.

Japanese stock prices had risen along with U.S. and European stock prices. The

Nikkei 225 Stock Average had recently been slightly above 10,000 yen. Long-term

interest rates in Japan had increased slightly, partly because views on the economic outlook

had become somewhat less cautious. The benchmark rate had recently been at around

1.45 percent.

The yen had depreciated somewhat against the U.S. dollar and had recently been

traded at around 97 yen to the dollar, amid waning concerns about business performance in

the United States.

**C. Overseas Economic and Financial Developments**

Global economic conditions had stopped worsening.

U.S. economic conditions had continued to deteriorate, but the pace of

deterioration was moderating. The rates of decline in business fixed investment and

housing investment were slowing while the rate in home prices was moderating.

Meanwhile, the level of private consumption was broadly unchanged, owing partly to the

effects of fiscal stimulus measures. Cutbacks in production had continued, but at a

decelerating pace due to progress in inventory adjustments. In the labor market, although

the unemployment rate had been on a rising trend and the number of employees had

continued to decline considerably, there were signs that the pace of decline in the number of

employees was slowing. As for prices, the year-on-year rate of change in the consumer

price index (CPI) for all items had been negative, as energy prices had been low and food

prices had been more or less unchanged. The year-on-year rate of increase in the CPI for

all items less energy and food, or the core CPI, had been in the range of 1.5-2.0 percent.

Economic conditions in the euro area had continued to deteriorate, but the pace of

deterioration was slowing gradually. The rates of decline in exports and production were

moderating. Domestic demand had continued to decrease, but the pace of decline in

private consumption was slowing due to the effects of economic stimulus measures. As

for prices, the year-on-year rate of change in the Harmonized Index of Consumer Prices

(HICP) had declined. Regarding economic conditions in the United Kingdom, the pace of

deterioration had been moderating partly reflecting progress in housing market adjustments.

4


-----

The Chinese economy was growing at a faster rate, led mainly by domestic

demand. The pace of decrease in exports was moderating, and production was increasing

at a faster rate. Growth in private consumption had been firm, and fixed asset investment

had been increasing strongly. Economic growth in the NIEs and the ASEAN countries had

turned upward, as seen in the fact that exports had increased, the pace of decline in business

fixed investment had slowed, and private consumption had shown some improvement.

Meanwhile, economic growth in India had started to accelerate. With regard to prices, the

year-on-year rate of change in the CPI had been on a declining trend in many Asian

economies.

As for global financial markets, money markets were regaining stability, as seen in

the fact that Treasury-Eurodollar (TED) spreads and credit spreads on CP had generally

been at their levels in around August 2007. Credit spreads on corporate bonds had

generally been on a decreasing trend, although those on low-rated bonds remained at high

levels. U.S. and European stock prices had risen, reflecting firm economic indicators and

better-than-expected corporate results. Long-term interest rates in the United States had

increased slightly against the background of firm economic indicators.

**D. Economic and Financial Developments in Japan**

1. Economic developments

Exports, after falling substantially from autumn 2008, had recently picked up,

mainly due to the effects of various countries' policy measures and to progress in

adjustments in overseas inventories. They were expected to continue recovering, on the

back of this progress and improvement in overseas economic conditions.

Public investment had increased and was likely to continue increasing due to the

implementation of various economic measures.

With regard to domestic private demand, business fixed investment had declined

substantially. It was likely to gradually stop worsening but be relatively weak for the time

being, given the severe situation in corporate profits and firms' funding and the strong sense

of excessive capital stock among firms.

Private consumption had remained generally weak, although there had been some

signs of picking up with the support of various measures and price declines. Sales at

department stores had continued to decrease significantly, reflecting further curtailment of

5


-----

purchases by consumers. On the other hand, the number of new passenger-car

registrations had recovered noticeably, mainly due to the reduction in automobile taxes and

to subsidies. Meanwhile, indicators of consumer sentiment had remained at low levels but

were generally recovering on the back of various demand-boosting policy measures, in

addition to the decline in retail prices. Private consumption was likely to remain generally

weak amid the worsening employment and income situation.

Housing investment had decreased and was expected to continue decreasing for

the time being, given the sluggishness in housing starts.

Production, after falling substantially from autumn 2008, had picked up recently,

reflecting progress in inventory adjustments both at home and abroad as well as the policy

effects. It was expected to continue recovering for the time being due to the same factors.

The employment and income situation had become increasingly severe, with the

substantial slackening of the labor market and the significant decrease in household income.

Household income was likely to continue decreasing substantially for the time being,

mainly due to the lagged effects of the earlier drop in corporate profits and production.

On the price front, commodity prices had been more or less flat recently. The

three-month rate of change in the domestic corporate goods price index (CGPI) had

continued to be slightly negative, mainly due to the easing of supply and demand conditions

for products. The CGPI was likely to continue decreasing gradually for the time being, as

supply and demand conditions for products were likely to remain slack. The year-on-year

decline in the CPI (excluding fresh food) had accelerated, mainly due to the prices of

petroleum products being lower than the high levels of a year earlier, in addition to the

substantial slack persisting in the economy as a whole. The decline in the CPI (excluding

fresh food) was expected to continue accelerating for the time being, mainly due to the

prices of petroleum products being lower than the high levels of a year earlier.

2. Financial environment

Financial conditions, while remaining generally tight, had continued to show signs

of improvement. The overnight call rate had remained at an extremely low level, and

firms' funding costs had remained more or less unchanged at low levels. However, the

stimulative effects from low interest rates had been limited given the low level of economic

activity and corporate profits. With regard to credit supply, although many firms still saw

6


-----

financial institutions' lending attitudes as severe, firms as a whole regarded the situation as

improving somewhat. Issuing conditions for CP and corporate bonds, although remaining

severe for firms with low credit ratings, had continued to improve on the whole, as reflected

in the narrowing of credit spreads and the increase of firms issuing corporate bonds. As

for credit demand, firms' demand for working capital and funds for fixed investment had

declined, and some firms had reduced on-hand liquidity that they had accumulated.

Against such a backdrop, the pace of increase in bank lending had slowed. Issuance of

corporate bonds had been at a high level, while that of CP had declined. In these

circumstances, firms' financial positions, although many firms still saw them as weak, had

continued to improve. Meanwhile, the year-on-year rate of change in the money stock had

been at around 2.5 percent.

**II. Summary of Discussions by the Policy Board on Economic and Financial**

**Developments**

**A. Economic Developments**

Members concurred that overseas economic conditions had stopped worsening.

As for the outlook, they agreed that such conditions were likely to recover gradually against

the background of further progress in inventory adjustments and the positive effects of

fiscal and monetary policy measures. Many members, however, said that the pace and

sustainability of overseas economic recovery after inventory adjustments had been

completed and the initial effects of the policy measures had abated remained highly

uncertain. One member cited (1) adjustments to corporate and household balance sheets

and (2) credit contraction stemming from the liquidity crisis as the two channels through

which the recent bursting of a credit bubble had affected economic activity. The member

was of the view that the recent improvement in economic conditions reflected the easing of

the latter on the back of the policy measures taken in various countries. This member

continued that it would take time for the remaining issue -- balance-sheet adjustments -- to

be resolved, and therefore the pace of economic recovery would inevitably be moderate but

also uncertain. A different member said that balance-sheet adjustments would indeed take

some time to be completed, but regarding their impact on the economy, there was room for

debate over whether it was appropriate to make a pessimistic forecast based on Japan's

experience of similar adjustments in the 1990s. Meanwhile, some members expressed the

7


-----

view that, in the longer run, aggressive fiscal and monetary policy measures taken in

various countries might pose the risks of inducing excessive swings in the world economy

and of creating another economic distortion.

Many members said that the state of global financial markets had been improving

since early spring 2009. Many members, however, noted that concerns about the U.S. and

European financial systems persisted and uncertainty about future developments had not

been dispelled. One member said that growth in bank lending in the United States and

Europe had slowed, and this suggested that financial institutions had not yet fully restored

their financial intermediary function.

Turning to the U.S. economy, members concurred that economic conditions had

continued to deteriorate but the pace of deterioration was moderating. Many members

noted that an increasing number of indicators suggested a leveling out of the U.S. economy:

for example, the rate of decline in real GDP moderated significantly in the April-June

quarter of 2009, and housing starts and home sales figures had started to rise on a

quarter-on-quarter basis. As for the outlook, members agreed that the U.S. economy was

likely to level out and start recovering on the back of progress in inventory adjustments.

However, many members said that the pace of recovery warranted conservative forecasting

given the strength of adjustment pressures on household balance sheets, the deterioration in

the employment and income situation, and the severe situation in corporate profits.

Meanwhile, one member noted that, since firms' pessimism and anxiety had intensified to a

considerable degree, improved sentiment might prompt firms to spend more than in the

usual rebound from the downturn.

With regard to the economy of the euro area, many members said that economic

conditions had continued to deteriorate but the pace of deterioration was slowing gradually.

Some members said that car sales had started to increase on the back of the effects of policy

measures, and various indicators of business and consumer confidence had been improving.

However, these members also noted that the pace of improvement in economic conditions

was moderate compared with that in the United States and other countries, since the

spending behavior of households in the euro area had remained cautious against the

background of continued worsening in the employment and income situation.

Members concurred that the Chinese economy was growing at a faster rate, led

mainly by domestic demand. Many members said that fixed asset investment had been

8


-----

increasing strongly and growth in private consumption had been firm following

implementation of the large-scale stimulus package. Some members, noting the sharp

increase in bank loans and the money stock, expressed concern that an overheating in

financial and economic activity might have started to emerge in China. A different

member said that although both upside and downside risks to the Chinese economy existed,

more attention should be paid to upside risks of overheating than downside risks of stalling.

Some members said that economic growth in the NIEs and the ASEAN countries as a whole

had turned upward, as evidenced by growing exports to China and recent signs of an uptick

in domestic demand.

Based on the above discussions on economic and financial conditions abroad,

members discussed the state of Japan's economy. They concurred that Japan's economic

conditions had stopped worsening. They also agreed that although business fixed

investment had declined substantially and private consumption had remained generally

weak, public investment had increased and exports and production had picked up.

With regard to the outlook for economic activity in the latter half of fiscal 2009

onward, members agreed that Japan's economy was likely to start recovering with medium
to long-term expectations of future growth generally unchanged, supported partly by the

positive effects of measures to stabilize the financial system and of fiscal and monetary

policy measures, in addition to a recovery in overseas economies and improvements in

conditions in global financial markets. However, they shared the view that, against the

background of progress in inventory adjustments both at home and abroad, economic

activity would be greatly influenced by developments in final demand, and therefore the

outlook was attended by a significant level of uncertainty stemming mainly from

developments in overseas economies and global financial markets.

Regarding developments in each demand component, members agreed that exports

had recently picked up on the back of positive effects of policy measures taken in various

countries and progress in adjustments in overseas inventories. As for the outlook, they

concurred that exports were likely to continue recovering for the time being.

Members said that business fixed investment had declined substantially, reflecting

the strong sense of excessive capital stock among firms and the significant deterioration in

corporate profits, and was likely to continue declining for the time being. Some members

noted that leading indicators of business fixed investment, such as machinery orders and

9


-----

construction starts in terms of floor area, had been on a decreasing trend and that the

capacity utilization rate was likely to remain substantially below its recent peak even if it

recovered.

Many members said that private consumption had remained generally weak,

although there had been signs of an uptick in sales of some items, such as cars and electrical

appliances, primarily attributable to the positive effects of various policy measures. A few

members noted that, if the level of economic activity remained low even after having

recovered, firms, which had already made various cost-cutting efforts, might be forced to

step up adjustments in employment and wages, including those of regular employees,

making the employment and income situation even more severe. Members agreed that

private consumption was likely to remain generally weak for the time being as households

were persistently curtailing spending against the background of the severe employment and

income situation.

Members agreed that production had picked up recently, reflecting progress in

inventory adjustments both at home and abroad as well as the policy effects. One member

said that the member was previously concerned about the possibility that the recovery in

production might slow in summer 2009, but acknowledged that production had turned out

to be slightly stronger than previously anticipated, reflecting the pick-up in iron and steel

production, which had lagged behind. A different member also expressed the view that

the pace of recovery in production was slightly faster than expected. Members agreed that

production was likely to continue recovering for the time being with further progress in

inventory adjustments. However, many members said that the pace of recovery in

production from autumn 2009 onward remained highly uncertain given firms' conservative

production plans.

Many members said that the year-on-year decline in the CPI (excluding fresh

food) had accelerated mainly due to the prices of petroleum products being lower than the

high levels of a year earlier, in addition to the substantial slack persisting in the economy as

a whole. As for the outlook, members agreed that the year-on-year decline in the CPI was

likely to continue accelerating for the time being mainly due to the prices of petroleum

products being lower than the high levels of a year earlier, but then moderate from the latter

half of fiscal 2009. Many members exchanged views on key factors to the outlook for

prices. Some members commented that one key factor was developments in wages and

10


-----

ensuing changes in services prices. Many members saw another key factor in the impact

on prices from changes in the supply-demand balance of the economy. Some members,

referring to the increasing number of items for which prices had declined, expressed the

view that attention should be paid to the possibility that the impact of the deterioration in

the supply-demand balance on prices might be gradually growing. On this point, one

member noted Japan's experience from the latter half of the 1990s, when swings in the

year-on-year rate of change in the CPI were marginal despite considerable changes in the

supply-demand balance, and said that the correlation between the supply-demand balance

and prices should be interpreted with care. Some members expressed the view that upside

risks to prices also warranted attention in the longer term, amid central banks around the

world maintaining an accommodative policy stance. One member expressed the view that

another key in assessing price developments was how to interpret the seemingly

contradictory developments of a decline in prices and a recovery in exports and production,

both of which were proceeding at a slightly faster rate than expected.

One member noted that the year-on-year rate of change in the CPI in major

industrial countries had declined substantially over the past year, and had become negative

in many of them. This member continued that, since the current economic crisis had given

the world economy an unprecedentedly large shock, it was likely to be some time before

inflation rates in the economies around the world, including Japan, returned to a level

consistent with price stability.

**B. Financial Developments**

Members agreed that financial conditions, while remaining generally tight, had

continued to show signs of improvement. Some members commented that, in a situation

of ample liquidity, funding costs of firms had continued to decrease, as seen in further

declines in issuance rates on corporate bonds and CP as well as the small risk premium

embedded in interest rates on term instruments maturing beyond end-September 2009. A

few members noted that issuance rates on some CP with high ratings had again fallen below

yields on government bills. As for corporate funding activity, some members said that the

level of corporate bond issuance was elevated, with the number of issuers increasing, and

that financial institutions' lending attitudes were becoming less cautious. Many members

noted that the improvement in funding conditions of large firms was significant, but that of

11


-----

small firms and firms with low credit ratings remained limited. Some members also said

that firms remained anxious about uncertainties regarding the outlook for business and

funding conditions.

**III. Summary of Discussions on Monetary Policy for the Immediate Future**

Regarding the guideline for money market operations for the intermeeting period

ahead, members agreed that, given the above assessment of economic activity and prices as

well as financial conditions, it was appropriate to maintain the current guideline that the

Bank would encourage the uncollateralized overnight call rate to remain at around 0.1

percent. As for the future conduct of monetary policy, they concurred that the Bank

should be attentive to downside risks to economic activity and prices for the time being and

continue to exert its utmost efforts as the central bank to facilitate the return of Japan's

economy to a sustainable growth path with price stability.

Members also discussed various temporary measures regarding money market

operations. Some members commented that the Bank's decision at the previous meeting to

extend the effective periods of these measures was appropriate, as firms were still

concerned about funding despite the continued improvement in financial conditions. In

relation to this, a few members noted that some market participants regarded a decision by

the Bank to terminate the measures, or review them for revisions, as a signal indicating an

end to monetary easing policy. These members emphasized that the Bank should carefully

explain that such a view was not appropriate. One member added that the Bank should

also be mindful of the fact that the involvement of central banks in microeconomic resource

allocation had started to draw criticism, particularly in the United States, that specific

financial institutions and firms were being treated favorably.

A few members noted encouraging signs of improvement in market functioning:

namely, financial institutions' lessened reliance on the Bank's funds-supplying operations,

and the consequent decline in the balance of current accounts at the Bank and slight

increase in the amount of funds outstanding in the uncollateralized call market. One of

these members said that, in its conduct of money market operations, the Bank should

continue to provide ample liquidity while being careful not to hinder the self-sustaining

recovery in market functioning.

12


-----

**IV. Remarks by Government Representatives**

The representative from the Ministry of Finance made the following remarks.

(1) Japan's economic conditions had stopped worsening as a whole, as exports and

production had picked up. However, the economy was still in a difficult situation:

business fixed investment was decreasing substantially, reflecting the severe situation in

corporate profits; private consumption had remained relatively weak as the employment

and income situation had become increasingly severe; and housing investment was

decreasing. A similar assessment was made at this meeting.

(2) The government was steadily implementing the policy package to address the economic

crisis and other measures.

(3) The government expected the Bank to continue to support the economy from the

financial side by conducting monetary policy in an appropriate and flexible manner,

taking account of Japan's economic conditions and the government's policy efforts

described above.

The representative from the Cabinet Office made the following remarks.

(1) Japan's economy, while in a difficult situation, was showing signs of picking up recently,

reflecting the effects of the policy package. Regarding short-term prospects, attention

should be paid to the risks of continued deterioration in the employment situation and of

another slowdown in overseas economies. Moreover, the risk of deflation also

warranted attention, as the negative output gap had widened substantially.

(2) The government would continue to steadily implement the policy package to address

the economic crisis and other measures, in order to pursue its top priority of achieving

economic recovery in the near term. The government considered it important that the

government and the Bank make thorough assessments of economic and financial

developments, frequently exchange and share views on the outlook for economic

growth and inflation in the medium to long term as well as on the state of the financial

system, and jointly address the crisis.

**V. Votes**

Based on the above discussions, members agreed that it was appropriate to

maintain the current guideline for money market operations, which encouraged the

13


-----

uncollateralized overnight call rate to remain at around 0.1 percent.

To reflect this view, the chairman formulated the following proposal and put it to a

vote.

**The Chairman's Policy Proposal on the Guideline for Money Market Operations:**

1. The guideline for money market operations for the intermeeting period ahead will be as

follows.

The Bank of Japan will encourage the uncollateralized overnight call rate

to remain at around 0.1 percent.

2. A public statement will be decided separately.

Votes for the proposal: Mr. M. Shirakawa, Mr. H. Yamaguchi, Mr. K. G. Nishimura,

Ms. M. Suda, Mr. A. Mizuno, Mr. T. Noda, Mr. S. Nakamura, and Mr. H.

Kamezaki.

Votes against the proposal: None.

**VI. Discussion on the Statement on Monetary Policy**

Members discussed the Statement on Monetary Policy, and put it to a vote. The

Policy Board decided the text by a unanimous vote. It was confirmed that the statement

would be released immediately after the meeting (see Attachment).

**VII. Approval of the Minutes of the Monetary Policy Meeting**

The Policy Board approved unanimously the minutes of the Monetary Policy

Meeting of July 14 and 15, 2009 for release on August 14, 2009.

14


-----

Attachment

August 11, 2009

Bank of Japan

**Statement on Monetary Policy**

1. At the Monetary Policy Meeting held today, the Policy Board of the Bank of Japan

decided, by a unanimous vote,[6] to set the following guideline for money market

operations for the intermeeting period:

The Bank of Japan will encourage the uncollateralized overnight call rate

to remain at around 0.1 percent.

2. Japan's economic conditions have stopped worsening. Public investment is increasing

and exports and production are picking up. On the other hand, business fixed

investment is declining sharply mainly reflecting weak corporate profits. Private

consumption, while there are some signs of a pick-up mainly attributable to the effects

of various policy measures, remains generally weak amid the worsening employment

and income situation. Meanwhile, financial conditions, while remaining generally

tight, have continued to show signs of improvement. The year-on-year rate of decline

in the CPI (excluding fresh food) has accelerated mainly due to the prices of petroleum

products being lower than the high levels of a year earlier, in addition to the substantial

slack persisting in the economy as a whole.

3. With noticeable progress having already been made in inventory adjustments both at

home and abroad, economic activity will be greatly influenced by developments in

6 Voting for the action: Mr. M. Shirakawa, Mr. H. Yamaguchi, Mr. K. G. Nishimura, Ms. M. Suda,
Mr. A. Mizuno, Mr. T. Noda, Mr. S. Nakamura, and Mr. H. Kamezaki.
Voting against the action: None.

15


-----

final demand. The Bank's baseline scenario through fiscal 2010, in which

expectations of medium- to long-term growth are assumed to remain generally

unchanged, projects that the economy will start recovering from the latter half of fiscal

2009; this recovery will be supported partly by the positive effects of measures to

stabilize the financial system and of fiscal and monetary policy measures, as well as by

a recovery in overseas economies and improvements in conditions in global financial

markets. With regard to prices, the year-on-year rate of decline in the CPI will likely

accelerate for the time being. However, assuming that medium- to long-term inflation

expectations remain stable, the rate of decline in the CPI is expected to moderate from

the latter half of fiscal 2009 as the effects of the changes in the prices of petroleum

products abate. If these developments continue, there are prospects for Japan's

economy to return to a sustainable growth path with price stability in the longer run.

However, the outlook is attended by a significant level of uncertainty stemming mainly

from developments in overseas economies and global financial markets.

4. Risk factors that demand attention in the area of economic activity are the continued

high downside risks to the economy stemming from future developments in the global

financial and economic situation, changes in firms' medium- to long-term growth

expectations, and financial conditions in Japan. With regard to prices, there is a

possibility that inflation will decline more than expected, if the downside risks to the

economy materialize or medium- to long-term inflation expectations decline.

5. The Bank, paying attention for the time being to the downside risks to economic

activity and prices, will continue to exert its utmost efforts as the central bank to

facilitate the return of Japan's economy to a sustainable growth path with price stability.

16


-----

