Not to be released until 8:50 a.m.
Japan Standard Time on Monday,
October 19, 2009.

October 19, 2009

Bank of Japan

# Minutes of the Monetary Policy Meeting
## on September 16 and 17, 2009

(English translation prepared by the Bank's staff based on the Japanese original)


-----

Please contact the Bank of Japan at the address below in advance to request permission

when reproducing or copying the content of this document for commercial purposes.

Secretariat of the Policy Board, Bank of Japan

P.O. Box 30, Nihonbashi, Tokyo 103-8660, Japan

Please credit the source when quoting, reproducing, or copying the content of this

document.


-----

A Monetary Policy Meeting of the Bank of Japan Policy Board was held in the

Head Office of the Bank of Japan in Tokyo on Wednesday, September 16, 2009, from 2:00

p.m. to 4:29 p.m., and on Thursday, September 17, from 9:00 a.m. to 12:34 p.m.[1]

**Policy Board Members Present**

**Mr. M. Shirakawa, Chairman, Governor of the Bank of Japan**

**Mr. H. Yamaguchi, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Japan**

**Mr. K. G. Nishimura, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Japan**

**Ms. M. Suda**

**Mr. A. Mizuno**

**Mr. T. Noda**

**Mr. S. Nakamura**

**Mr. H. Kamezaki**

Government Representatives Present

Mr. S. Kagawa, Deputy Vice Minister for Policy Planning and Coordination, Ministry of

Finance

Mr. K. Umetani, Deputy Director-General, Economic and Fiscal Management, Cabinet

Office

Reporting Staff

Mr. A. Horii, Executive Director (Assistant Governor)[2]

Mr. K. Ido, Executive Director

Mr. H. Nakaso, Executive Director

Mr. M. Amamiya, Director-General, Monetary Affairs Department

Mr. T. Kato, Associate Director-General, Monetary Affairs Department

Mr. H. Toyama, Director-General, Financial Markets Department

Mr. K. Momma, Director-General, Research and Statistics Department

1 The minutes of this meeting were approved by the Policy Board at the Monetary Policy Meeting
held on October 13 and 14, 2009 as "a document describing an outline of the discussion at the
meeting" stipulated in Article 20, paragraph 1 of the Bank of Japan Act of 1997. Those present are
referred to by their titles at the time of the meeting.
2 Mr. A. Horii was present on September 17.

1


-----

Mr. T. Sekine, Associate Director-General, Research and Statistics Department

Mr. H. Ono, Director-General, International Department

Secretariat of the Monetary Policy Meeting

Mr. Y. Iino, Director-General, Secretariat of the Policy Board

Mr. T. Tachibana, Director, Deputy Head of Secretarial Services for the Board,

Secretariat of the Policy Board

Mr. A. Okuno, Senior Economist, Monetary Affairs Department

Mr. M. Nakashima, Senior Economist, Monetary Affairs Department

2


-----

**I. Summary of Staff Reports on Economic and Financial Developments[3]**

**A. Money Market Operations in the Intermeeting Period**

The Bank conducted money market operations in accordance with the guideline

decided at the previous meeting on August 10 and 11, 2009.[4] The uncollateralized

overnight call rate had been at around 0.1 percent.

With a view to ensuring market stability, the Bank continued to conduct money

market operations in a flexible manner in response to changes in the market situation, as

evidenced by its active purchases of Japanese government securities (JGSs) and CP under

repurchase agreements. The Bank also continued to conduct outright purchases of CP and

corporate bonds, special funds-supplying operations to facilitate corporate financing, and

U.S. dollar funds-supplying operations against pooled collateral. In outright purchases of

CP and corporate bonds and in U.S. dollar funds-supplying operations against pooled

collateral, the bidding amount had decreased further, as financial institutions' demand for

liquidity had declined reflecting a recovery in market functioning.

**B. Recent Developments in Financial Markets**

In Japan's money market, interest rates had been stable at low levels as there was a

strong sense of an abundance of liquidity in the market. General collateral (GC) repo rates

had been in the range of 0.10-0.15 percent. Interest rates on term instruments showed the

following developments. Yields on government bills, including those with a one-year

maturity, had been stable in the range of 0.1-0.2 percent recently. In the CP market,

issuing conditions had been improving: issuance rates on high-rated CP had been below

yields on government bills, and those on low-rated CP had generally decreased to their

levels before the failure of Lehman Brothers. Issuance rates on CP maturing beyond

end-September 2009 -- the end of a semiannual book closing period for many Japanese

firms -- had remained stable at low levels, and the pace of CP issuance had been steady,

with no evidence of front-loaded issuance in view of the situation at end-September.

Euroyen rates with longer maturities had remained at relatively elevated levels but had been

declining gradually.

3 Reports were made based on information available at the time of the meeting.
4 The guideline was as follows:
The Bank of Japan will encourage the uncollateralized overnight call rate to remain at
around 0.1 percent.

3


-----

Japanese stock prices had stopped rising, partly reflecting the appreciation of the

yen, while U.S. and European stock prices had hovered in a narrow range. The Nikkei 225

Stock Average had recently been moving in the range of 10,000-10,500 yen. Long-term

interest rates in Japan had declined slightly, partly because views on the economic outlook

had become somewhat more cautious. The benchmark rate had recently been at around

1.35 percent.

The yen had appreciated against the U.S. dollar and had recently been traded at

around 91 yen to the dollar.

**C. Overseas Economic and Financial Developments**

Global economic conditions had started to improve.

U.S. economic conditions had stopped worsening. Housing investment had

picked up, and the rate of decline in home prices was moderating. The rate of decrease in

business fixed investment was slowing and private consumption had been boosted by

growth in car sales as a result of fiscal stimulus measures. Production had stopped

declining due to progress in inventory adjustments. In the labor market, although the

unemployment rate had been rising and the number of employees had continued to decline,

the pace of decrease in the number of employees was slowing. As for prices, the

year-on-year rate of decline in the consumer price index (CPI) for all items had accelerated,

mainly because of a substantial drop in energy prices. The year-on-year rate of increase in

the CPI for all items less energy and food, or the core CPI, had fallen moderately to around

1.5 percent.

Economic conditions in the euro area had begun to stop worsening. Private

consumption had been boosted by growth in car sales as a result of stimulus measures taken

by governments in the area. Against the background of slower falls in exports and

business fixed investment, the rate of decline in production was moderating. As for prices,

the year-on-year rate of change in the Harmonized Index of Consumer Prices (HICP) had

declined moderately. Economic conditions in the United Kingdom had begun to stop

worsening, partly reflecting a slower pace of decline in private consumption and progress in

housing market adjustments.

The Chinese economy had continued to grow at a relatively rapid pace, led mainly

by domestic demand. Growth in private consumption had been firm, and fixed asset

4


-----

investment had been increasing strongly. The decline in exports was coming to a halt.

Under these circumstances, production had continued to increase. Economic conditions in

the NIEs and the ASEAN countries were improving. Exports and private consumption had

risen, the pace of decline in business fixed investment had slowed, and production had

increased due to progress in inventory adjustments. Meanwhile, the Indian economy had

also continued to grow at a relatively rapid pace. With regard to prices, the downward

trend in the year-on-year rate of change in the CPI for all items was coming to a halt in

many Asian economies.

As for global financial markets, money markets were regaining stability, as

evidenced by the fact that Treasury-Eurodollar (TED) spreads had fallen to around the

levels seen in summer 2007. Credit spreads on corporate bonds had generally been on a

decreasing trend, although those on low-rated bonds remained at high levels. U.S. and

European stock prices hovered in a narrow range, mainly reflecting mixed economic

indicators, and had recently increased somewhat. Long-term interest rates in the United

States had declined, partly because banks had been purchasing Treasuries with excess funds

that had resulted from sluggish growth in lending. Long-term interest rates in Europe had

also declined, following their U.S. counterparts.

**D. Economic and Financial Developments in Japan**

1. Economic developments

Exports had risen, mainly due to the effects of various countries' policy measures

and to progress in adjustments in overseas inventories. They were expected to continue

increasing as overseas economic conditions improved.

Public investment had continued to increase and was likely to keep rising due to

the implementation of various economic measures.

With regard to domestic private demand, business fixed investment had continued

to decline. It was likely to gradually stop worsening but be relatively weak for the time

being, given the continued severe situation in corporate profits and firms' funding and the

strong sense of excessive capital stock among firms.

Private consumption had remained relatively weak as a whole, with the exception

of durable goods consumption, which had picked up mainly due to the effects of various

measures. Sales at department stores had continued to decrease significantly, reflecting

5


-----

further curtailment of purchases by consumers. On the other hand, the number of new

passenger-car registrations had recovered rapidly, mainly due to the reduction in automobile

taxes and to subsidies. Meanwhile, indicators of consumer sentiment had remained at low

levels but were generally recovering on the back of various demand-boosting policy

measures, in addition to the decline in retail prices. Private consumption was likely to

remain relatively weak amid the worsening employment and income situation, with the

exception of durable goods consumption, which would be supported by the effects of

various policy measures for the time being.

Housing investment had decreased and was expected to continue decreasing for

the time being, given the sluggishness in housing starts.

Production had risen, reflecting progress in inventory adjustments and policy

effects both at home and abroad. It was expected to continue increasing for the time being,

mainly due to said policy effects.

The employment and income situation had become increasingly severe, with the

substantial slackening of the labor market and the significant decrease in household income.

Household income was likely to continue decreasing substantially for the time being,

mainly due to the lagged effects of the earlier drop in corporate profits and production.

On the price front, commodity prices, with some fluctuations, had generally been

on a rising trend. The three-month rate of change in the domestic corporate goods price

index (CGPI) had been around 0 percent, with a rise in commodity prices offsetting the

persistent slack in supply and demand conditions. The CGPI was likely to remain more or

less unchanged for the time being. The year-on-year decline in the CPI (excluding fresh

food) had accelerated mainly due to the prices of petroleum products, which were lower

than their higher levels of a year before, in addition to the substantial slack persisting in the

economy as a whole. The year-on-year decline in the CPI (excluding fresh food), after

accelerating somewhat, was expected to moderate over time as the effects of the lower

prices of petroleum products abated.

2. Financial environment

Financial conditions, with some lingering severity, were increasingly showing

signs of improvement. The overnight call rate had remained at an extremely low level,

and firms' funding costs had remained more or less unchanged at low levels. However, the

6


-----

stimulative effects from low interest rates had been limited given the low levels of

economic activity and corporate profits. With regard to credit supply, although many firms

still saw financial institutions' lending attitudes as severe, firms as a whole regarded the

situation as improving somewhat. Issuing conditions for CP and corporate bonds had

continued to improve, as reflected in the narrowing of credit spreads and the increased

number of firms issuing corporate bonds. However, firms with low credit ratings had

continued to face severe conditions for bond issues. As for credit demand, firms' needs to

fund working capital and fixed investment had declined, and some firms had reduced the

on-hand liquidity that they had accumulated. Against such a backdrop, the pace of

increase in bank lending had slowed. Issuance of corporate bonds had been at a high level,

while that of CP had declined. In these circumstances, firms' financial positions -
although many firms, mainly small ones, still saw them as weak -- had continued to

improve as a whole. Meanwhile, the year-on-year rate of change in the money stock had

been in the range of 2.5-3.0 percent.

**II. Summary of Discussions by the Policy Board on Economic and Financial**

**Developments**

**A. Economic Developments**

Members shared the view that overseas economic conditions had started to

improve against the background of further progress in inventory adjustments and the

positive effects of monetary and fiscal policy measures, and were likely to continue

improving. Many members, however, said that the pace and sustainability of overseas

economic recovery -- after inventory adjustments had been completed and the initial effects

of the policy measures had abated -- remained highly uncertain. A few members added

that the extent to which private final demand would recover in a self-sustaining manner

during a period when various policy measures were producing positive effects would be an

important factor in making a forecast. One member said that the liquidity crisis triggered

by the failure of Lehman Brothers and the resulting panic-driven contraction of financial

and economic activity had almost fully abated, and downside tail risks that many economic

agents confronted had diminished significantly. Some members, including this member,

however, expressed the view that lingering balance-sheet adjustments of firms, households,

and financial institutions were likely to prevent the world economy from achieving an early

7


-----

and full-fledged recovery, and risks to the outlook were still tilted to the downside. A few

members, noting that protectionist actions for domestic industry had increased recently in

some countries, expressed concern that this might exert downward pressure on the world

economy. Meanwhile, some members said that the faster-than-expected recovery in

emerging economies, especially those in East Asia, might pose an upside risk to the outlook

for the world economy. One member gave the following reasons for this view:

considering the limited need for balance-sheet adjustments in emerging economies, the

impact on them of stimulus measures around the world was larger than on advanced

economies; and, in emerging economies, increased capital inflow from advanced economies

had enhanced credit provision and pushed up asset prices, thereby significantly improving

the financial environment.

Many members said that the state of global financial markets had been improving.

One member was of the view that the narrowing of credit spreads in the U.S. and European

markets and the rise in stock prices worldwide were attributable to an abatement of the tail

risks, which had increased following the failure of Lehman Brothers. Some members,

however, said that although the strong sense of crisis in financial markets had subsided to

some extent, concerns about the U.S. and European financial systems persisted and market

participants' confidence in them had not been restored fully. In relation to this, a few

members, referring to the rise in delinquency rates on household loans and the significant

fall in commercial real estate prices in the United States, expressed the view that attention

should be paid to the risk of an adverse feedback loop between financial and economic

activity intensifying again in the United States and Europe. On the other hand, one

member said that a preference for risk assets had returned, especially in emerging

economies, and that a search for yield, which had been evident in the past, had reemerged in

some markets. In addition, some members expressed the view that the expansionary fiscal

and monetary policy, in the longer run, might pose the risks of creating another economic

distortion and of inducing excessive swings in economic and financial developments.

Turning to the U.S. economy, members concurred that economic conditions had

stopped worsening. Many members noted that housing starts and home sales figures

remained on an uptrend and that the significant growth in car sales had boosted private

consumption. Some members said that positive signs were observed in a wider range of

production-related indicators; for example, industrial production rose in August and thus

8


-----

realized growth for two consecutive months, mainly due to progress in inventory

adjustments. As for the outlook, many members expressed the view that the U.S.

economy was likely to recover moderately, mainly reflecting increased implementation of

public works projects and further progress in inventory adjustments. However, some

members said that the improvement in the housing and automobile sectors was largely

attributable to the effects of policy measures, and the sustainability of recovery therefore

warranted conservative forecasting that took into account a possible downturn after the

completion of demand-boosting policy measures. A few members, noting that the number

of employees had been falling significantly and the amount outstanding of consumer credit

had been declining due to financial institutions' cautious lending attitudes, said that

attention should be paid to the downward pressure on the economy, mainly on private

consumption, from those factors.

With regard to the economy of the euro area, many members shared the view that

economic conditions had begun to stop worsening as a whole, as evidenced by real GDP in

Germany and France, which started to grow in the April-June quarter of 2009. Some

members expressed the opinion that the rate of decline in exports and production was

moderating, reflecting progress in inventory adjustments, and that private consumption was

improving on the back of stimulus measures by governments in the area, as evidenced by

the recovery in car sales in particular. However, a few members were of the view that the

pace of recovery in the economy of the euro area was likely to remain moderate, given that

car sales were expected to decrease after the current strong sales and that Central and

Eastern European economies, which were the euro area's major export destinations, had

remained sluggish.

Members concurred that the Chinese economy had continued to grow at a

relatively rapid pace, led mainly by domestic demand. Many members said that fixed

asset investment had been increasing strongly and growth in private consumption had been

firm following implementation of the vigorous fiscal and monetary policy measures. One

member expressed the view that there was only a limited risk of the Chinese economy

decelerating in the near future, given that the Chinese government had recently indicated

that it would firmly maintain the current macroeconomic policy. In this regard, some

members, noting the sharp rise in bank loans and the money stock, as well as the increased

share of public-sector investment and consumption, expressed the opinion that careful

9


-----

attention should be paid to whether an overheating in financial and economic activity would

lead to new accumulation of excesses. Members concurred that economic conditions in

the NIEs and the ASEAN countries were improving, mainly due to a significant increase in

exports owing to demand growth from China. Some members said that real GDP in the

April-June quarter of 2009 marked a double-digit annualized quarter-on-quarter increase in

many of the NIEs and the ASEAN countries, and private consumption and business fixed

investment in the region were increasingly showing signs of improvement. A few

members added that the economies of commodity-exporting countries and grain-exporting

countries such as those in the Middle East and Central and South America, as well as

Australia, showed signs of recovery on the back of growing demand for commodities and

food from China. They commented that this situation and the aforementioned

developments suggested that growth in China and other Asian emerging economies was

stronger than expected.

Based on the above discussions on economic and financial conditions abroad,

members discussed the state of Japan's economy. They concurred that Japan's economic

conditions were showing signs of recovery. They also agreed that although business fixed

investment had continued to decline and private consumption had remained generally weak,

public investment had continued to increase and exports and production had risen.

With regard to the outlook for economic activity in the latter half of fiscal 2009

onward, members agreed that Japan's economy was likely to start recovering with medium
to long-term expectations of future growth generally unchanged, supported partly by the

positive effects of measures to stabilize the financial system and of fiscal and monetary

policy measures, in addition to a recovery in overseas economies and improvements in

conditions in global financial markets. However, they shared the view that the outlook

continued to be attended by a significant level of uncertainty. A few members said that the

effects of inventory restocking and of fiscal stimulus measures both at home and abroad

were projected to diminish gradually, but there were still no signs of a self-sustaining

recovery in private final demand. However, some members commented that the balance

of upside and downside risks had changed somewhat from the time of the previous meeting

with the emergence of an additional upside factor -- a better-than-projected recovery in

emerging economies. Ultimately, many members shared the view that, even taking into

account this upside factor, it still appeared likely that risks to Japan's economy were on the

10


-----

downside, stemming from future developments in the global financial and economic

situation, as well as from changes in firms' medium- to long-term growth expectations.

Regarding developments in each demand component, members agreed that exports

had risen on the back of progress in adjustments in overseas inventories and of

improvement in overseas economies, especially emerging economies. As for the outlook,

many members were of the view that the pace of increase in exports might slow somewhat

mainly due to an abatement of the effects of inventory restocking, but that exports were

likely to continue increasing for the time being as overseas economic conditions improved.

One member said that it was worth noting that exports to the Middle East and Central and

South America had started to improve. Meanwhile, some members expressed the opinion

that attention should be paid to how the recent yen appreciation trend would affect Japan's

economy, especially in terms of exports.

Members concurred that business fixed investment had continued to decline,

mainly reflecting weak corporate profits, albeit at a slower pace. A few members

expressed the view that the risk of further cuts in business fixed investment was declining,

noting that business fixed investment had already fallen below the level of depreciation

costs and that the pace of decrease in machinery orders -- a leading indicator of business

fixed investment -- had been moderating. Many members, however, expressed the opinion

that business fixed investment was likely to remain relatively weak for the time being in a

situation where a recovery in domestic and overseas economies remained moderate and the

severe situation in corporate profits continued.

Members agreed that private consumption had remained generally weak, although

sales had picked up for some durable consumer goods such as cars and electrical appliances,

primarily as a result of the positive effects of various policy measures. As for the outlook,

they concurred that private consumption was likely to remain generally weak for the time

being as households were persistently curtailing spending against the background of the

severe employment and income situation. A few members said that the effects of various

measures to encourage purchases of cars and electrical appliances were expected to support

private consumption for the time being, but that sales of those items were likely to weaken

in the next fiscal year because those policy effects would abate and because the current firm

sales seemed partly attributable to front-loaded demand. They concluded that

developments in private consumption warranted conservative forecasting. A few members

11


-----

expressed the opinion that attention should continue to be paid to the impact of the H1N1

influenza virus, which was projected to spread further.

Members agreed that production had risen, reflecting progress in inventory

adjustments and policy effects both at home and abroad. As for the outlook, they shared

the view that production was expected to continue increasing for the time being, mainly due

to said policy effects and the recovery in emerging economies. Some members expressed

the view that interviews with firms suggested that production was likely to rise at a

relatively fast pace in the July-September quarter, as in the previous quarter, and continue

increasing in the October-December quarter. However, a few members said that future

developments with respect to production in 2010 onward -- following the completion of

inventory restocking and the end of policy measures encouraging car purchases -- remained

highly uncertain, and that firms were still cautious regarding their future business

environment.

Members also exchanged views regarding the recent employment and income

situation. One member said that whereas real wages in Japan had declined due to a

substantial decrease in nominal wages, those in the United States had continued to rise, and,

when hit by a large shock, there were economies where wages were primarily adjusted

flexibly -- such as Japan -- and economies where the number of employees was primarily

adjusted -- such as the United States and European countries. A different member said that

there was a prevalent view that the high flexibility of wages enabled Japan's economy to

achieve a relatively strong performance at the time of the second oil crisis, but it was

uncertain if the same could be expected to occur in the current situation. Some members,

including this member, expressed the opinion that the different manners in which the two

adjustment mechanisms for employment and income would affect economic activity and

prices in the respective economies should continue to be examined.

Many members said that the year-on-year decline in the CPI (excluding fresh

food) had accelerated mainly due to the prices of petroleum products, which were lower

than their high levels of a year before, in addition to the substantial slack persisting in the

economy as a whole. A few members expressed the view that the recent pace of decline

had been somewhat faster than expected. Regarding this point, some members said that

the gradual acceleration in the year-on-year decline in the CPI for all items less energy and

food suggested deterioration in the supply-demand balance. As for the outlook, members

12


-----

agreed that the year-on-year decline in the CPI (excluding fresh food) was likely to

accelerate somewhat for the time being, but then moderate from the latter half of fiscal 2009

as the effects of the prices of petroleum products abated. With regard to other major

economies, one member said there was a consensus view that, as was the case in Japan,

these economies were facing significant deterioration in the supply-demand balance and

therefore a considerable period of time was likely to elapse before the balance improved

and inflation rates returned to desirable levels. Some members commented that, besides

developments in the supply-demand balance, changes in households' expectations about

medium- to long-term inflation, firms' price-setting behavior, foreign exchange rates,

primary commodity prices, and wages should be monitored as factors that could well affect

future price developments.

**B. Financial Developments**

Members agreed that financial conditions, with some lingering severity, were

increasingly showing signs of improvement. Many members said that issuing conditions

for CP for firms with low credit ratings had improved, given that issuance spreads on CP

rated a-2 had narrowed to levels comparable with those seen before the failure of Lehman

Brothers, and that the amount outstanding of low-rated CP had risen substantially since the

end of 2008. One member added that the policy effects on the CP market remained overly

strong in some aspects, as suggested by issuance rates on some CP with high ratings, which

had been below yields on government bills.

Many members expressed the view that issuing conditions for corporate bonds,

although still severe for firms with low credit ratings, had continued to improve on the

whole, as reflected in the narrowing of credit spreads and the increase in the number of

firms issuing corporate bonds. Based on this understanding, members discussed how to

assess the polarization of the corporate bond market, focusing particularly on the severity of

issuing conditions for BBB-rated corporate bonds. One member said that spreads on

BBB-rated corporate bonds, with some exceptions, had recently been narrowing in the

secondary market as investors had been increasingly active in purchasing corporate bonds

with wide spreads. Some members noted that issuance of BBB-rated corporate bonds was

indeed lower than the level seen before the failure of Lehman Brothers. However, they

attributed this partly to the existence of only a few investors with high risk-taking capacity,

13


-----

and to a lack of strong demand by Japanese firms with low credit ratings for bond issuance

owing to the high funding costs compared with borrowing from banks. One member was

of the view that firms and financial institutions, having experienced the financial market

turmoil from autumn 2008, had become increasingly aware of the importance of indirect

financing. The member continued that the corporate bond market therefore would not

necessarily be able to return to its former state even if its conditions had sufficiently

improved. Based on these discussions, many members expressed the opinion that, given

the situation of Japan's corporate bond market, it might not be appropriate to consider that

Japan's financial conditions remained severe just because the issuance of low-rated

corporate bonds had been limited.

Members agreed that firms' financial positions -- although many firms, mainly

small ones, still saw them as weak -- had continued to improve as a whole. Some

members said that the recent improvement owed much to a decrease in firms' needs to fund

working capital and fixed investment, and therefore prospects for their financial positions

could not be viewed optimistically. In relation to this, one member, while admitting that

there still were concerns among firms about the dim outlook for the economy and their sales,

expressed the view that the current nature of their anxiety over cash availability seemed to

be different from the time until around spring 2009, when they experienced difficulty in

satisfying daily operational expenses and short-term debt.

Members discussed whether it was appropriate to view Japan's financial conditions

as a downside risk factor for the outlook for the economy. Some members expressed the

opinion that Japan's financial conditions should be considered a downside risk factor for the

economy for the time being, given that (1) firms were still concerned about their future cash

availability against the backdrop of considerable uncertainty regarding the economic

outlook, and (2) there remained the risk that another economic downturn would increase

financial institutions' credit costs and push down stock prices, thereby causing an adverse

feedback loop between financial and economic activity. Some other members argued that

risk factors for the economy should be defined as what might trigger upward or downward

deviations of economic developments from forecasts. On this basis, many members said

that the steady improvement in Japan's funding conditions and stability of its financial

system as a whole indicated a decrease in the risk that developments in domestic financial

markets and financial conditions would trigger a downward deviation. Based on this

14


-----

discussion, members concurred that it was appropriate to properly communicate the

following consensus views to the public. First, the recent financial conditions indicated

that the need to emphasize developments in domestic financial conditions as a downside

risk factor for the economy had declined. Second, however, there was a risk that

potentially unstable developments in overseas economies and global financial markets

might worsen Japan's financial conditions, which in turn could pose a downside risk to its

economy. And third, amid considerable uncertainty regarding the outlook for the economy,

firms were still concerned about their future cash availability.

**III. Summary of Discussions on Monetary Policy for the Immediate Future**

Regarding the guideline for money market operations for the intermeeting period

ahead, members agreed that, given the above assessment of economic activity and prices, it

was appropriate to maintain the current guideline that the Bank would encourage the

uncollateralized overnight call rate to remain at around 0.1 percent. As for the future

conduct of monetary policy, they concurred that the Bank should be attentive to downside

risks to economic activity and prices for the time being and continue to exert its utmost

efforts as the central bank to facilitate the return of Japan's economy to a sustainable growth

path with price stability.

Members also discussed various temporary measures regarding money market

operations. Regarding "exit strategies" being discussed around the world, one member

commented that it was important to deal with individual policy measures separately, based

on their purposes and roles, as was confirmed in the communiqué of the meeting of the

Group of Twenty (G-20) Finance Ministers and Central Bank Governors held in early

September. With regard to the Bank's measures to facilitate corporate financing, such as

outright purchases of CP and corporate bonds, many members said that the manner of

dealing with these temporary measures -- which were introduced as a response to the panic

in financial markets that began in autumn 2008 -- should be decided appropriately in light

of the degree of improvement in financial conditions. As for the role of extraordinary

measures, a few members were of the view that the positive effects these measures could

produce were on the wane, as evidenced by the fact that the amount of CP and corporate

bonds purchased by the Bank had declined significantly and that interest rates in

funds-supplying operations, which were determined by conventional auction, had been

15


-----

stable at low levels. Meanwhile, a different member said it was important to bear in mind

that these measures to facilitate corporate financing were expected to perform the role of a

safety net.

**IV. Remarks by Government Representatives**

The representative from the Ministry of Finance made the following remarks.

(1) Japan's economy, while showing signs of picking up recently, was still in a difficult

situation, as evidenced by the fact that business fixed investment continued to decrease

and the employment situation was becoming increasingly severe.

(2) The government expected the Bank to continue to support the economy from the

financial side by conducting monetary policy in an appropriate and flexible manner,

taking account of Japan's economic conditions.

The representative from the Cabinet Office made the following remarks.

(1) Japan's economy, while in a difficult situation, was showing signs of picking up recently.

Regarding short-term prospects, attention should be paid to the risks of continued

deterioration in the employment situation and of another slowdown in overseas

economies.

(2) The government expected the Bank to continue to conduct monetary policy in an

appropriate and flexible manner.

**V. Votes**

Based on the above discussions, members agreed that it was appropriate to

maintain the current guideline for money market operations, which encouraged the

uncollateralized overnight call rate to remain at around 0.1 percent.

To reflect this view, the chairman formulated the following proposal and put it to a

vote.

**The Chairman's Policy Proposal on the Guideline for Money Market Operations:**

1. The guideline for money market operations for the intermeeting period ahead will be as

follows.

16


-----

The Bank of Japan will encourage the uncollateralized overnight call rate

to remain at around 0.1 percent.

2. A public statement will be decided separately.

Votes for the proposal: Mr. M. Shirakawa, Mr. H. Yamaguchi, Mr. K. G. Nishimura,

Ms. M. Suda, Mr. A. Mizuno, Mr. T. Noda, Mr. S. Nakamura, and Mr. H.

Kamezaki.

Votes against the proposal: None.

**VI. Discussion on the Statement on Monetary Policy**

Members discussed the Statement on Monetary Policy, and put it to a vote. The

Policy Board decided the text by a unanimous vote. It was confirmed that the statement

would be released immediately after the meeting (see Attachment).

**VII. Approval of the Minutes of the Monetary Policy Meeting**

The Policy Board approved unanimously the minutes of the Monetary Policy

Meeting of August 10 and 11, 2009 for release on September 25, 2009.

17


-----

Attachment

September 17, 2009

Bank of Japan

**Statement on Monetary Policy**

1. At the Monetary Policy Meeting held today, the Policy Board of the Bank of Japan

decided, by a unanimous vote,[5] to set the following guideline for money market

operations for the intermeeting period:

The Bank of Japan will encourage the uncollateralized overnight call rate

to remain at around 0.1 percent.

2. Japan's economic conditions are showing signs of recovery. Public investment is

increasing, and exports and production are also increasing against a backdrop of

progress in inventory adjustments both at home and abroad as well as a recovery in

overseas economies, especially emerging economies. On the other hand, business

fixed investment is declining mainly reflecting weak corporate profits. Private

consumption, while there are some signs of a pick-up mainly attributable to the effects

of various policy measures, remains generally weak amid the worsening employment

and income situation. Meanwhile, financial conditions, with some severity lingering,

are increasingly showing signs of improvement. The year-on-year rate of decline in

the CPI (excluding fresh food) has accelerated mainly due to the prices of petroleum

products, which are lower than their high levels a year ago, in addition to the

substantial slack persisting in the economy as a whole.

5 Voting for the action: Mr. M. Shirakawa, Mr. H. Yamaguchi, Mr. K. G. Nishimura, Ms. M. Suda,
Mr. A. Mizuno, Mr. T. Noda, Mr. S. Nakamura, and Mr. H. Kamezaki.
Voting against the action: None.

18


-----

3. The Bank's baseline scenario through fiscal 2010, in which expectations of medium- to

long-term growth are assumed to remain generally unchanged, projects that the

economy will start recovering from the latter half of fiscal 2009; this recovery will be

supported partly by the positive effects of measures to stabilize the financial system and

of fiscal and monetary policy measures, as well as by a recovery in overseas economies

and improvements in conditions in global financial markets. With regard to prices,

the year-on-year rate of decline in the CPI will likely accelerate somewhat for the time

being. However, assuming that medium- to long-term inflation expectations remain

stable, the rate of decline in the CPI is expected to moderate from the latter half of

fiscal 2009 as the effects of the changes in the prices of petroleum products abate. If

these developments continue, there are prospects for Japan's economy to return to a

sustainable growth path with price stability in the longer run. However, the outlook is

attended by a significant level of uncertainty stemming mainly from developments in

overseas economies and global financial markets.

4. While there are signs of a better-than-projected recovery in emerging economies, risks

to the economy are still on the downside, stemming from future developments in the

global financial and economic situation, as well as from changes in firms' medium- to

long-term growth expectations. With regard to prices, there is a possibility that

inflation will decline more than expected, if the downside risks to the economy

materialize or medium- to long-term inflation expectations decline.

5. The Bank, paying attention for the time being to the downside risks to economic

activity and prices, will continue to exert its utmost efforts as the central bank to

facilitate the return of Japan's economy to a sustainable growth path with price stability.

19


-----

