Not to be released until 8:50 a.m.
Japan Standard Time on Friday,
April 10, 2009.

April 10, 2009

Bank of Japan

# Minutes of the Monetary Policy Meeting
## on March 17 and 18, 2009

(English translation prepared by the Bank's staff based on the Japanese original)


-----

Please contact the Bank of Japan at the address below in advance to request permission

when reproducing or copying the content of this document for commercial purposes.

Secretariat of the Policy Board, Bank of Japan

P.O. Box 30, Nihonbashi, Tokyo 103-8660, Japan

Please credit the source when quoting, reproducing, or copying the content of this

document.


-----

A Monetary Policy Meeting of the Bank of Japan Policy Board was held in the

Head Office of the Bank of Japan in Tokyo on Tuesday, March 17, 2009, from 2:00 p.m. to

4:44 p.m., and on Wednesday, March 18, from 9:00 a.m. to 12:22 p.m.[1]

**Policy Board Members Present**

**Mr. M. Shirakawa, Chairman, Governor of the Bank of Japan**

**Mr. H. Yamaguchi, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Japan**

**Mr. K. G. Nishimura, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Japan**

**Ms. M. Suda**

**Mr. A. Mizuno**

**Mr. T. Noda**

**Mr. S. Nakamura**

**Mr. H. Kamezaki**

Government Representatives Present

Mr. W. Takeshita, Senior Vice Minister of Finance, Ministry of Finance[2]

Mr. Y. Miyauchi, Deputy Director-General Minister's Secretariat, Ministry of Finance[3]

Mr. B. Fujioka, Vice Minister for Policy Coordination, Cabinet Office

Reporting Staff

Mr. A. Horii, Executive Director (Assistant Governor)

Mr. K. Ido, Executive Director[4]

Mr. H. Nakaso, Executive Director

Mr. M. Amamiya, Director-General, Monetary Affairs Department

Mr. T. Sekine, Associate Director-General, Monetary Affairs Department

Mr. H. Toyama, Director-General, Financial Markets Department

1 The minutes of this meeting were approved by the Policy Board at the Monetary Policy Meeting
held on April 6 and 7, 2009 as "a document describing an outline of the discussion at the meeting"
stipulated in Article 20, paragraph 1 of the Bank of Japan Act of 1997. Those present are referred
to by their titles at the time of the meeting.
2 Mr. W. Takeshita was present on March 18.
3 Mr. Y. Miyauchi was present on March 17.
4 Mr. K. Ido was present on March 17.

1


-----

Mr. K. Momma, Director-General, Research and Statistics Department

Mr. E. Maeda, Associate Director-General, Research and Statistics Department

Mr. T. Nunami, Director-General, International Department

Secretariat of the Monetary Policy Meeting

Mr. K. Osugi, Director-General, Secretariat of the Policy Board

Mr. K. Shigyoh, Director, Deputy Head of Secretarial Services for the Board, Secretariat

of the Policy Board

Mr. T. Kato, Senior Economist, Monetary Affairs Department

Mr. T. Sakamoto, Director, Head, Monetary Operations Planning, Monetary Affairs

Department[5]

Mr. A. Otani, Senior Economist, Monetary Affairs Department

Mr. K. Nakamura, Senior Economist, Monetary Affairs Department

5 Mr. T. Sakamoto was present on March 18.

2


-----

**I. Summary of Staff Reports on Economic and Financial Developments[6]**

**A. Money Market Operations in the Intermeeting Period**

The Bank conducted money market operations in accordance with the guideline

decided at the previous meeting on February 18 and 19, 2009.[7] The uncollateralized

overnight call rate had been at around 0.1 percent.

To ensure market stability in Japan, the Bank further increased the provision of

funds maturing over the fiscal year-end and actively purchased Japanese government

securities (JGSs) and CP under repurchase agreements. The Bank continued to conduct

outright purchases of CP, special funds-supplying operations to facilitate corporate

financing, and U.S. dollar funds-supplying operations against pooled collateral. Moreover,

on March 4, 2009 the Bank commenced outright purchases of corporate bonds.

**B. Recent Developments in Financial Markets**

Japan's money market had been nervous. The general collateral (GC) repo rates

had declined slightly compared with the time of the previous meeting, but had been highly

volatile. Yields on government bills had been more or less unchanged. Euroyen rates

had declined partly due to the expansion of funds-supplying measures taken by the Bank,

but the risk premium embedded in them remained at a relatively elevated level. Interest

rates on CP with low ratings had been at relatively high levels, but those on CP with high

ratings had declined to below their levels immediately before the failure of Lehman

Brothers Holdings Inc.

Japanese stock prices plunged temporarily due to concerns about economic

prospects, but had recovered. The Nikkei 225 Stock Average had been moving in the

range of 7,500-8,000 yen recently. Long-term interest rates had been more or less

unchanged. The benchmark rate in Japan had recently been moving in the range of

1.30-1.35 percent.

The yen had been depreciating against the U.S. dollar mainly reflecting significant

deterioration in Japan's economic conditions, and was recently as low as 98-99 yen.

6 Reports were made based on information available at the time of the meeting.
7 The guideline was as follows:
The Bank of Japan will encourage the uncollateralized overnight call rate to remain at
around 0.1 percent.

3


-----

**C. Overseas Economic and Financial Developments**

U.S. economic conditions had continued to deteriorate significantly. A

substantial decline in housing investment continued, and home prices continued to fall.

With business fixed investment contracting noticeably and private consumption on a

declining trend, industrial production had also been decreasing. The number of employees

had been declining considerably, and the unemployment rate had been rising. Funding

conditions for firms and households had remained tight. As for prices, the year-on-year

rate of increase in the consumer price index (CPI) for all items had declined, to close to 0

percent, due to a fall in energy prices and a leveling-off of increases in food prices; that in

the CPI for all items less energy and food, or the core CPI, had been in the range of 1.5-2.0

percent.

Economic conditions in the euro area had continued to deteriorate significantly.

In addition to the continuing decline in exports, private consumption, business fixed

investment, and housing investment had decreased. As for prices, the year-on-year rate of

increase in the Harmonized Index of Consumer Prices (HICP) had been more or less

unchanged. Economic conditions in the United Kingdom had also continued to deteriorate

significantly, mainly reflecting the considerable adjustments in the housing market and a

declining trend in private consumption.

The Chinese economy had decelerated significantly due to the decline in exports,

although domestic demand continued to show high growth. Economic growth in India had

also decelerated significantly, and economic conditions in the NIEs and the ASEAN

countries had deteriorated significantly. As for prices, the year-on-year rate of increase in

the CPI had been on a declining trend in many Asian economies.

Global financial markets remained under strain. While Treasury-Eurodollar

(TED) spreads and credit spreads on CP had been more or less unchanged, credit spreads on

corporate bonds, particularly those with low ratings, had widened slightly. U.S. and

European stock prices plunged temporarily due to concerns about the performance of

financial institutions and firms, but had rebounded. U.S. and European long-term interest

rates had been more or less unchanged, with concerns about a possible increase in the

issuance of government bonds on one hand and about further economic deterioration on the

other.

4


-----

**D. Economic and Financial Developments in Japan**

1. Economic developments

Exports had decreased substantially. They were expected to continue decreasing

for the time being, due to the deterioration in overseas economic conditions and the strong

yen.

With regard to domestic private demand, business fixed investment had declined

substantially, mainly due to the faster decrease in corporate profits. It was likely to

continue declining significantly for the time being, given the ongoing deterioration in

corporate profits and firms' funding conditions, as well as the growing sense of excessive

capacity.

Private consumption had weakened, as the employment and income situation had

become increasingly severe. The decrease in the number of new passenger-car

registrations had accelerated. Sales at department stores had continued to be relatively

weak, since consumers had further curtailed their purchases. Indicators of consumer

sentiment had stayed at extremely low levels, mainly due to the drop in stock prices and

growing employment uncertainty, although they seemed to have stopped declining, mainly

reflecting the decline in gasoline prices. Private consumption was likely to continue

weakening for the time being, as the employment and income situation would become

increasingly severe.

Housing investment had been more or less flat, but the number of housing starts, a

leading indicator of housing investment, had recently begun decreasing again. Housing

investment was expected to weaken somewhat for the time being, given the sluggishness in

housing starts.

Production had decreased at a much faster pace, reflecting the decline in domestic

and external demand and the increase in adjustment pressures on inventories. It was likely

that production would continue to decrease reflecting the decline in domestic and external

demand, but the pace of decrease was expected to moderate gradually as adjustment

pressures on inventories waned. The increase in inventories was coming to a halt due to

the substantial reduction in production, but with the much faster pace of decrease in

shipments the shipment-inventory balance had continued to deteriorate.

The employment and income situation had become increasingly severe, as seen in

the slacker labor market and relatively weak household income. Household income was

5


-----

likely to continue declining for the time being in response to the decrease in corporate

profits and production.

On the price front, commodity prices, which peaked in summer 2008 and dropped

substantially thereafter, had recently been essentially flat at low levels. The three-month

rate of change in the domestic corporate goods price index (CGPI) had continued to be

negative and the CGPI was likely to continue decreasing for the time being, mainly due to

the declines in commodity prices. The year-on-year rate of increase in the CPI (excluding

fresh food) had declined to 0 percent, reflecting the declines in the prices of petroleum

products and the stabilization of food prices. It was expected to become negative, mainly

due to the above factors and also to increasing slackness in supply and demand conditions

in the overall economy.

2. Financial environment

Financial conditions had remained tight. The overnight call rate had been at an

extremely low level, but the stimulative effects from this had become increasingly limited

given the significant deterioration in economic activity. Firms' funding costs had declined

compared to their levels at the end of 2008 following the reductions in the policy interest

rate and improvements in issuance conditions in the CP market. The amount outstanding

of CP and corporate bonds issued had been increasing since a while ago, and that of bank

lending, especially to large firms, had continued to increase rapidly. However, issuance of

corporate bonds by firms with low credit ratings had remained subdued, and an increasing

number of firms, especially small firms, had reported that their financial positions were

weak and lending attitudes of financial institutions were severe. The year-on-year rate of

change in the money stock had been around 2 percent.

**II. Summary of Discussions by the Policy Board on Economic and Financial**

**Developments**

**A. Economic Developments**

Members shared the view that overseas economic conditions had been

deteriorating as a whole in a situation where the adverse feedback loop between financial

and economic activity had been intensifying further around the world. Many members

expressed the view that not only the U.S. and European economies, but also emerging and

6


-----

commodity-exporting economies were experiencing a significant downturn. Some

members said that indicators of manufacturers' business sentiment seemed to be showing

signs of leveling out against the background of progress in inventory adjustments

worldwide, and the large-scale cutbacks in production might have started to produce

positive effects. However, many members including these members commented that the

spending behavior of firms and households remained cautious around the world. Many

members were therefore of the opinion that a recovery in final demand was still not in

prospect given the severity of the employment and income situation and financial

conditions, and downside risks to overseas economies continued to warrant attention.

Many members expressed the view that, although there was for a while a slight

improvement in some financial markets, such as money markets, strains in global financial

markets had again increased somewhat recently due to the worsening performance of firms

and growing uncertainties about the financial soundness of financial institutions.

Turning to the U.S. economy, members concurred that economic conditions had

continued to deteriorate significantly as the adverse feedback loop between financial and

economic activity worsened amid the significant fall in the risk-taking capacity of financial

institutions and investors. Many members expressed the view that adjustments in the

housing market were likely to continue for the time being, given the continuing fall in home

prices. Many members said that the employment situation had deteriorated markedly, and

the effects on private consumption were cause for concern. One member, however, said

that some positive developments were starting to be observed: for example, the first

month-on-month increase in the number of housing starts in several months.

With regard to the economy of the euro area, members concurred that economic

conditions had deteriorated significantly. A few members commented that there was a risk

that the deterioration in economic conditions would persist, given that even though in the

euro area the adverse feedback loop between financial and economic activity had been

intensifying further, there was less room for large-scale fiscal expenditure than in other

economies. Some members noted as a matter of concern that the significant downturn in

Central and Eastern European economies might cause a further decline in exports from the

euro area, which was their major trading partner, and might also negatively affect euro area

financial institutions, whose exposures to Central and Eastern European economies were

large.

7


-----

Some members expressed the view that the Chinese economy had decelerated

significantly due to a decrease in exports and production. Many members commented

with regard to domestic demand that the large-scale economic stimulus package and

successive monetary easing measures had succeeded in encouraging a significant increase

in bank lending and progress in inventory adjustments. A few members, however, said

that the probability of an early economic recovery should be viewed conservatively because

China's export environment had not improved yet. One member said that the severity of

the state of exports and domestic demand was also intensifying in the NIEs and the ASEAN

countries.

Based on the above discussion on economic and financial conditions abroad,

members discussed the state of Japan's economy. They shared the view that economic

conditions had deteriorated significantly and were likely to continue deteriorating for the

time being given the following factors: (1) exports had been decreasing substantially

reflecting the deterioration in overseas economic conditions; (2) domestic demand had

become weaker against the background of declining corporate profits and the worsening

employment and income situation in the household sector; and (3) financial conditions had

remained tight. Some members noted that positive factors were starting to be observed:

for example, information pointing to progress in inventory adjustments was gradually

increasing and indicators of consumer sentiment seemed to be showing signs of leveling out.

However, many members including these members were of the opinion that downside risks

to the economy warranted careful attention for the time being, because economic conditions

had thus far become increasingly severe and the effects of the worsening employment and

income situation on economic activity might increase. Some members said that, looking at

the change in economic indicators available since the Bank's interim assessment in January

of the projections presented in the October 2008 Outlook for Economic Activity and Prices

(hereafter the Outlook Report), the economy had become weaker than anticipated, and the

projection of the economic growth rate was likely to be revised downward in the April 2009

Outlook Report.

As for the outlook, members agreed that -- assuming that expectations about

medium- to long-term growth would remain generally unchanged -- the economy was likely

to start recovering, at the earliest, from the latter half of fiscal 2009 as global financial

markets regained stability and overseas economies moved out of their deceleration phase,

8


-----

although this projection was attended by a significant level of uncertainty. With regard to

risks to the economy, some members noted that if a recovery of the global economy was

delayed, expectations about medium- to long-term growth might be revised downward,

further increasing pressures to adjust capital stock and employment in Japan.

With regard to developments in each demand component, members agreed that

exports had decreased substantially, and were likely to continue decreasing for the time

being. Some members said that, although in China some positive movements had been

observed in domestic demand reflecting monetary and fiscal policy measures, it was

uncertain whether this would lead to an immediate increase in Japan's exports. A different

member commented that if manufacturers' inventory adjustments progressed on a global

basis, particularly in the automobile industry, the decrease in Japan's exports might come to

a halt by around the summer. Some members including this member, however, shared the

view that there was considerable uncertainty regarding developments in global final demand,

an increase in which was a precondition for Japan's exports to recover.

Some members expressed the view that business fixed investment was likely to

continue declining significantly for the time being, mainly due to the deterioration in

overseas economic conditions, the decrease in corporate profits, and the deterioration in

firms' funding conditions. A few members expressed concern that a possible decline in

expectations about medium- to long-term growth caused by a prolonged economic

downturn might exert further downward pressure on business fixed investment.

Many members said that private consumption was likely to continue weakening.

One member noted that firms, which had been reducing overtime working hours and the

number of non-regular employees, had recently started to adjust the number of regular

employees.

Members agreed that production had decreased at a much faster pace, reflecting

the decline in domestic and external demand and the increase in adjustment pressures on

inventories. As for the outlook, many members said that signs of leveling out in

production had gradually become evident: the production forecast index for March had

become positive; and some firms were reportedly planning to slow the pace of reduction in

production or to increase production by around the summer. Some members, however,

said that the Bank's baseline scenario already assumed a leveling out in production, and

given the developments in global demand, attention should continue to be paid to downside

9


-----

risks.

Members agreed that the year-on-year rate of increase in the CPI (excluding fresh

food) had declined to 0 percent recently, reflecting the declines in the prices of petroleum

products and the stabilization of food prices, and was likely to become negative for the

same reasons and due also to increasing slackness in supply and demand conditions in the

overall economy. Some members said that the risk of a decline in firms' and households'

expectations about medium- to long-term inflation would warrant attention, as downward

pressure on prices would strengthen in tandem with a further widening of the output gap.

A few members noted that the difference between the number of items whose prices had

risen and those whose prices had declined had continued to narrow. Some members said

that, given the ongoing severe economic conditions, increased awareness of the cost of

living -- and a consequent preference for inexpensive goods and services and reduced

spending -- and intensified competition among firms in the distribution sector might exert

further downward pressure on prices, and such movements had in fact started to be

observed. However, from a longer perspective, one member expressed the view that,

unless appropriate policy actions were taken as the global economy recovered, there was a

risk of a recurrence of the rise in commodity prices leading to a higher-than-expected rate of

inflation worldwide.

**B. Financial Developments**

Members concurred that financial conditions in Japan had remained tight. Many

members said that CP issuance rates had declined and interbank rates on term instruments

had also declined gradually, due partly to the policy measures taken by the Bank. Many

members expressed the view that firms' funding conditions had been recovering since a

while ago, as seen in improved issuing conditions for CP due partly to the effects of the

Bank's outright purchases and in large-scale issuance of corporate bonds. Many members,

however, were of the view that availability of funds had declined, as shown by, for example,

a significant increase in the number of firms reporting that lending attitudes of financial

institutions were severe. These members continued that the significant deterioration in

economic activity had worsened business performance and had reduced financial

institutions' risk-taking capacity, and this in turn had led to the tightening of their lending

standards. One member said that attention should be paid to the fact that firms' cash flow

10


-----

had declined and firms had become less resilient to changes in their financial positions.

**III. Summary of Discussions on Monetary Policy for the Immediate Future**

Regarding the guideline for money market operations for the intermeeting period

ahead, members agreed that it was appropriate to maintain the current guideline that the

Bank would encourage the uncollateralized overnight call rate to remain at around 0.1

percent. They also shared the view that various measures to facilitate corporate financing

had been steadily producing positive effects on relevant financial markets, and it was

important to continue to implement them appropriately. One member said that the Bank's

special funds-supplying operations to facilitate corporate financing seemed to have so far

brought more positive effects than initially expected.

Members discussed policy measures to be taken in view of the outlook for the

financial markets in the new fiscal year. Many members agreed that funding over the

fiscal year-end had mostly been completed, but it was likely that financial markets would

remain under stress after the turn of the fiscal year given the severe economic and financial

conditions. In view of this situation, members concurred that continued provision of

substantial liquidity was required to ensure stability in financial markets.

Based on the above discussion, members discussed outright purchases of Japanese

government bonds (JGBs). Many members expressed the view that it was appropriate that

the Bank increase the amount of outright purchases of JGBs in order to make greater use of

its long-term funds-supplying operations and thereby facilitate smooth money market

operations. Some members said that, when increasing the amount of outright purchases of

JGBs, the Bank should increase such purchases as much as possible while keeping to the

"banknote principle" -- that the amount of the Bank's JGB holdings should be limited within

the amount of banknotes in circulation -- in order to demonstrate the Bank's firm intention

to ensure stability in financial markets after the turn of the fiscal year. One member said

that, at a rough estimate, under this principle the Bank could increase the amount of outright

purchases of JGBs by as much as about 5 trillion yen per year. Members then asked the

staff's view.

The staff made the following remarks. The framework for JGB outright

purchases revised in January, whereby the Bank set the amounts of JGBs to buy annually

according to their residual maturities, had enabled the Bank to control, if not fully, the

11


-----

maturity composition of its JGB holdings. As a result, the Bank was now able, under the

banknote principle, to increase such purchases by an amount greater than past increases.

Specifically, the Bank would be able to increase the annual amount of its JGB outright

purchases by 4.8 trillion yen -- from the current 16.8 trillion yen to 21.6 trillion yen -- if the

Bank were to increase the amount to the level that would eventually eliminate the difference

between the amount of banknotes in circulation and that of the Bank's JGB holdings while

avoiding large swings in operations caused by, for example, selling soon after purchasing.

However, if the Bank continued to purchase JGBs outright at this pace, the amount of its

JGB holdings was likely to reach a level close to the amount of banknotes in circulation in

several years, although this projection would depend on the pace of increase in banknotes.

In that case, the room for additional outright purchases would be limited considerably.

Based on the staff's explanation, most members said that it was appropriate to

increase outright purchases of JGBs to 21.6 trillion yen per year. Many members then

expressed the view that the Bank should explain its outright purchases of JGBs to the public

carefully. Members agreed that the banknote principle was important for the following

reasons: (1) the principle made it clear that the sole aim of the Bank's outright purchases of

JGBs was to facilitate smooth money market operations; and (2) it also made it clear that

such purchases were not intended to support JGB prices or government financing. A few

members elaborated on the banknote principle in connection with facilitation of smooth

money market operations as follows: banknotes, which were regarded as long-term

liabilities of the Bank, should be backed by JGBs, which were long-term assets; and

similarly, reserve deposits and other liabilities the amount of which changed in the short

term should be backed by short-term financial assets. They continued that the point they

had just made was essential to ensure the timeliness and flexibility of the Bank's conduct of

monetary policy, and therefore the Bank should take every opportunity to explain it

carefully.

**IV. Remarks by Government Representatives**

The representative from the Ministry of Finance made the following remarks.

(1) The government understood that the Bank continued to assess Japan's economic and

financial conditions, both current and future, as very severe.

(2) The government also regarded Japan's economic and financial conditions as severe, and

12


-----

would steadily implement the measures in the recently passed second supplementary

budget for fiscal 2008. The government was also striving to ensure that the budget for

fiscal 2009 would be approved by the Diet before the fiscal year began.

(3) Regarding recent financial market developments, funding over the fiscal year-end on

March 31 had mostly been completed, but the government was of the view that, even

after the turn of the fiscal year, the severe economic and financial conditions were likely

to continue and it would face very difficult decisions regarding economic policy. The

government would like the Bank to support the economy from the financial side by

actively providing funds through, for example, an increase in the amount of outright

purchases of JGBs, which was discussed at this meeting.

The representative from the Cabinet Office made the following remarks.

(1) With a view to stimulating Japan's economy, which was worsening rapidly, as the top

priority, the government would steadily implement economic measures amounting to

about 75 trillion yen in total. The government would, taking into account the opinions

of people in all social groups, do its best to prevent further economic deterioration and

to help the economy overcome the current crisis.

(2) Given the recent severe economic and financial conditions at home and abroad, the

government would like to request the Bank -- taking account of the government's policy

efforts and sharing the basic perspective on macroeconomic management with the

government -- to support the economy by conducting monetary policy in an appropriate

and flexible manner and to secure stability in the financial system.

(3) The government considered that an increase in the amount of outright purchases of

JGBs by the Bank was an appropriate response to the current situation, because it would

enable the Bank to provide more liquidity to bolster the economy. In the most severe

economic downturn since World War II, the government would also like the Bank to

continue to take appropriate measures so that firms could secure sufficient funds.

**V. Votes**

Based on the above discussions, members agreed that it was appropriate to

maintain the current guideline for money market operations, which encouraged the

uncollateralized overnight call rate to remain at around 0.1 percent.

13


-----

To reflect this view, the chairman formulated the following proposal and put it to

the vote.

**The Chairman's Policy Proposal on the Guideline for Money Market Operations:**

1. The guideline for money market operations for the intermeeting period ahead will be as

follows.

The Bank of Japan will encourage the uncollateralized overnight call rate

to remain at around 0.1 percent.

2. A public statement will be decided separately.

Votes for the proposal: Mr. M. Shirakawa, Mr. H. Yamaguchi, Mr. K. G. Nishimura,

Ms. M. Suda, Mr. A. Mizuno, Mr. T. Noda, Mr. S. Nakamura, and Mr. H.

Kamezaki.

Votes against the proposal: None.

**VI. Discussion on the Statement on Monetary Policy**

Members discussed the Statement on Monetary Policy, and put it to the vote. The

Policy Board decided the text by a unanimous vote. It was confirmed that the statement

would be released immediately after the meeting (see Attachment).

**VII. Approval of the Minutes of the Monetary Policy Meeting**

The Policy Board approved unanimously the minutes of the Monetary Policy

Meeting of February 18 and 19, 2009 for release on March 24, 2009.

14


-----

Attachment

March 18, 2009

Bank of Japan

**Statement on Monetary Policy**

1. At the Monetary Policy Meeting held today, the Policy Board of the Bank of Japan

decided, by a unanimous vote,[[Note]] to set the following guideline for money market

operations for the intermeeting period:

The Bank of Japan will encourage the uncollateralized overnight call rate

to remain at around 0.1 percent.

2. Fund raising in financial markets for funds over the fiscal year-end has mostly been

completed, but it is likely that the markets will remain under stress in the new fiscal

year given the severe financial and economic conditions described below. In light of

this situation, the Bank judged that continued provision of substantial liquidity is

required to ensure stability in financial markets. To put this into action, the Bank

decided to further utilize its long-term funds-supplying operations by increasing its

outright purchases of Japanese government bonds (JGBs), thereby facilitating smooth

money market operations.

The amount of outright purchases of JGBs will be increased by 4.8 trillion yen to 21.6

trillion yen per year (1.8 trillion yen per month) from 16.8 trillion yen per year (1.4

trillion yen per month), effective from this month.

[Note] Voting for the action: Mr. M. Shirakawa, Mr. H. Yamaguchi, Mr. K. G. Nishimura, Ms. M.
Suda, Mr. A. Mizuno, Mr. T. Noda, Mr. S. Nakamura, and Mr. H. Kamezaki.
Voting against the action: None.

15


-----

3. Exports have been decreasing substantially reflecting the deterioration in overseas

economic conditions, and domestic demand has become weaker against the background

of declining corporate profits and the worsening employment and income situation in

the household sector. Financial conditions have remained tight on the whole, despite

improvements in issuing conditions for CP and corporate bonds. Under these

circumstances, economic conditions have deteriorated significantly and are likely to

continue deteriorating for the time being. Meanwhile, CPI inflation (excluding fresh

food) has recently moderated reflecting the declines in the prices of petroleum products

and the stabilization of food prices, and, with increasing slackness evident in supply

and demand conditions, will likely become negative. The Bank's baseline scenario

through fiscal 2010, in which expectations of both medium- to long-term growth and

inflation are assumed to remain generally unchanged, projects that the economy will

start recovering from the latter half of fiscal 2009, with price declines abating as global

financial markets regain stability and overseas economies move out of their

deceleration phase. Although this scenario offers the prospect of the economy

returning to a sustainable growth path with price stability in the latter half of the

projection period, uncertainty is high.

4. With regard to risk factors, much depends on global financial conditions as well as

developments in overseas economies, and attention will need to be paid to the

downside risks posed to economic activity. In addition, there is the risk of a further

weakening in domestic private demand if firms' medium- to long-term growth

expectations decline and pressures to adjust capital stocks and employment increase.

If financial conditions should tighten further, pressures acting to depress economic

activity from the financial side may become more marked and the adverse feedback

loop between financial and economic activity may intensify. Turning to prices, there

is a possibility that the inflation rate will decline further if downside risks to economic

activity materialize or commodity prices fall. In this case, the risk of a decline in the

medium- to long-term inflation expectations of firms and households warrants

attention.

16


-----

5. In order to support the economy, the Bank has taken various monetary policy actions

since last fall in three main areas: reducing the policy interest rate; ensuring stability in

financial markets; and facilitating corporate financing. In addition, to secure stability

in the financial system, the Bank resumed its purchases of stocks held by banks, and

decided yesterday to explore a framework to provide subordinated loans to banks.

The Bank will continue to exert its utmost efforts as a central bank to facilitate the

return of Japan's economy to a sustainable growth path with price stability.

17


-----

