Not to be released until 8:50 a.m.
Japan Standard Time on Tuesday,
February 24, 2009.

February 24, 2009

Bank of Japan

# Minutes of the Monetary Policy Meeting
## on January 21 and 22, 2009

(English translation prepared by the Bank's staff based on the Japanese original)


-----

Please contact the Bank of Japan at the address below in advance to request permission

when reproducing or copying the content of this document for commercial purposes.

Secretariat of the Policy Board, Bank of Japan

P.O. Box 30, Nihonbashi, Tokyo 103-8660, Japan

Please credit the source when quoting, reproducing, or copying the content of this

document.


-----

A Monetary Policy Meeting of the Bank of Japan Policy Board was held in the

Head Office of the Bank of Japan in Tokyo on Wednesday, January 21, 2009, from 2:00

p.m. to 5:17 p.m., and on Thursday, January 22, from 8:30 a.m. to 1:38 p.m.[1]

**Policy Board Members Present**

**Mr. M. Shirakawa, Chairman, Governor of the Bank of Japan**

**Mr. H. Yamaguchi, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Japan**

**Mr. K. G. Nishimura, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Japan**

**Ms. M. Suda**

**Mr. A. Mizuno**

**Mr. T. Noda**

**Mr. S. Nakamura**

**Mr. H. Kamezaki**

Government Representatives Present

Mr. W. Takeshita, Senior Vice Minister of Finance, Ministry of Finance[2]

Mr. C. Kawakita, Deputy Vice Minister for Policy Planning and Coordination, Ministry

of Finance[3]

Mr. B. Fujioka, Vice Minister for Policy Coordination, Cabinet Office

Reporting Staff

Mr. A. Horii, Executive Director (Assistant Governor)

Mr. K. Ido, Executive Director

Mr. K. Yamamoto, Executive Director

Mr. H. Nakaso, Executive Director[4]

1 The minutes of this meeting were approved by the Policy Board at the Monetary Policy Meeting
held on February 18 and 19, 2009 as "a document describing an outline of the discussion at the
meeting" stipulated in Article 20, paragraph 1 of the Bank of Japan Act of 1997. Those present are
referred to by their titles at the time of the meeting.
2 Mr. W. Takeshita was present on January 22.
3 Mr. C. Kawakita was present on January 21.
4 Mr. H. Nakaso concurrently held the post of Director-General of the Financial Markets
Department.

1


-----

Mr. M. Amamiya, Director-General, Monetary Affairs Department

Mr. M. Ayuse, Associate Director-General, Monetary Affairs Department[5]

Mr. T. Sekine, Associate Director-General, Monetary Affairs Department

Mr. K. Momma, Director-General, Research and Statistics Department

Mr. E. Maeda, Associate Director-General, Research and Statistics Department

Mr. T. Nunami, Director-General, International Department

Secretariat of the Monetary Policy Meeting

Mr. K. Osugi, Director-General, Secretariat of the Policy Board

Mr. K. Shigyoh, Director, Deputy Head of Secretarial Services for the Board, Secretariat

of the Policy Board

Mr. T. Kato, Senior Economist, Monetary Affairs Department

Mr. T. Sakamoto, Director, Head, Monetary Operations Planning, Monetary Affairs

Department[5]

Mr. K. Nakamura, Senior Economist, Monetary Affairs Department

Mr. A. Okuno, Senior Economist, Monetary Affairs Department

5 Messrs. M. Ayuse and T. Sakamoto were present on January 22.

2


-----

**I. Summary of Staff Reports on Economic and Financial Developments[6]**

**A. Money Market Operations in the Intermeeting Period**

The Bank conducted money market operations in accordance with the guideline

decided at the previous meeting on December 18 and 19, 2008.[7] The uncollateralized

overnight call rate had been at around 0.1 percent.

To ensure market stability in Japan, the Bank provided more funds maturing over

the year-end and actively purchased Japanese government securities and CP under

repurchase agreements. Moreover, the Bank continued to conduct U.S. dollar

funds-supplying operations against pooled collateral and on January 8, 2009 started to

conduct special funds-supplying operations to facilitate corporate financing.

**B. Recent Developments in Financial Markets**

Japan's money market had been nervous. While the general collateral (GC) repo

rates as well as yields on treasury bills (TBs) and financing bills (FBs) had generally

declined, the risk premium on Euroyen rates remained at an elevated level. The CP market

generally remained tight, although interest rates on CP had declined somewhat since late

December as (1) firms' seasonal demand for funds over the year-end had dropped, (2) the

Development Bank of Japan Inc. had started outright purchases of CP, and (3) the Bank of

Japan had decided to introduce such purchases.

Japanese stock prices had been unstable at low levels, mainly reflecting the bleak

outlook for corporate profits. The Nikkei 225 Stock Average had declined to around 8,000

yen recently. Long-term interest rates in Japan declined temporarily to the 1.1-1.2 percent

level in late December, reflecting decreases in U.S. and European long-term interest rates

due mainly to deterioration in the outlook for the world economy, and had recently been in

the range of 1.20-1.25 percent.

The yen depreciated temporarily to the level of 94-95 yen against the U.S. dollar in

early January as the dollar was bought on expectations about the economic stimulus plan

that would be put forth by the new administration in the United States. The yen had since

6 Reports were made based on information available at the time of the meeting.
7 The guideline was as follows:
The Bank of Japan will encourage the uncollateralized overnight call rate to be at around
0.1 percent.

3


-----

appreciated, to around 89-90 yen against the dollar, mainly reflecting the deterioration in

indicators relating to employment and private consumption in the United States and the fall

in U.S. stock prices.

**C. Overseas Economic and Financial Developments**

U.S. economic conditions had deteriorated significantly. A substantial decline in

housing investment continued, and home prices continued to fall. Private consumption

and business fixed investment continued to decrease. In this situation, industrial

production had been decreasing and the number of employees had been declining

considerably. Funding conditions for firms and households had remained tight. As for

prices, the year-on-year rate of increase in the consumer price index (CPI) for all items had

declined significantly, to close to 0 percent, due to a fall in energy prices and a leveling-off

of increases in food prices; that in the CPI for all items less energy and food, or the core CPI,

had also declined.

Economic conditions in the euro area had deteriorated significantly. Exports had

declined sharply, while private consumption, business fixed investment, and housing

investment had decreased. As for prices, the year-on-year rate of increase in the

Harmonized Index of Consumer Prices (HICP) had been declining. Economic conditions

in the United Kingdom had also deteriorated significantly, mainly reflecting the

considerable adjustments in the housing market and a decrease in private consumption.

Deceleration in the Chinese economy had become evident: although domestic

demand continued to show high growth, exports had declined sharply. Economic growth

in India had decelerated, and that in the NIEs and the ASEAN countries had been sluggish.

As for prices, the year-on-year rate of increase in the CPI had declined in many Asian

economies.

Global financial markets generally remained under strain, although there was a

slight improvement in some markets, such as money markets. Although

Treasury-Eurodollar (TED) spreads had narrowed to close to their levels immediately

before the failure of Lehman Brothers Holdings Inc., credit spreads on corporate bonds,

particularly those with low ratings, had remained wide, and new funding of firms had been

low. U.S. and European stock prices rose temporarily on expectations about economic

stimulus plans, but had generally declined against the background of deterioration in

4


-----

economic indicators and concerns about business performance. U.S. long-term interest

rates had risen slightly due to concerns about a possible increase in the issuance of

government bonds, while European long-term interest rates had been more or less flat.

**D. Economic and Financial Developments in Japan**

1. Economic developments

Exports had decreased substantially. They were expected to continue decreasing

for the time being, due to the slowdown in overseas economies and the appreciation of the

yen.

With regard to domestic private demand, business fixed investment had declined

substantially, mainly due to the decrease in corporate profits. It was likely to continue

declining significantly for the time being, given the slowdown in overseas economies and

the ongoing decrease in corporate profits as well as the deterioration in firms' funding

conditions.

Private consumption had weakened, as the employment and income situation had

become increasingly severe. The decrease in the number of new passenger-car

registrations had accelerated. Sales at department stores had softened further, since

consumers had further curtailed their purchases. Consumer sentiment had deteriorated

further, mainly due to the drop in stock prices and growing employment uncertainty;

indicators of consumer sentiment had fallen to around or below their levels at the time of

the previous economic downturn. Private consumption was likely to continue weakening

for the time being, as the employment and income situation would become increasingly

severe.

Housing investment had been more or less flat. The number of housing starts,

which was a leading indicator of housing investment and had been more or less flat from

the beginning of 2008, had recently started to decrease again. Housing investment was

expected to weaken somewhat for the time being, given the sluggishness in housing starts.

Production had decreased at a much faster pace. It was likely that production

would continue to decrease for the time being, since the weakness in domestic and external

demand had become more evident and inventory adjustment pressures had increased.

Inventories had risen noticeably, while shipments had decreased substantially; the

shipment-inventory balance had therefore deteriorated rapidly.

5


-----

As for employment and income, household income had been relatively weak, as

the year-on-year rate of change in nominal wages per worker had become negative.

Household income was likely to continue declining for the time being in response to the

decrease in corporate profits and production.

On the price front, commodity prices, which peaked in summer 2008 and dropped

substantially thereafter, had recently been essentially flat at low levels. The three-month

rate of decrease in the domestic corporate goods price index (CGPI) had been large and the

CGPI was likely to continue decreasing for the time being, mainly due to the declines in

commodity prices. The year-on-year rate of increase in the CPI (excluding fresh food) had

moderated to around 1 percent, mainly reflecting the declines in the prices of petroleum

products and the stabilization of food prices. It was expected to moderate further and

become negative by the spring, mainly due to the above factors and also to increasing

slackness in supply and demand conditions in the overall economy.

2. Financial environment

Financial conditions had become tighter. The overnight call rate had been at an

extremely low level, but the stimulative effects from this had become increasingly limited

given the significant deterioration in economic activity. Despite a slight decline in bank

lending rates following the reductions in the policy interest rate, funding costs for firms had

been more or less flat as a whole, as credit spreads on CP and corporate bonds had remained

wide. The amount outstanding of CP and corporate bonds issued had been below the

previous year's level, as investors had continued to be selective in their purchases of them.

The amount outstanding of bank lending, particularly to large firms, had increased at a

faster pace reflecting firms' need to secure more liquidity and to compensate for the decline

in the issuance of CP and corporate bonds. Despite the increase in bank lending, an

increasing number of firms had reported that their financial positions were weak and

lending attitudes of financial institutions were severe. The year-on-year rate of change in

the money stock (M2) had been around 2 percent.

6


-----

**II. Amendments to Principal Terms and Conditions for the Outright Purchase/Sale**

**of Japanese Government Bonds (JGBs)**

**A. Staff Proposal**

The staff would like to propose that the Bank amend Principal Terms and

Conditions for the Outright Purchase/Sale of Japanese Government Bonds so as to be able

to conduct a multiple-price competitive auction, where counterparties bid in terms of "price

spreads" (calculated by subtracting the benchmark prices from the prices at which

counterparties wished to sell bonds to the Bank), for outright purchases of floating-rate

bonds and inflation-indexed bonds, which were added to the list of JGBs eligible for the

Bank's outright purchases by the Policy Board's decision at the previous Monetary Policy

Meeting held on December 18 and 19, 2008. As for the scheme to purchase JGBs of

specific types and residual maturities, the introduction of which was decided at the previous

meeting, the staff would like to make public a finalized plan specifying details such as the

amounts to be purchased from different types and maturity brackets.

**B. Discussion by the Policy Board and Vote**

Members voted unanimously to approve the proposal to amend Principal Terms

and Conditions for the Outright Purchase/Sale of Japanese Government Bonds and agreed

that the decision should be made public.

**III. Amendments to Principal Terms and Conditions for Money Market Operations**

**A. Staff Proposal**

In line with the integration of TBs and FBs to form "treasury discount bills," which

would be issued by the Ministry of Finance from February 2009, the staff would like to

propose that the Bank make necessary amendments to Principal Terms and Conditions for

the Outright Purchase/Sale of Short-Term Japanese Government Securities and other rules

and regulations related to the integration.

**B. Discussion by the Policy Board and Vote**

Members voted unanimously to approve the proposal and agreed that the decision

should be made public.

7


-----

**IV. Summary of Staff Reports on Basic Principles regarding Additional Measures to**

**Facilitate Corporate Financing**

At the Monetary Policy Meeting held on December 18 and 19, 2008, the chairman

instructed the Bank's staff to examine additional measures to facilitate corporate financing,

including outright purchases of CP. In response to the instruction, the staff reported at this

meeting on the basic principles regarding outright purchases of corporate financing

instruments to facilitate corporate financing and actions that could be taken based on these

principles.

Outright purchases of corporate financing instruments to facilitate corporate

financing should be regarded as an exceptional measure for a central bank for the following

reasons. First, they involved taking on a greater degree of individual private firms' credit

risk and consequently a relatively high probability of incurring losses that would ultimately

be borne by the taxpayer and deepened the involvement of the Bank in microeconomic

resource allocation among individual firms. And second, they involved a higher risk,

compared to other policy measures, of damaging the financial health of the Bank as a result

of losses incurred and ultimately undermining confidence in the currency and monetary

policy.

Outright purchases of corporate financing instruments should be implemented only

when, first, a significant decline in the functioning of the market for corporate financing

instruments had been observed, and it had led to tight overall corporate financing conditions,

and second, outright purchases by the Bank of corporate financing instruments were judged

necessary to improve the situation in light of the Bank's mission.

In the implementation of such outright purchases, the following points should be

considered: (1) preventing the purchases from constituting an arbitrary allocation of funds

to particular firms; (2) conducting the purchases only for the term required and on an

appropriate scale; and (3) ensuring the Bank's financial health.

Based on these basic principles, the following actions could be taken for the time

being. First, the Bank could begin outright purchases of CP and asset-backed CP (ABCP).

It would be appropriate to draw up a scheme for such outright purchases in line with the

basic principles and swiftly put it into action. And second, it would be appropriate to

investigate ways to implement outright purchases of corporate bonds. In this case, it

would be necessary to manage credit risk by, for example, restricting the purchases to

8


-----

corporate bonds with a residual maturity of up to one year.

**V. Staff Proposal of Introduction of Outright Purchases of CP**

In accordance with the decision made at the Monetary Policy Meeting held on

December 18 and 19, 2008 to introduce outright purchases of CP, the staff would like to

propose that the Bank take the necessary steps, such as establishment of Principal Terms

and Conditions for Outright Purchases of CP.

**VI. Staff Proposal of Acceptance of Debt Instruments Issued by Real Estate**

**Investment Corporations as Eligible Collateral**

To further facilitate the Bank's money market operations, improve the functioning

of the real estate securitization market, and ensure stability in financial markets, the staff

would like to propose that the Bank take the necessary steps, such as amendments to

Guidelines on Eligible Collateral, to accept debt instruments issued by real estate

investment corporations as eligible collateral for the Bank's provision of credit. The staff

would also like to propose that the Bank take the necessary steps, such as an amendment to

Principal Terms and Conditions for the Purchase of CP with Repurchase Agreements, to add

CP issued by real estate investment corporations to the list of CP eligible to be purchased

with repurchase agreements.

**VII. Summary of Discussions by the Policy Board on Economic and Financial**

**Developments**

**A. Economic Developments**

With regard to economic and financial conditions abroad, members shared the

view that, in a situation where global financial markets remained under increased strain,

overseas economies had been slowing markedly. On this point, some members expressed

the following view. First, the effects of financial crises in the United States and Europe

had been spreading even to emerging economies, and the adverse feedback loop between

financial and economic activity had been intensifying further on a global basis. And

second, an inter-regional adverse feedback loop between trading partners -- a process

whereby deceleration in domestic demand in any one country led to a decrease in its

imports and a corresponding decrease in the exports of its trading partners -- was also

9


-----

operating worldwide, as suggested by the drop in the value of global trade.

Turning to the U.S. economy, members concurred that economic conditions had

deteriorated significantly as the adverse feedback loop between financial and economic

activity worsened amid the significant fall in the risk-taking capacity of financial

institutions and investors. With regard to the housing market, many members expressed

the view that there were no signs of bottoming out although mortgage rates were declining

recently. One member pointed out the possibility that corporate balance sheets might be

damaged eventually given that commercial real estate prices had recently fallen

significantly. A few members added that business fixed investment had continued to

decline due to weakening demand at home and abroad and financial institutions' tightening

of lending standards. Some members noted that private consumption continued to

decrease substantially, as seen in continued sluggish new car sales and in poor retail sales

during the holiday season, against the background of deterioration in the employment and

income situation and consumer confidence.

With regard to European economies, members shared the view that economic

conditions in the euro area continued to deteriorate as exports particularly to Central and

Eastern European countries had declined sharply, while domestic demand, especially

private consumption and business fixed investment, had also decreased.

On Asian economies, members concurred that the economic slowdown had

intensified, due to a decrease in exports reflecting the economic downturn in the United

States and Europe and to deterioration in financial conditions mainly caused by a capital

outflow. Some members focused on the Chinese economy in particular, and expressed the

view that deceleration had become evident recently, especially in the developments in

production and external trade. These members continued that, although domestic demand

in China was likely to be pushed up by the large-scale economic stimulus package and a

surge in bank lending resulting from the removal of the ceiling set on aggregate credit

extended by commercial banks, it was necessary to continue to watch carefully to ascertain

when and to what extent the effects on domestic demand appeared.

Based on the above discussion on economic and financial conditions abroad,

members discussed the state of Japan's economy. They shared the view that economic

conditions had deteriorated significantly and were likely to continue deteriorating for the

time being given the following factors: exports had been decreasing substantially reflecting

10


-----

the slowdown in overseas economies; domestic demand had become weaker against the

background of declining corporate profits and the worsening employment and income

situation in the household sector; and financial conditions had become tighter. Some

members said that Japan was experiencing a sharp economic deterioration equivalent to or

even worse than that in the United States and Europe, and this was because, over the past

several years, Japan's economy had established a growth mechanism that depended on

continued expansion in global demand particularly for durable consumer goods, such as

automobiles, and for capital goods. These members then expressed the view that an

unprecedented drop in exports due to the overseas economic downturn had depressed

production rapidly and substantially. A few members, referring to the especially severe

economic downturn in the Osaka and Nagoya areas reported at the meeting of general

managers of the Bank's branches held on January 16, 2009, said that this reflected the fact

that manufacturers, particularly those producing goods for export, were being negatively

affected and it was necessary to pay attention to the possible effects on small and

medium-sized firms that did business with them.

As for the outlook, many members expressed the following view: for Japan's

economy to start recovering, it was necessary that global financial markets regain stability

and overseas economies move out of their deceleration phase, and the economy was likely

to start recovering, at the earliest, from the latter half of fiscal 2009. In relation to this,

some members said that the mechanism for economic recovery on a global basis was

expected to operate through the synergy of the following processes. First, large-scale

fiscal and monetary policy measures as well as various measures to stabilize the financial

system taken in individual countries worldwide were expected to take effect. And second,

adjustments of various imbalances accumulated in the past several years, which were the

precondition for policy effects to appear, had been gradually progressing in the private

sector, for example, in the areas of manufacturing and housing. A few members, however,

were of the view that it would be some time before the effects of the measures taken in

individual countries would be seen clearly, and that it was very uncertain how great they

would be. Some members said that, given that adjustments of various imbalances

accumulated in the past several years lay behind the current global economic downturn, it

should be borne in mind that the global economy would require time to recover.

11


-----

On the mechanism of Japan's economic growth in relation to the global economy,

one member commented that attention should be paid to whether the established growth

mechanism, which was primarily based on production for export of durable consumer goods

and capital goods, required structural changes. A different member said that firms,

particularly exporting firms, were expected to curtail excessive capacity, and the potential

growth rate of Japan's economy might have declined to 1.0-1.5 percent or around 1.5

percent.

With regard to developments in each demand component, members concurred that

exports had decreased substantially, and were likely to continue decreasing for the time

being. Some members said that exports to China, which previously were relatively steady,

had decreased substantially, and therefore developments warranted careful monitoring.

One member noted that the decrease in exports to emerging economies might be an effect

not only of the decrease in local demand but also a financial factor, the fact that local

importers were facing difficulty in obtaining trade credit.

Many members expressed the view that business fixed investment was likely to

continue declining significantly for the time being, mainly due to the slowdown in overseas

economies, the decrease in corporate profits, and the deterioration in firms' funding

conditions. Some members said that the recent large drop in machinery orders suggested a

future significant decrease in business fixed investment, and future developments, including

the risk that growth expectations of firms might weaken considerably, required close

attention.

Some members said that private consumption had weakened as the employment

and income situation had become increasingly severe, and was likely to continue weakening.

One member noted that recent developments in stock prices and media reports about

employment uncertainty seemed to have contributed to the further deterioration in consumer

sentiment. Some members said that adjustments in employment, in terms of both wages

and the number of employees, might spread from manufacturers to nonmanufacturing firms,

and therefore developments warranted careful monitoring.

Many members expressed the view that production had decreased at a much faster

pace, and was likely to continue to decrease for the time being since the weakness in

domestic and external demand had become more evident. One member noted that the

effects of sluggish production of processing industries such as the automobile industry were

12


-----

spreading to a wide range of materials industries such as the iron and steel and chemical

industries in the form of production adjustments. Some members said that, although

individual firms were cutting production significantly, there was the risk that a

faster-than-expected decrease in global demand might exceed the pace of reduction in

production, leading to protracted adjustments.

As for prices, members agreed that the year-on-year rate of increase in the CPI

(excluding fresh food) had moderated recently, due to the declines in the prices of

petroleum products and the stabilization of food prices, and was likely to become negative

by the spring for the same reasons and due also to increasing slackness in supply and

demand conditions in the overall economy. Some members added that, given the risk of a

further decline in the inflation rate, it was important to closely monitor developments in

medium- to long-term inflation expectations. One member expressed the view that,

although downside risks to the outlook for prices required watching for the time being, from

a longer perspective it was also necessary to always be aware of the possibility that a

protracted worldwide monetary easing might cause various new excesses and in turn a

recurrence of rising inflationary pressures.

**B. Financial Developments**

Members concurred that financial conditions in Japan had become tighter on the

whole. A few members said that bank lending rates and interest rates on CP, particularly

with high ratings, had recently declined slightly against the background of various policy

measures, including the reductions in the policy interest rate. Some members, however,

expressed the view that the effects of the reductions in the policy interest rate might not yet

have been fully felt, as indicated by, for example, the fact that interbank rates on term

instruments had remained at high levels and credit spreads on CP and corporate bonds had

remained wide on the whole. Some members commented that firms continued to suffer

from difficult funding conditions, especially limited availability of funds, as shown by the

fact that (1) the amount outstanding of CP and corporate bonds issued had been below the

previous year's level, as investors had continued to be selective in their purchases of them,

and (2) an increasing number of firms had reported that their financial positions were weak

and lending attitudes of financial institutions were severe. Many members said that

corporate financing conditions required closer attention, given, for example, the fact that

13


-----

firms' cash flow from operating activities was decreasing sharply due to the significant

decrease in production and sales since autumn 2008.

**C. Interim Assessment**

Given the above assessment of economic activity, prices, and financial

developments, members agreed that prospects for Japan's economic growth rate and

inflation rate had shifted downward compared with the projections presented in the Outlook

_for Economic Activity and Prices (hereafter the Outlook Report) released in October 2008._

Most members expressed the view that the growth rate was likely to be negative in fiscal

2008 and fiscal 2009 and to recover to 1.0-2.0 percent in fiscal 2010. As for prices, most

members were of the view that the year-on-year rate of change in both the CGPI and the

CPI (excluding fresh food) was likely to be negative in fiscal 2009, and the rate of decline

was likely to be somewhat less in fiscal 2010. Based on this discussion, members agreed

that, although this scenario offered the prospect of the economy returning to a sustainable

growth path with price stability in the latter half of the projection period, uncertainty

remained high.

With regard to risk factors for the economy, members concurred that, in addition

to global financial conditions and developments in overseas economies, both of which had

been noted as risk factors in the October 2008 Outlook Report, the risk that firms' medium
to long-term growth expectations might decline and the adverse feedback loop between

financial and economic activity might intensify warranted attention. As for prices, many

members said that a possible decline in the medium- to long-term inflation expectations of

firms and households required careful monitoring as an additional risk factor.

**VIII. Summary of Discussions on Monetary Policy for the Immediate Future**

Regarding the guideline for money market operations for the intermeeting period

ahead, members agreed that it would be appropriate to maintain the current guideline that

the Bank would encourage the uncollateralized overnight call rate to be at around 0.1

percent. This was because the Bank's recent policy rate reductions had been producing

some positive effects, especially on the money market, and the Bank should continue to

monitor the effects carefully.

14


-----

On this basis, some members said that as the overnight interest rate had declined to

the current extremely low level, it was important to work upon longer-term interest rates,

which firms paid when they borrowed, that is, interest rates on term instruments. A few

members expressed the view that the Bank should continue to examine what additional

measures it could take to work upon these interest rates in its market operations. In

relation to this, a different member said that one reason for the elevated interest rates on

term instruments was the fact that it had become difficult for financial institutions to take on

further credit risk due to capital constraints, and it was therefore important to increase

capital at financial institutions.

Members next examined the basic principles regarding additional measures to

facilitate corporate financing. They generally agreed with the staff's report on the basic

principles, and said that it would be appropriate to draw up and make public the Bank's

principles regarding outright purchases of corporate financing instruments. They then

went further into points they considered especially important.

Some members said that, with outright purchases of corporate financing

instruments, the Bank would come close to the realm of fiscal policy, because losses that

would ultimately be borne by the taxpayer were more likely to occur than in the case of

other policy tools and also because such purchases would deepen the involvement of the

Bank in microeconomic resource allocation among individual firms. They continued that

it was therefore important for the Bank to make clear that outright purchases of corporate

financing instruments were an exceptional measure for a central bank. One member said

that it should be borne in mind that outright purchases of various corporate financing

instruments beyond what was necessary might in fact impair market functioning in Japan,

the decline in which was limited so far in both degree and extent compared with that in

other countries, notably the United States. Many members said that the decision to

conduct outright purchases of such instruments should be made based not on the state of

each market but on whether a decline in the functioning of a market was leading to tight

overall corporate financing conditions. Based on this understanding, most members

agreed that the following points should be ensured when implementing outright purchases

of corporate financing instruments: (1) the Bank should prevent the purchases from

constituting an arbitrary allocation of funds to particular firms; (2) the Bank should conduct

such purchases on an appropriate scale in order to avoid a further decline in market

15


-----

functioning and adopt a purchasing scheme that would facilitate, when it became necessary,

the smooth termination of such purchases as market functioning recovered; and (3) with a

view to minimizing possible losses that would ultimately be borne by the taxpayer, the

Bank should manage credit risk appropriately, by carefully determining how it would buy

what kind of corporate financing instruments. Some members said that it was important,

in addition to appropriately managing credit risk, to ensure the Bank's financial health

through the appropriate disposal of losses and maintenance of adequate capital in the

settlement of the Bank's accounts. These members continued that the Bank should seek

the government's understanding of the principles discussed above.

Based on the basic principles regarding outright purchases of corporate financing

instruments, members exchanged views on additional measures in the area of corporate

financing.

Members discussed details concerning outright purchases of CP, which the Bank

had decided to introduce at the previous Monetary Policy Meeting held on December 18

and 19, 2008. Many members were of the view that the Bank should also purchase ABCP

with a view to facilitating financing of firms, including small ones, given that (1) issuing

conditions in the ABCP market had tightened due to a decline in the functioning of the

market and (2) most of the underlying assets of ABCP were firms' receivables and bills

receivable. Based on this view, many members said that the Bank should (1) announce

clearly that it would conduct outright purchases of such instruments only up until the fiscal

year-end, (2) set certain conditions for financial instruments to be purchased in terms of

their ratings and residual maturities and also set a limit on the amount of purchases from a

single issuer in order to appropriately manage credit risk, and (3) set interest rates for

purchasing such instruments at a level that would facilitate the smooth termination of

purchases by causing the incentive to sell the instruments to the Bank to diminish as market

functioning recovered. Regarding the total outstanding amount of such purchases by the

Bank, members agreed that the upper limit should be 3 trillion yen taking account of the

following points: (1) the Bank would purchase not only CP but also ABCP; (2) CP could be

issued by firms to raise funds in order to meet higher demand toward the fiscal year-end

arising, for example, from redemptions of corporate bonds; and (3) excessive intervention

by the Bank in markets should be avoided.

16


-----

Members next discussed points concerning possible outright purchases of

corporate bonds. Many members were of the view that these should also be examined

further, given that the functioning of the corporate bond market had declined significantly,

as indicated by a marked expansion of credit spreads and the fact that only a limited number

of firms were able to issue bonds, and the decline in the functioning of the corporate bond

market was one of the factors behind the tight corporate financing conditions. Some

members added that purchases should be limited to corporate bonds with a residual maturity

of up to one year, since a central bank's primary function was provision of liquidity and

appropriate management of credit risk was necessary. In contrast to these views, one

member expressed the opinion that it was premature to make a decision to conduct outright

purchases of corporate bonds at this point and, for the time being, the Bank should continue

to examine market conditions as well as the degree of tightness in corporate financing

conditions for the following reasons: (1) the recent decline in the functioning of the

corporate bond market had not led to overall tightness in corporate financing, due partly to

firms obtaining alternative funding through issuance of CP and borrowing from banks; and

(2) outright purchases of corporate bonds with a residual maturity of up to one year could

only be expected to have a limited effect as a means of facilitating corporate financing.

The member added that it was also inappropriate even to make public a decision to examine

outright purchases of corporate bonds at present, given the possible impact on the market.

In relation to this opinion, a different member expressed the view that outright purchases of

corporate bonds even with a residual maturity of up to one year would be able to contribute

to facilitating corporate financing through various channels, for example, via the support

they would give to a recovery in market functioning by encouraging securities companies to

underwrite corporate bonds and via the boost they would give to financial institutions'

capacity to extend loans.

Members then discussed the possible acceptance of debt instruments issued by real

estate investment corporations as eligible collateral for the Bank's provision of credit.

They agreed that it was appropriate to accept bonds and CP issued by real estate investment

corporations, bills drawn by them, and loans on deeds to them as eligible collateral for the

Bank's provision of credit, with a view to further facilitating the Bank's money market

operations, improving the functioning of the real estate securitization market, and ensuring

stability in financial markets. Furthermore, they concurred that the Bank should add CP

17


-----

issued by real estate investment corporations to the list of CP eligible to be purchased with

repurchase agreements. One member commented that acceptance of debt instruments

issued by real estate investment corporations as eligible collateral was consistent with the

Bank's past decision to accept asset-backed securities (ABSs) and ABCP with a view to

promoting the development of markets for securitized products. A different member said

that, given that debt instruments issued by real estate investment corporations were

intermediate in character between corporate bonds and ABSs, appropriate eligibility criteria

should be applied.

**IX. Remarks by Government Representatives**

The representative from the Ministry of Finance made the following remarks.

(1) The Bank seemed to assess Japan's economic conditions as very severe, and this

assessment was reflected in, for example, the projection of a negative rate of change in

the CPI.

(2) The government would like the Bank to continue to conduct monetary policy in an

appropriate and flexible manner so as to support the economy from the financial side,

based on the Bank's experience of taking various measures in dealing with the

post-bubble deflation.

(3) The government welcomed the Bank's policy actions such as the introduction of

outright purchases of CP, as they were likely to facilitate corporate financing in a

situation where there was the risk of a further increase in the severity of financial

conditions during the run-up to the fiscal year-end. The government hoped for early

introduction of other measures to facilitate corporate financing that were under

consideration.

(4) In relation to outright purchases of corporate financing instruments, the need to ensure

the Bank's financial health had been discussed at this meeting. The government would

give due consideration to the fact that the Bank regarded taking on credit risk as a

serious matter. If such credit risk materialized, the Ministry of Finance would respond

in full consultation with the Bank, on the occasion of discussing the settlement of the

Bank's accounts.

18


-----

The representative from the Cabinet Office made the following remarks.

(1) Japan's economy had worsened rapidly. Looking ahead, it was likely to continue

worsening for the time being, and attention should be given to risk factors that might

make economic conditions more severe such as the worsening global financial crisis

and the possibility of a further slowdown in overseas economies.

(2) The government submitted the second supplementary budget for fiscal 2008 and the

budget for fiscal 2009 to the Diet with a view to implementing economic measures as

the top priority in the near term. The government would pursue sound public finance

based on "Medium- to Long-Term Fiscal Policy and Economic and Fiscal Outlook for

Next Ten Years," but it would also take prompt and bold action flexibly in response to

changes in global economic and financial conditions.

(3) Given the recent severe economic and financial conditions at home and abroad, the

government would like to request the Bank to support the economy by conducting

monetary policy in an appropriate and flexible manner, taking account of the

government's policy efforts and the Bank's interim assessment at this meeting of the

October 2008 Outlook Report, and sharing the basic perspective on macroeconomic

management with the government.

(4) The government considered that outright purchases of CP by the Bank were an

appropriate response to a situation where firms' financial positions were weakening.

The government would like the Bank to closely examine developments in corporate

financing and to appropriately implement measures to facilitate it so that firms could

secure sufficient funds during the run-up to the fiscal year-end.

**X. Votes**

**A. Vote on the Guideline for Money Market Operations**

Based on the above discussions, members agreed that it was appropriate to

maintain the current guideline for money market operations, which encouraged the

uncollateralized overnight call rate to be at around 0.1 percent.

To reflect this view, the chairman formulated the following proposal and put it to

the vote.

19


-----

**The Chairman's Policy Proposal on the Guideline for Money Market Operations:**

1. The guideline for money market operations for the intermeeting period ahead will be as

follows.

The Bank of Japan will encourage the uncollateralized overnight call rate

to remain at around 0.1 percent.

2. A public statement will be decided separately.

Votes for the proposal: Mr. M. Shirakawa, Mr. H. Yamaguchi, Mr. K. G. Nishimura,

Ms. M. Suda, Mr. A. Mizuno, Mr. T. Noda, Mr. S. Nakamura, and Mr. H.

Kamezaki.

Votes against the proposal: None.

**B. Vote on Outright Purchases of Corporate Financing Instruments**

To reflect the view of members, the chairman formulated a policy proposal on

outright purchases of corporate financing instruments and put it to the vote. The

chairman's policy proposal was approved by a majority vote. It was confirmed that the

statement Outright Purchases of Corporate Financing Instruments would be released

immediately after the meeting (see Attachment 1).

Votes for the proposal: Mr. M. Shirakawa, Mr. H. Yamaguchi, Mr. K. G. Nishimura,

Mr. A. Mizuno, Mr. T. Noda, Mr. S. Nakamura, and Mr. H. Kamezaki.

Votes against the proposal: Ms. M. Suda.

Ms. M. Suda dissented from the above proposal for the following reason. Recent

overall conditions for corporate financing were not so severe as to require the Bank to

conduct outright purchases of corporate bonds. In view of this and the possible impact on

the market, it was premature at this point to decide to examine outright purchases of

corporate bonds and make this decision public in the statement.

20


-----

**C. Vote on Establishment of Principal Terms and Conditions for Outright Purchases**

**of CP**

Members voted unanimously to approve the staff proposal and agreed that the

decision should be made public.

**D. Vote on Amendments to Guidelines on Eligible Collateral**

Members voted unanimously to approve the staff proposal and agreed that the

decision should be made public.

**XI. Discussion on the Statement on Monetary Policy**

Members discussed the Statement on Monetary Policy, and put it to the vote. The

Policy Board decided the text by a unanimous vote. It was confirmed that the statement

would be released immediately after the meeting (see Attachment 3).

**XII. Approval of the Minutes of the Monetary Policy Meetings**

The Policy Board approved unanimously the minutes of the Monetary Policy

Meetings of December 2, 2008 and December 18 and 19 for release on January 27, 2009.

**XIII. Approval of Changes in the Scheduled Dates Related to the Monetary Policy**

**Meetings in January-December 2009**

The Policy Board approved changes in the dates related to the Monetary Policy

Meetings in the period January-December 2009 for immediate release (see Attachment 5).

21


-----

Attachment 1

January 22, 2009

Bank of Japan

**Outright Purchases of Corporate Financing Instruments[[NOTE]]**

The Bank of Japan examined additional measures in the area of corporate financing

including outright purchases of CP, and has established the following basic principles

regarding the outright purchases of corporate financing instruments to facilitate corporate

financing.

Based on these principles, the Bank decided to begin, from this month, outright purchases

of CP and ABCP based on the scheme outlined in Attachment 2. In addition, the Chairman

instructed Bank staff to investigate ways to implement outright purchases of corporate

bonds with a residual maturity of up to 1 year and swiftly map out a concrete plan.

**1. Distinctive features in the outright purchases of corporate financing instruments**

   - The degree of taking on the credit risks of individual private firms is greater in the

case of outright purchases of corporate financing instruments than when these

instruments are taken as collateral for providing credit to financial institutions.

Therefore, outright purchases involve a relatively higher probability of imposing

costs on taxpayers by incurring losses, and deepen the involvement of the Bank in

microeconomic resource allocation among individual firms.

   - In addition, outright purchases involve higher risks, compared to other policy

measures, of damaging the financial health of the Bank by incurring losses and

[NOTE] Voting for the action: Mr. M. Shirakawa, Mr. H. Yamaguchi, Mr. K. G. Nishimura, Mr. A.
Mizuno, Mr. T. Noda, Mr. S. Nakamura, and Mr. H. Kamezaki.
Voting against the action: Ms. M. Suda.

22


-----

ultimately undermining confidence in the currency and monetary policy.

   - Given these considerations, outright purchases of corporate financing instruments

should be regarded as an exceptional measure for a central bank, and their

implementation as well as ways to implement them should be examined

accordingly.

**2. Necessary conditions for the implementation**

   - Outright purchases of corporate financing instruments with a view to facilitating

corporate financing should be implemented only when the following conditions

are met.

a) A significant decline in market functioning of corporate financing instruments

is observed in, for example, a significant rise in interest rates regardless of

issuing firm's conditions or in fewer transactions, leading to tight corporate

financing conditions on the whole.

b) The Bank's outright purchases of corporate financing instruments as an

exceptional measure, taking full account of the factors below, are judged

necessary to improve the situation in light of the Bank's mission.

**3. Factors to be considered in the implementation**

(1) Preventing the purchases from functioning as arbitrary funds allocation among

individual firms

   - In order to prevent the purchases from functioning as arbitrary funds allocation

among individual firms, the Bank will adopt an appropriate purchasing scheme

that may include conditions such as (1) purchasing from financial institutions that

are counterparties of the Bank instead of purchasing directly from issuers and (2)

purchasing by means of competitive auctions.

23


-----

(2) Conducting the purchases only for a term required and in an appropriate scale

   - The Bank will set either the date of the termination or the conditions for the

termination to ensure that purchases are conducted only for a term required.

   - The Bank will conduct purchases in an appropriate scale in order to avoid a

further decline in market functioning due to excessive reliance on the Bank's

purchases.

   - The Bank will adopt a purchasing scheme that will ensure purchases in an

appropriate scale and facilitate, when necessary, the smooth termination of

purchases by, for example, structuring the scheme in a way that the incentive to

sell the instrument to the Bank becomes smaller as the market recovers its

functioning.

(3) Ensuring the Bank's financial health

   - Given the higher risk of incurring losses compared to other monetary policy

measures, the Bank will properly manage credit risks arising from outright

purchases. Accordingly, the Bank will set certain conditions on financial

instruments to be purchased in terms of their creditworthiness and residual

maturities. The Bank will also set a limit on the total amount of purchases and

take measures to avoid concentration of credit risks in a specific firm.

   - In addition to the appropriate management of credit risks, the Bank will ensure its

financial health through appropriate disposal of losses and maintenance of

adequate capital in the process of settling Bank's account. The Bank will seek

the government's understandings for these principles.

24


-----

Attachment 2


**Outline of Outright Purchases of CP**

1. CP to be Purchased

CP and ABCP that are eligible as the Bank's collateral, a-1 rated, issued before or on the

auction date and with the residual maturity of up to 3 months.

2. Eligible Counterparties

Financial institutions that wish to be counterparties of this operation among those who are

already counterparties in the Bank's CP repo operations or those who are to borrow funds at

the Bank's Head Office in the Bank's Funds-Supplying Operations against Pooled

Collateral.

3. Method for Auctions

A multiple-price competitive auction in which a minimum yield equally applied to CP and

ABCP is set according to their residual maturity as below and counterparties bid the

non-negative yield spread from the minimum yield. Minimum yields are subject to

change.

(A residual maturity of up to 1 month)

The targeted uncollateralized overnight call rate plus 20 bps

(A residual maturity of more than 1 month and up to 3 months)

The targeted uncollateralized overnight call rate plus 30 bps

4. Amount to be Purchased

The outstanding amount of CP (including ABCP) purchased by the Bank shall not exceed 3

trillion yen.

25


-----

The outstanding amount of a single issuer's CP (including ABCP) purchased by the Bank

shall not exceed 100 billion yen. In addition, if the outstanding amount of a single issuer's

CP purchased by the Bank exceeds 25 percent of the "upper limit" (the highest

end-of-the-month figure for the CP issued by an issuer between July 2008 and December

2008), the CP would be excluded from the eligible list of CP until the outstanding amount

of the issuer's CP purchased by the Bank falls below the upper limit by redemptions.

5. Duration of Purchases

All outright purchases of CP will be conducted by March 31, 2009.

6. Schedule, etc.

10 purchases are scheduled and they will be offered on January 30, February 4, 10, 16, 20

and 25 and March 2, 6, 11 and 16. The schedule is subject to change.

The amount of each purchase is planned to be 300 billion yen.

26


-----

Attachment 3

January 22, 2009

Bank of Japan

**Statement on Monetary Policy**

1. At the Monetary Policy Meeting held today, the Policy Board of the Bank of Japan

decided, by a unanimous vote,[[Note]] to set the following guideline for money market

operations for the intermeeting period:

The Bank of Japan will encourage the uncollateralized overnight call rate

to remain at around 0.1 percent.

2. Exports have been decreasing substantially reflecting a slowdown in overseas

economies, and domestic demand has become weaker against the background of

declining corporate profits and the worsening employment and income situation in the

household sector. Financial conditions have become tighter. Under these

circumstances, economic conditions have been deteriorating significantly and are

likely to continue deteriorating for the time being. Meanwhile, CPI inflation

(excluding fresh food) has recently moderated reflecting the declines in the prices of

petroleum products and the stabilization of food prices, and will likely become

negative by this spring with increasing slackness in supply and demand conditions.

The Bank's baseline scenario through fiscal 2010 expects that, with the assumption of

medium- to long-term growth expectations and inflation expectations remaining

generally unchanged, the economy will, from the latter half of fiscal 2009, start

recovering and price declines will abate as global financial markets regain stability and

[Note] Voting for the action: Mr. M. Shirakawa, Mr. H. Yamaguchi, Mr. K. G. Nishimura, Ms. M.
Suda, Mr. A. Mizuno, Mr. T. Noda, Mr. S. Nakamura, and Mr. H. Kamezaki.
Voting against the action: None.

27


-----

overseas economies move out of their deceleration phase. Although this scenario

offers prospects for the economy to return to a sustainable growth path with price

stability in the latter half of the projection period, uncertainty is high.

3. Compared with the projections presented in the October 2008 _Outlook for Economic_

_Activity and Prices, growth prospects for fiscal 2008 and fiscal 2009 have shifted_

significantly downward and the growth rates are expected to be negative. In fiscal

2010, the growth rate is projected to recover to around 1.5 percent. Turning to prices,

the year-on-year rates of change in domestic corporate goods prices are expected to be

lower, notably for fiscal 2009, than the October projection. The year-on-year rates of

change in consumer prices (excluding fresh food) are also expected to be lower than the

October projection; recording a decline of around 1 percent in fiscal 2009 and

somewhat less in fiscal 2010.

4. With regard to risk factors, much depends on global financial conditions as well as

developments in overseas economies, and attention will need to be paid to the downside

risks posed to economic activity. In addition, there is a risk of a further weakening in

domestic private demand through a decline in firms' medium- to long-term growth

expectations, raising pressures for adjusting capital stock and employment. If

financial conditions should tighten further, pressures acting to depress economic

activity from the financial side may become more marked and an adverse feedback

loop between financial and economic activities may intensify. Turning to prices, there

is a possibility that the inflation rate will decline further if downside risks to economic

activity materialize or commodity prices fall. In this case, the risk of a decline in

medium- to long-term inflation expectations of firms and households warrants

attention.

5. Since last fall, the Bank, in addition to reductions in the policy interest rates, has been

conducting various measures to support Japan's economy from the financial side such

as the substantial provision of liquidity and implementation of measures to facilitate

corporate financing. Today, the Bank, among other policy decisions, outlined its

principles regarding outright purchases of corporate financing instruments, and decided

28


-----

on the specifics of outright purchases of CP as well as agreed to examine outright

purchases of corporate bonds (see Attachment 4). The Bank will continue to carefully

assess the future outlook for economic activity and prices, closely considering the

likelihood of its projections as well as risk factors, and to exert its utmost efforts as a

central bank to facilitate the return of Japan's economy to a sustainable growth path

with price stability.

29


-----

Appendix 1

**Forecasts of the Majority of Policy Board Members**
y/y % chg.

Real GDP Domestic CGPI CPI (excluding fresh food)

-2.0 to -1.7 +3.0 to +3.2 +1.1 to +1.2
Fiscal 2008

[-1.8] [+3.1] [+1.2]

Forecasts made in +0.1 to +0.2 +4.3 to +4.8 +1.5 to +1.6
October 2008 [+0.1] [+4.6] [+1.6]

-2.5 to -1.9 -7.0 to -6.0 -1.2 to -0.9
Fiscal 2009

[-2.0] [-6.4] [-1.1]

Forecasts made in +0.3 to +0.7 -1.4 to -0.4 -0.2 to +0.2
October 2008 [+0.6] [-0.8] [0.0]

+1.3 to +1.8 -1.5 to -0.8 -0.6 to 0.0
Fiscal 2010

[+1.5] [-0.9] [-0.4]

Forecasts made in +1.5 to +1.9 -0.3 to +0.5 +0.1 to +0.5
October 2008 [+1.7] [+0.3] [+0.3]

Notes: 1. Figures in brackets indicate forecast medians.

2. The forecasts of the majority of Policy Board members are constructed as follows: each
Policy Board member's forecast takes the form of a point estimate, namely the figure to
which he or she attaches the highest probability of realization. These forecasts are
then shown as a range, with the highest and lowest figures excluded. It should be
noted that the range does not indicate the forecast errors.

3. Individual Policy Board members make the above forecasts with reference to the view
of market participants regarding the future course of the policy interest rate -- a view
that is incorporated in market interest rates.

4. The forecasts of all Policy Board members may be summarized as follows.
y/y % chg.

Real GDP Domestic CGPI CPI (excluding fresh food)

Fiscal 2008 -2.0 to -1.6 +2.8 to +3.2 +1.0 to +1.2

Forecasts made in
-0.4 to +0.3 +4.0 to +4.8 +1.5 to +1.7
October 2008

Fiscal 2009 -2.8 to -1.8 -7.0 to -5.0 -1.3 to -0.8

Forecasts made in
+0.3 to +0.8 -1.5 to -0.2 -0.3 to +0.3
October 2008

Fiscal 2010 +1.2 to +2.0 -1.8 to -0.5 -0.7 to 0.0

Forecasts made in
+1.3 to +2.0 -0.3 to +0.6 -0.1 to +0.5
October 2008

30

|Col1|Col2|Col3|Col4|y/y % chg|
|---|---|---|---|---|
|||Real GDP|Domestic CGPI|CPI (excluding fresh food)|
|Fiscal 2008 Forecasts made in October 2008||-2.0 to -1.7 [-1.8]|+3.0 to +3.2 [+3.1]|+1.1 to +1.2 [+1.2]|
||Forecasts made in October 2008|+0.1 to +0.2 [+0.1]|+4.3 to +4.8 [+4.6]|+1.5 to +1.6 [+1.6]|
|Fiscal 2009 Forecasts made in October 2008||-2.5 to -1.9 [-2.0]|-7.0 to -6.0 [-6.4]|-1.2 to -0.9 [-1.1]|
||Forecasts made in October 2008|+0.3 to +0.7 [+0.6]|-1.4 to -0.4 [-0.8]|-0.2 to +0.2 [0.0]|
|Fiscal 2010 Forecasts made in October 2008||+1.3 to +1.8 [+1.5]|-1.5 to -0.8 [-0.9]|-0.6 to 0.0 [-0.4]|
||Forecasts made in October 2008|+1.5 to +1.9 [+1.7]|-0.3 to +0.5 [+0.3]|+0.1 to +0.5 [+0.3]|

|Col1|Col2|Col3|Col4|y/y % chg|
|---|---|---|---|---|
|||Real GDP|Domestic CGPI|CPI (excluding fresh food)|
|Fiscal 2008 Forecasts made in October 2008||-2.0 to -1.6|+2.8 to +3.2|+1.0 to +1.2|
||Forecasts made in October 2008|-0.4 to +0.3|+4.0 to +4.8|+1.5 to +1.7|
|Fiscal 2009 Forecasts made in October 2008||-2.8 to -1.8|-7.0 to -5.0|-1.3 to -0.8|
||Forecasts made in October 2008|+0.3 to +0.8|-1.5 to -0.2|-0.3 to +0.3|
|Fiscal 2010 Forecasts made in October 2008||+1.2 to +2.0|-1.8 to -0.5|-0.7 to 0.0|
||Forecasts made in October 2008|+1.3 to +2.0|-0.3 to +0.6|-0.1 to +0.5|


-----

Appendix 2


**Risk Balance Charts**

(1) Real GDP (2) CPI (Excluding Fresh Food)
FY2008 FY2008

50 30


45

40

35

30

25

20

15

10

5

0


25

20


15

10

|0 5 0 5 0 5 0 5 0 5|Col2|3 2 2 1 1|
|---|---|---|


50

45

40

35

30

25

20

15

10

5

0


5

0

FY2009 FY2009

30


25

20


15

10

|0 5 0 5 0 5 0 5 0 5|Col2|3 2 2 1 1|
|---|---|---|


50

45

40

35

30

25

20

15

10

5

0


5

0

Notes: 1. Vertical axes in the charts represent probability (%), while horizontal axes represent the year-on-year percentage
changes in the respective indicators. Bar charts represent the probability distributions in January 2009, and
solid lines represent those in October 2008.
2. Vertical dashed heavy lines indicate the median of the Policy Board members' forecasts (point estimates).
indicates the range of the forecasts of the majority of Policy Board members.          indicates
the range of the forecasts of all Policy Board members.
3. Vertical dashed thin lines indicate the median of the Policy Board members' forecasts (point estimates) in October 2008.
4. For the process of compilation of the Risk Balance Charts, see the box on page 9 of the April 2008 Outlook for
_Economic Activity and Prices ._


5

0

FY2010 FY2010

30


25

20


15

10

|5 0 5 0 5 0 5 0 5|Col2|2 2 1 1|
|---|---|---|


31


-----

Attachment 4

**Policy Decisions**

1. Basic principles regarding outright purchases of corporate financing instruments (see

Document 1)

2. Outright purchases of CP (see documents 1 and 2)

3. Examination of outright purchases of corporate bonds with a residual maturity of up to

one year (see Document 1)

4. Acceptance of debt instruments issued by real estate investment corporations as eligible

collateral (see Document 3)

5. Expansion in the range of Japanese government bonds accepted in outright purchases

and introduction of purchases from specific brackets classified by bond type and

residual maturity (see documents 4 and 5)

Document 1: Outright Purchases of Corporate Financing Instruments

Document 2: Establishment of "Principal Terms and Conditions for Outright Purchases of CP"

Document 3: Amendments to "Guidelines on Eligible Collateral"

Document 4: Outline of Outright Purchases of Japanese Government Bonds

Document 5: Amendments to "Principal Terms and Conditions for the Outright Purchase/Sale

of Japanese Government Bonds"

32


-----

Attachment 5

January 22, 2009

Bank of Japan

**Scheduled Dates of Monetary Policy Meetings in January-December 2009**

**Revised**

Dates underlined are revised dates (those crossed-out are previously released on December 19, 2008).


(Reference)
Publication of
Monthly Report


Publication of
Date of MPM
MPM Minutes


Publication of
Outlook Report
(The Bank's View)


Jan. 2009 21 (Wed.), 22 (Thur.) Feb. 24 (Tue.) -- 23 (Fri.)


Feb. 18 (Wed.), 19 (Thur.) Mar. 24 (Tue.)

Mar. 23 (Mon.)


-- 20 (Fri.)


Mar. 17 (Tue.), 18 (Wed.)

16 (Mon.), 17 (Tue.)


Apr. 10 (Fri.) -- 19 (Thur.)

18 (Wed.)


Apr. 6 (Mon.), 7 (Tue.) May 8 (Fri.) -- 8 (Wed.)

30 (Thur.) May 27 (Wed.) 30 (Thur.) -
May 21 (Thur.), 22 (Fri.) June 19 (Fri.) -- 25 (Mon.)

June 15 (Mon.), 16 (Tue.) July 21 (Tue.) -- 17 (Wed.)

July 14 (Tue.), 15 (Wed.) Aug. 14 (Fri.) -- 16 (Thur.)

Aug. 10 (Mon.), 11 (Tue.) Sep. 25 (Fri.) -- 12 (Wed.)

Sep. 16 (Wed.), 17 (Thur.) Oct. 19 (Mon.) -- 18 (Fri.)

Oct. 13 (Tue.), 14 (Wed.) Nov. 5 (Thur.) -- 15 (Thur.)

30 (Fri.) Nov. 26 (Thur.) 30 (Fri.) -
Nov. 19 (Thur.), 20 (Fri.) Dec. 24 (Thur.) -- 24 (Tue.)

Dec. 17 (Thur.), 18 (Fri.) To be announced -- 21 (Mon.)

Note: The time of release will be, in principle, as follows.

MPM Minutes will be released at 8:50 a.m.

_Outlook for Economic Activity and Prices (Outlook Report):_

"The Bank's View" in the Outlook Report will be released at 3:00 p.m., and the full text at 2:00 p.m.

on the next business day.

_Monthly Report of Recent Economic and Financial Developments (Monthly Report):_

The Japanese original and the English translation for summary will be released at 2:00 p.m.

(the English translation for the full text will be published at 4:30 p.m. on the next business day).

33


-----

