Not to be released until 8:50 a.m.
Japan Standard Time on Friday,
January 29, 2010.

January 29, 2010

Bank of Japan

# Minutes of the Monetary Policy Meeting
## on December 1, 2009

(English translation prepared by the Bank's staff based on the Japanese original)


-----

Please contact the Bank of Japan at the address below in advance to request permission

when reproducing or copying the content of this document for commercial purposes.

Secretariat of the Policy Board, Bank of Japan

P.O. Box 30, Nihonbashi, Tokyo 103-8660, Japan

Please credit the source when quoting, reproducing, or copying the content of this

document.


-----

A Monetary Policy Meeting of the Bank of Japan Policy Board was held in the

Head Office of the Bank of Japan in Tokyo on Tuesday, December 1, 2009, from 2:00 p.m.

to 3:33 p.m.[1]

**Policy Board Members Present[2]**

**Mr. M. Shirakawa, Chairman, Governor of the Bank of Japan**

**Mr. H. Yamaguchi, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Japan**

**Mr. K. G. Nishimura, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Japan**

**Ms. M. Suda**

**Mr. A. Mizuno**

**Mr. S. Nakamura**

**Mr. H. Kamezaki**

Government Representatives Present

Mr. S. Kagawa, Deputy Vice Minister for Policy Planning and Coordination, Ministry

of Finance

Mr. K. Umetani, Deputy Director-General, Economic and Fiscal Management, Cabinet

Office

Reporting Staff

Mr. A. Horii, Executive Director (Assistant Governor)

Mr. K. Ido, Executive Director

Mr. H. Nakaso, Executive Director

Mr. M. Amamiya, Director-General, Monetary Affairs Department

Mr. N. Yoshioka, Deputy Director-General, Monetary Affairs Department

Mr. T. Kato, Associate Director-General, Monetary Affairs Department

1 The minutes of this meeting were approved by the Policy Board at the Monetary Policy Meeting
held on January 25 and 26, 2010 as "a document describing an outline of the discussion at the
meeting" stipulated in Article 20, paragraph 1 of the Bank of Japan Act of 1997. Those present are
referred to by their titles at the time of the meeting.
2 An absent member of the Policy Board, Mr. T. Noda, submitted via the chairman his written
opinion on matters related to the meeting's agenda, in accordance with Article 5, paragraph 2 of the
Rules concerning Policy Board Meetings.

1


-----

Mr. H. Toyama, Director-General, Financial Markets Department

Mr. K. Momma, Director-General, Research and Statistics Department

Mr. T. Sekine, Associate Director-General, Research and Statistics Department

Mr. H. Ono, Director-General, International Department

Secretariat of the Monetary Policy Meeting

Mr. Y. Iino, Director-General, Secretariat of the Policy Board

Mr. T. Tachibana, Director, Deputy Head of Secretarial Services for the Board,

Secretariat of the Policy Board

Mr. T. Sakamoto, Associate Director-General, Monetary Affairs Department

Mr. A. Okuno, Senior Economist, Monetary Affairs Department

Mr. M. Nakashima, Senior Economist, Monetary Affairs Department

2


-----

**I. Remarks on the Purpose of the Unscheduled Monetary Policy Meeting**

The chairman first provided the following explanation for calling an unscheduled

Monetary Policy Meeting.

(1) There seemed to be an increased risk that recent international financial developments

and foreign exchange market instability might adversely affect economic activity

through an impact on such factors as business sentiment.

(2) Given this situation, the chairman decided to call an unscheduled Monetary Policy

Meeting, in accordance with Article 17, paragraph 3 of the Bank of Japan Act, to

receive the staff's report on recent developments in financial markets and consider how

money market operations should be implemented.

**II. Summary of Staff Reports on Recent Financial Market Developments**

Some instability had recently been observed in global financial markets.

European stock prices had declined substantially due to the effects of Dubai's debt crisis,

and currency values and stock prices had fallen significantly in some emerging economies.

In foreign exchange markets, the yen had strengthened further since the occurrence of

Dubai's debt crisis.

Partly due to these developments in global financial markets, Japanese stock prices,

particularly of firms in export-related manufacturing industries such as electrical machinery

and automobiles, continued to decline. There were growing concerns among market

participants about possible deterioration in business sentiment reflecting the instability in

financial markets.

**III. Staff Proposal of Introduction of a New Funds-Supplying Operation**

With a view to further spreading the effects of monetary easing and encouraging a

decline in longer-term interest rates in the money market, the staff proposed that the Bank

introduce a new funds-supplying operation whereby funds would be provided at a fixed rate

against pooled collateral. In this new operation, conditions such as eligible counterparties,

the form of loans, and eligible collateral would be the same as in the existing

funds-supplying operation against pooled collateral -- whereby the interest rates to be

applied were determined by a multiple-rate competitive auction -- and funds with a term of

three months would be provided at a fixed interest rate equivalent to the target for the

3


-----

uncollateralized overnight call rate. This new operation, should it be introduced, would

for the time being provide funds amounting to 800 billion yen once a week, with the amount

outstanding of funds provided to reach approximately 10 trillion yen.

**IV. Summary of Discussions by the Policy Board**

**A. Discussions on the Staff Proposal**

Members discussed recent developments in financial markets and their impact on

economic activity. Many members expressed the view that, while Japan's economy was

picking up, the pace of economic improvement was likely to remain moderate until around

the middle of fiscal 2010. These members continued that, in this situation, there was an

increased risk that recent international financial developments and foreign exchange market

instability might adversely affect economic activity through an impact on such factors as

business sentiment. One member expressed the concern that the recent widespread

discussions about deflation might have negative effects on household and business

confidence and in turn could intensify the downward pressure on economic activity.

Based on these observations, members shared the view that the Bank should

implement an additional monetary policy measure to provide support for Japan's economy

to overcome deflation and return to a sustainable growth path with price stability. Many

members said that, specifically, given that the overnight call rate had been virtually at 0

percent, encouraging a further decline in interest rates on term instruments in the money

market would be most effective in further supporting the economic recovery from the

financial side. Some members said that, to this end, the new funds-supplying operation

proposed by the staff -- whereby funds with a term of three months would be provided at an

extremely low interest rate -- could be introduced to further spread the strong effects of

monetary easing. One member expressed the opinion that, in addition to the new

funds-supplying operation's potential effect of encouraging a decline in interest rates on

term instruments, clearly presenting the Bank's stance of enhancing easy monetary

conditions in response to the increased downside risks to economic activity might have its

own effect of alleviating economic entities' anxiety. A different member, referring to the

fact that the government had been formulating an economic policy package, commented

that the implementation of an additional measure by the Bank would be effective, together

with the government's efforts, in bolstering business and household confidence.

4


-----

Based on the above discussion, members agreed that, in supporting the economic

recovery from the financial side, it was most effective at present to further spread the strong

effects of monetary easing and encourage a further decline in longer-term interest rates in

the money market through provision of ample longer-term funds at an extremely low

interest rate, by introducing the new funds-supplying operation, whereby funds would be

provided at a fixed rate. One member commented that the Bank should take measures that

would be most appropriate on each occasion, in view of the degree of likelihood that its

baseline scenario for economic activity and prices would be realized, as well as factors

posing upside or downside risks.

Members discussed issues that should be duly taken into account in the Bank's

communication to the public when introducing the new operation. Many members noted

that some market participants were speculating that the Bank might introduce a quantitative

easing policy. On this point, many members, referring to the fact that the Bank had

already made clear its stance of fully satisfying financial institutions' liquidity demands,

expressed the opinion that the Bank should clearly show to the market that it was

determined to continue providing ample funds, by making use of various tools including the

new operation. These members said that the Bank should present this stance in a manner

that would not cause any misunderstanding. One member said it was necessary, in the

Bank's communication to the public, to make clear the intention of the new operation of

encouraging a decline in interest rates on term instruments, and to avoid the

misunderstanding that the new operation was a measure targeting a specific quantitative

indicator. A different member expressed the view that, in a broad sense, the term

quantitative easing could be applied to a policy that provided a massive amount of funds to

meet demand from the market and created a situation in which the amount of funds

provided by the Bank did not constrain financial institutions' activity.

**B. Discussions on Monetary Policy for the Immediate Future**

Regarding the guideline for money market operations until the next meeting to be

held on December 17 and 18, members agreed that it was appropriate to maintain the

current guideline that the Bank would encourage the uncollateralized overnight call rate to

remain at around 0.1 percent.

5


-----

**V. Remarks by Government Representatives**

The representative from the Ministry of Finance made the following remarks.

(1) The government welcomed the measure proposed at this meeting as an appropriate and

swift response to recent changes in economic conditions, to be made in parallel with the

formulation of an economic policy package by the government.

(2) The government expected the Bank to continue to support the economy from the

financial side by conducting monetary policy in an appropriate and flexible manner,

while working together with the government.

The representative from the Cabinet Office made the following remarks.

(1) The Japanese economy was in a mild deflationary phase, and recent volatile movements

in currency markets might exert a detrimental influence on trends toward economic

recovery. The government approved today the formulation of a new economic policy

package, while closely monitoring movements in the currency markets. It anticipated

that the Bank would support the economy from the financial side, in a manner

consistent with the government's efforts.

(2) The government considered the Bank's introduction of a new funds-supplying operation

as an important measure to support the economy. It expected the Bank to continue to

conduct monetary policy in an appropriate and flexible manner, while working together

with the government, in order to facilitate the return of the Japanese economy to a

sustainable growth path with price stability.

**VI. Votes**

**A. Vote on the Guideline for Money Market Operations**

To reflect the view of members, the chairman formulated the following proposal

and put it to a vote.

**The Chairman's Policy Proposal on the Guideline for Money Market Operations:**

1. The guideline for money market operations for the intermeeting period ahead will be as

follows, effective immediately from the announcement of the decision.

6


-----

The Bank of Japan will encourage the uncollateralized overnight call rate

to remain at around 0.1 percent.

2. A public statement will be decided separately.

Votes for the proposal: Mr. M. Shirakawa, Mr. H. Yamaguchi, Mr. K. G. Nishimura,

Ms. M. Suda, Mr. A. Mizuno, Mr. S. Nakamura, and Mr. H. Kamezaki.

Votes against the proposal: None.

Absent: Mr. T. Noda.

**B. Vote on the Amendment to Principal Terms and Conditions for Funds-Supplying**

**Operations against Pooled Collateral**

Members voted unanimously to approve the staff proposal and agreed that the

decision should be made public.

**VII. Discussion on the Public Statement Entitled Enhancement of Easy Monetary**

**Conditions**

Members discussed the statement Enhancement of Easy Monetary Conditions, and

put it to a vote. The Policy Board decided the text by a unanimous vote. It was

confirmed that the statement would be released immediately after the meeting (see

Attachment).

**VIII. Timing for Approval of the Minutes of the Monetary Policy Meeting**

Taking into account practical constraints, the minutes of this meeting would be

approved at and released after the Monetary Policy Meeting to be held on January 25 and

26, 2010.

7


-----

Attachment

December 1, 2009

Bank of Japan

**Enhancement of Easy Monetary Conditions**

1. At the unscheduled Monetary Policy Meeting held today, the Policy Board of the Bank

of Japan decided to further enhance easy monetary conditions by introducing a new

funds-supplying operation to encourage a further decline in longer-term interest rates.

2. While Japan's economy is picking up, there is not yet sufficient momentum to support

self-sustaining recovery in business fixed investment and private consumption. As for

the outlook, the pace of economic improvement is likely to remain moderate until

around the middle of fiscal 2010. On the price front, downward pressures on prices

are expected to remain even after the year-on-year decline in the CPI (excluding fresh

food) becomes fairly moderate toward the beginning of next year. On the financial

front, corporate finance, with some lingering severity, has continued to show signs of

improvement. However, there is a risk that recent international financial

developments and foreign exchange market instability might pose adverse effects on

economic activity through impacts on business sentiment and others, and this warrants

attention.

3. The Bank has judged that, in supporting the economic recovery from the financial side,

it is most effective at present to further spread the strong effects of monetary easing and

encourage a further decline in longer-term interest rates in the money market through

provision of ample longer-term funds at an extremely low interest rate. Therefore, the

8


-----

Policy Board of the Bank of Japan decided, by a unanimous vote,[3] to introduce a new

funds-supplying operation as follows.

a. Loan rate: Fixed interest rate (the target for the uncollateralized overnight call rate:

0.1 percent).

b. Duration: Three months.

c. Collateral: Any eligible collateral for the Bank's funds-supplying operations, such

as Japanese government securities, corporate bonds, CP, and loans on

deeds (pooled collateral).

4. The Policy Board of the Bank of Japan decided, by a unanimous vote,[4] to set the

following guideline for money market operations for the intermeeting period:

The Bank of Japan will encourage the uncollateralized overnight call rate

to remain at around 0.1 percent.

5. The Bank believes that the decision made today, together with the government's efforts,

will firmly support Japan's economic developments toward recovery.

6. The Bank recognizes that it is a critical challenge for Japan's economy to overcome

deflation and return to a sustainable growth path with price stability. To this end, the

Bank will continue to do its utmost as central bank.

3 Voting for the action: Mr. M. Shirakawa, Mr. H. Yamaguchi, Mr. K. G. Nishimura, Ms. M. Suda,
Mr. A. Mizuno, Mr. S. Nakamura, and Mr. H. Kamezaki.
Voting against the action: None.
Absent: Mr. T. Noda.
4 Voting for the action: Mr. M. Shirakawa, Mr. H. Yamaguchi, Mr. K. G. Nishimura, Ms. M. Suda,
Mr. A. Mizuno, Mr. S. Nakamura, and Mr. H. Kamezaki.
Voting against the action: None.
Absent: Mr. T. Noda.

9


-----

