# Minutes of the 225th Meeting of the  Monetary Policy Committee (Copom*) Banco Central do Brasil**

### September 17-18, 2019

#### * The Monetary Policy Committee of the Banco Central do Brasil is herein referred to as the “Copom” and the “Committee”.

 ** These minutes represent Copom's best effort to provide an English version of the minutes of its policy meeting. In case of any inconsistency, the original version in Portuguese prevails.


-----

**Date: September 17-18, 2019**

**Place:** BCB Headquarters’ meeting rooms on the 8[th] floor (September 17) and 20[th] floor (September 18) – Brasilia –
DF – Brazil
**Starting and ending times:** September 17 10:06 AM – 12:42 PM; 2:36 PM – 6:43 PM

September 18 2:00 PM – 6:06 PM

**In attendance:**
**Members of the Copom**
Roberto Oliveira Campos Neto – Governor
Bruno Serra Fernandes
Carlos Viana de Carvalho
Carolina de Assis Barros
Fernanda Feitosa Nechio
João Manoel Pinho de Mello
Maurício Costa de Moura
Otávio Ribeiro Damaso
Paulo Sérgio Neves de Souza

**Department Heads in charge of technical presentations (present on September 17)**
Alan da Silva Andrade Mendes - Department of Foreign Reserves
André Minella - Research Department (also present on September 18)
André de Oliveira Amante – Department of Open Market Operations
Flávio Túlio Vilela – Department of Banking Operations and Payments System
João Barata Ribeiro Blanco Barroso – Department of International Affairs
Tulio José Lenti Maciel – Department of Economics

**Other participants (present on September 17)**
Adalberto Felinto da Cruz Júnior – Executive Secretary
Carlos Eduardo de Almeida - Senior Advisor at the Deputy Governor for Licensing and Resolution’s Office
Eduardo José Araújo Lima – Head of the Deputy Governor for Economic Policy’s Office
Enrico Bezerra Ximenes de Vasconcelos – Secretary of the Financial Stability Committee and Advisor to the Board
Fabia Aparecida de Carvalho – Deputy Head of the Research Department
Fabio Araujo – Head of the Economic Advisors’ Office
Fernando Alberto Sampaio Rocha – Head of the Department of Statistics
Gilneu Francisco Astolfi Vivan – Head of the Financial System Monitoring Department
Leonardo Martins Nogueira – Head of the Governor’s Office
Márcio Antônio Estrela – Head of the Deputy Governor for International Affairs and Corporate Risk Management’s
Office
Mauro Zanatta – Press Officer
Paulo Marcelo Cavalcanti Muniz - Head of the Deputy Governor for Regulation’s Office
Ricardo Franco Moura - Head of the Prudential and Foreign Exchange Regulation Department
Rogério Antônio Lucca – Head of the Deputy Governor for Monetary Policy’s Office
Sílvio Michael de Azevedo Costa - Deputy Head of the Department of International Affairs

The members of Copom analyzed the recent performance and prospects for the Brazilian and international
economies, under the monetary policy framework, whose objective is to comply with the inflation targets established
by the National Monetary Council.


-----

### A) Update of Economic Outlook and Copom’s B) Risks Around the Baseline Inflation Baseline Scenario[1] Scenario

9. The Copom’s baseline scenario for inflation encompasses

1. Data on economic activity since the previous Copom

risk factors in both directions.

meeting suggest resumption of the process of economic
recovery. Copom's baseline scenario assumes that this
recovery will occur at a gradual pace. 10. On the one hand, (i) the high level of economic slack may

continue to produce a lower-than-expected prospective
inflation trajectory.

2. The economy continues to operate with a high level of
economic slack, as reflected in the low industrial capacity
utilization indexes and, mainly, in the unemployment rate. 11. On the other hand, (ii) a possible frustration regarding the

continuation of reforms and the perseverance in the
necessary adjustments in the Brazilian economy may affect

3. Regarding the global outlook, the provision of additional

risk premia and increase the path for inflation over the

monetary stimulus in major economies, in a context of

relevant horizon for the conduct of monetary policy. Risk (ii)

economic slowdown and below-target inflation, has been

intensifies in case (iii) the outlook for emerging economies

able to generate a relatively favorable environment for

deteriorates.

emerging economies. The outlook remains uncertain,
however, and risks of a more pronounced slowdown in global
growth persist.

4. Various measures of underlying inflation are running at **C) Discussion About the Conduct of Monetary**
comfortable levels. This includes the components that are **Policy**
most sensitive to the business cycle and monetary policy.

12. Copom members discussed the evolution of economic

5. Inflation expectations for 2019, 2020, 2021, and 2022

activity in light of available information and indicators. They

collected by the Focus survey are around 3.5%, 3.8%, 3.75%,

concluded that the data released since their previous meeting

and 3.5%, respectively.

suggest recovery of the Brazilian economic resumption
process. After higher-than-expected growth in the second

6. The Copom's inflation projections in the scenario with

quarter, the Committee expects Gross Domestic Product

interest rate and exchange rate paths extracted from the

(GDP) to grow slightly in the third quarter. Subsequent

Focus survey stand around 3.3% for 2019 and 3.6% for 2020.

quarters should show some acceleration, which should be

This scenario assumes, among other assumptions, a path for

reinforced by the stimuli resulting from the release of FGTS

the Selic rate that ends 2019 at 5.00% p.a. and remains at that

and PIS-PASEP resources – impacting the last quarter of 2019,

level until the end of 2020. It also assumes a path for the

in particular. Copom’s baseline inflation scenario assumes

exchange rate that ends 2019 at R$3.90/US$, and remains at

that the pace of underlying economic activity – which

that level until the end of 2020. In this scenario, inflation

excludes the effects of temporary stimuli – will be gradual.

projections for administered prices are 3.5% for 2019, and
4.5% for 2020.

13. Copom members also evaluated the evolution of financial
conditions indicators. They concluded that these conditions

7. In the scenario with a constant Selic rate at 6.00% p.a., and

remained at favorable levels, despite some volatility since the

a constant exchange rate at R$4.05/US$[2], Copom’s inflation

previous Copom meeting, as a result of developments in

projections stand around 3.4% for 2019, and 3.6% for 2020.

international markets and of temporary impacts of the crisis

In this scenario, inflation projections for administered prices

in Argentina. The environment with favorable financial

are 3.6% for 2019, and 4.6% for 2020.

conditions results from the increase in the degree of
monetary stimulus, the relatively favorable external

8. In the scenario with the interest rate path from the Focus environment for emerging economies and the prospects for
survey and a constant exchange rate at R$4.05/US$, Copom’s improving the fundamentals of the Brazilian economy, as a
inflation projections stand around 3.4% for 2019, and 3.8% result of the reform agenda. This easing of financial
for 2020. In this scenario, inflation projections for conditions has been more clearly reflected in the dynamics of
administered prices are 3.6% for 2019, and 4.6% for 2020. credit and capital markets.

1 Unless explicitly stated otherwise, this update takes into account 2 Value obtained according to the usual procedure of rounding the
changes occurred since the July Copom meeting (224[th] meeting). average R$/US$ exchange rate observed during the five business days

ending on the Friday prior to the Copom meeting.


-----

14. Copom members also discussed factors that could affect is true for the scenario with interest rate and exchange rate
economic activity, in the context of the deep adjustments paths extracted from the Focus survey. In this scenario, the
that the Brazilian economy requires, notably those of fiscal conditioning factors have opposite effects on inflation for
nature. In a context of limited fiscal space, they emphasized 2020. On the one hand, additional monetary stimulus from
the importance of the continuation of the process of reforms lower interest rates contributes to increasing inflation over
and adjustments that contribute to the sustainability of fiscal the relevant horizon. On the other hand, the scenario
policy. By reducing fundamental uncertainties about the considers exchange rate appreciation in the short run, which
Brazilian economy, these reforms tend to stimulate private constitutes a vector in the opposite direction. The effects of
investment. This potential expansionary effect should the aforementioned currency appreciation become clear in
counterbalance the impact of current fiscal adjustments on the hybrid scenario with interest rate path from the Focus
economic activity, as well as mitigate the risk of episodes of survey and an agnostic hypothesis of constant exchange rate,
large increase in risk premia. which projects inflation slightly below target in 2020.

Conditional projections for 2020 inflation in the various

15. The Copom stressed the understanding that an scenarios are also affected by the propagation of lower
acceleration of the pace of economic recovery to more robust current inflation.
levels will also depend on other initiatives aimed at
productivity increases, efficiency gains, greater flexibility of 18. Committee members then discussed the evolution, since
the economy, and improvements in the business their previous meeting, of the factors highlighted in their

environment. These efforts are fundamental for the balance of risks around the baseline inflation scenario. All
resumption of economic activity and development of the members emphasized the importance of continuing the
Brazilian economy. Initiatives in the structural agenda of the reform agenda and persevering in the required adjustments
Banco Central do Brasil (BC# Agenda) contribute to this in the Brazilian economy. They also assessed that while the
process. external scenario remained relatively favorable for the

conduct of monetary policy in emerging economies, the risk

16. Regarding the global outlook, Committee members of adverse scenarios for risky assets appears to have
deemed the scenario relatively favorable for emerging intensified.
economies. On the one hand, central banks of several
economies – some major economies included – have 19. Copom members assessed that economic conditions with
provided additional monetary stimuli, which contribute to anchored inflation expectations, underlying inflation
easing global financial conditions. On the other hand, the measures at comfortable levels, scenarios with 2020 inflation
Copom judges that the risks associated with a slowing global projected below or slightly below target, and high level of
economy remain and that economic policy and geopolitical slack in the economy prescribe stimulative monetary policy,
uncertainties – notably trade disputes and geopolitical i.e., interest rates below the structural interest rate level. The
tensions – may contribute to even lower global growth. Committee members expressed the view that the current
Uncertainties in the external scenario imply risks to assets level of _ex-ante real interest rates provides stimulus to the_
whose pricing hinge heavily on a scenario with low global economy.
interest rates and the maintenance of the recent pace of
economic growth. In this context, the Copom members once 20. The structural interest rate is a reference for the conduct
again highlighted the capability of the Brazilian economy to of monetary policy. When this policy yields a real (ex-ante)
withstand a setback in the international scenario, given its interest rate below the structural rate, it provides stimulus for
robust balance of payments, anchored inflation expectations, economic activity and contributes to an increase in inflation.
and prospects of continuing structural reforms and of As the structural rate is not observable and economic activity
economic recovery. and inflation depend on several other factors, estimates of

this rate involve a high degree of uncertainty and are

17. The Committee members discussed recent inflation continually reassessed by the Committee. At each meeting,
projections and the levels of various measures of underlying the Copom assesses whether the Selic rate is at an
inflation. The latter measures are deemed to be at appropriate level, considering all factors that affect the
comfortable levels. Short-term projections indicate that 12- evolution of inflation projections and expectations, the
month inflation is expected to decline in the coming months balance of risks, and economic activity. Under the
and to revert, at the end of the year, to levels around those aforementioned circumstances, this implies evaluating
observed until August. This short-term trajectory reflects, whether the degree of monetary stimulus is adequate. It is
among other factors, the benign behavior of some volatile worth highlighting that the provision of monetary stimulus
inflation components and the dynamics of imported inflation, requires an environment with anchored inflation
whose upward drivers have been moderated by the path of expectations.
prices in foreign markets. In the relevant horizon for
monetary policy, scenarios with constant interest rates at 21. The Copom reiterates its view that the continuity of
6.00% p.a. result in inflation below the 2020 target. The same reforms and perseverance in the necessary adjustments in


-----

the Brazilian economy are essential for the reduction of its this agenda is fundamental for the consolidation of the
structural interest rate, for the full operation of monetary benign scenario for prospective inflation.
policy, and for sustainable economic recovery. The
Committee also stresses that the perception of continuation 27. In the Copom's assessment, the evolution of the baseline
of the reform agenda affects current expectations and scenario and of the balance of risks prescribes adjusting the
macroeconomic projections. In particular, the Committee degree of monetary stimulus, lowering the Selic rate by 0.50
judges that concrete progress in this agenda is fundamental percentage point. The Committee deems that the
for the consolidation of the benign scenario for prospective consolidation of the benign scenario for prospective inflation
inflation. should permit additional adjustment of the degree of

stimulus. The Copom reiterates that communicating this

22. The Committee members then discussed the monetary assessment does not constrain its next decision, and
policy decision, in light of the evolution of the baseline emphasizes that the next steps in the conduct of monetary
scenario and the balance of risks since its July meeting (224[th] policy will continue to depend on the evolution of economic
meeting). They unanimously decided to lower the Selic rate activity, the balance of risks, and on inflation projections and
to 5.50% p.a. expectations.

23. The Copom also discussed the advisability of providing 28. The following members of the Committee voted for this
some perspective on possible monetary policy scenarios. The decision: Roberto Oliveira Campos Neto (Governor), Bruno
Committee decided to express its assessment that the Serra Fernandes, Carlos Viana de Carvalho, Carolina de Assis
consolidation of the benign scenario for prospective inflation Barros, Fernanda Feitosa Nechio, João Manoel Pinho de
should permit additional adjustment of the degree of Mello, Maurício Costa de Moura, Otávio Ribeiro Damaso, and
stimulus. Given the decision to clarify conditionalities for the Paulo Sérgio Neves de Souza.
conduct of monetary policy, which best conveys the
economic rationality that guides its decisions, the Copom
deemed it essential to emphasize that the communication of
this assessment does not constrain its next decision, and to
reiterate that the next steps in the conduct of monetary
policy will continue to depend on in the evolution of
economic activity, the balance of risks, and inflation
projections and expectations.

## D) Monetary Policy Decision

24. Taking into account the baseline scenario, the balance of
risks, and the wide array of available information, the Copom
unanimously decided to lower the Selic rate to 5.50% p.a. The
Committee judges that this decision reflects its baseline
scenario for prospective inflation and the associated balance
of risks, and is consistent with convergence of inflation to
target over the relevant horizon for the conduct of monetary
policy, which includes 2020.

25. The Copom reiterates that economic conditions prescribe
stimulative monetary policy, i.e., interest rates below the
structural level.

26. The Copom sees progress in the process of reforms and
necessary adjustments in the Brazilian economy, but
emphasizes that persevering in this process is essential for the
reduction of its structural interest rate and for sustainable
economic recovery. The Committee also stresses that the
perception of continuation of the reform agenda affects
current expectations and macroeconomic projections. In
particular, the Committee judges that concrete progress in


-----

