# Minutes of the 224[th] Meeting of the  Monetary Policy Committee (Copom*) of Banco Central do Brasil**

### July 30-31, 2019 

#### * The Monetary Policy Committee of the Banco Central do Brasil is herein referred to as the “Copom” and the “Committee”.

 ** These minutes represent Copom's best effort to provide an English version of the minutes of its policy meeting. In case of any inconsistency, the original version in Portuguese prevails.


-----

**Date: July 30-31, 2019**

**Place:** BCB Headquarters’ meeting rooms on the 8[th] floor (July 30) and 20[th] floor (July 31) – Brasilia – DF
– Brazil
**Starting and ending times:** July 30: 09:05 AM – 12:57 PM; 5:04 PM – 7:44 PM

July 31: 2:00 PM – 6:10 PM

**In attendance:**
**Members of the Copom**
Roberto Oliveira Campos Neto – Governor
Bruno Serra Fernandes
Carlos Viana de Carvalho
Carolina de Assis Barros
Fernanda Feitosa Nechio
João Manoel Pinho de Mello
Maurício Costa de Moura
Otávio Ribeiro Damaso
Paulo Sérgio Neves de Souza

**Department Heads in charge of technical presentations (present on July 30)**
Alan da Silva Andrade Mendes - Department of Foreign Reserves
André Minella - Research Department (also present on July 31)
André de Oliveira Amante – Department of Open Market Operations
Flávio Túlio Vilela – Department of Banking Operations and Payments System
João Barata Ribeiro Blanco Barroso – Department of International Affairs
Tulio José Lenti Maciel – Department of Economics

**Other participants (present on July 30)**
Adalberto Felinto da Cruz Júnior – Executive Secretary
Eduardo José Araújo Lima – Head of the Deputy Governor for Economic Policy’s Office
Fabia Aparecida de Carvalho – Deputy Head of the Research Department
Fabio Araujo – Head of the Economic Advisors’ Office
Fernando Alberto Sampaio Rocha – Head of the Department of Statistics
Gilneu Francisco Astolfi Vivan – Head of the Financial System Monitoring Department
Leonardo Martins Nogueira – Head of the Governor’s Office
Márcio Antônio Estrela – Head of the Deputy Governor for International Affairs and Corporate Risk
Management’s Office
Mauro Zanatta – Press Officer
Ricardo Eyer Harris – Head of the Deputy Governor for Regulation’s Office
Ricardo Franco Moura - Head of the Prudential and Foreign Exchange Regulation Department
Rogério Antônio Lucca – Head of the Deputy Governor for Monetary Policy’s Office

The members of Copom analyzed the recent performance and prospects for the Brazilian and
international economies, under the monetary policy framework, whose objective is to comply with the
inflation targets established by the National Monetary Council.


-----

### A) Update of the Economic Outlook and B) Risks Around the Baseline Inflation Copom’s Baseline Scenario[1] Scenario

8. The Copom’s baseline scenario for inflation

1. Recent data on economic activity suggest a possible

encompasses risk factors in both directions.

resumption of the process of economic recovery.
Copom's baseline scenario assumes that this recovery
will occur at a gradual pace. 9. On the one hand, (i) the high level of economic slack

may continue to produce lower-than-expected
prospective inflation trajectory.

2. The economy continues to operate with a high level
of economic slack, as reflected in the low industrial
capacity utilization indexes and, mainly, in the 10. On the other hand, (ii) a possible frustration of
unemployment rate. expectations regarding the continuation of reforms

and necessary adjustments in the Brazilian economy
may affect risk premia and increase the path for

3. The global outlook has become benign, owing to

inflation over the relevant horizon for the conduct of

changes in monetary policy in major economies.

monetary policy. Risk (ii) intensifies in case of (iii)

Nevertheless, the risks associated with a slowdown in

reversal of the benign outlook for emerging

global growth remain.

economies.

4. Various measures of underlying inflation are running

11. The Committee acknowledges that the balance of

at comfortable levels. This includes the components

risks has evolved favorably, but risk (ii) still prevails.

that are most sensitive to the business cycle and
monetary policy.

5. Inflation expectations for 2019, 2020, 2021, and
2022 collected by the Focus survey are around 3.8%, **C) Discussion About the Conduct of**
3.9%, 3.75%, and 3.50%, respectively. **Monetary Policy**

6. The Copom's inflation projections in the scenario

12. Copom members discussed the evolution of

with interest rate and exchange rate paths extracted

economic activity in light of available information and

from the Focus survey stand around 3.6% for 2019 and

indicators. They concluded that the data suggest the

3.9% for 2020. This scenario assumes, among other

possibility of resumption of the process of economic

assumptions, a path for the Selic rate that ends 2019 at

recovery, which had been interrupted in recent

5.50% p.a. and remains at that level until the end of

quarters. The Committee estimates that Gross

2020. It also assumes a path for the exchange rate that

Domestic Product (GDP) should remain stable or show

ends 2019 at R$3.75/US$ and 2020 at R$3.80/US$. In

a small increase in the second quarter, with

this scenario, inflation projections for administered

some acceleration expected for subsequent quarters,

prices are 4.1% for 2019, and 4.6% for 2020.

which will likely be reinforced by the stimuli provided
by the release of FGTS and PIS-PASEP funds.

7. In the scenario with a constant Selic rate at 6.50%

Notwithstanding this expected acceleration, the

p.a., and a constant exchange rate at R$3.75/US$[2],

Copom’s baseline inflation scenario assumes that

conditional inflation projections for both 2019 and

the pace of the underlying growth of the economy

2020 stand around 3.6%. In this scenario, inflation

– that excludes the effects of temporary stimuli – will

projections for administered prices are 4.1% for 2019,

be gradual.

and 4.4% for 2020.

13. Committee members also assessed the evolution
of indicators of financial conditions and concluded that
there was significant easing in recent months. The
Committee attributes this movement basically to the
expectations of adjustment in the degree of monetary
policy accomodation, to the benign evolution of
financial conditions in global markets, and to the
prospects for improving the fundamentals of the
Brazilian economy. The latter, a result of the progress
in the agenda of reforms and necessary adjustments in
the economy. This easing has been reflected in both

1 Unless explicitly stated otherwise, this update takes into 2 Value obtained according to the usual procedure of rounding
account changes occurred since the June Copom meeting (223[rd] the average R$/US$ exchange rate observed during the five
meeting). business days ending on the Friday prior to the Copom meeting.


-----

asset prices and the dynamics of credit and capital calendar year 2020, the scenario with constant interest
markets. rates at 6.50% leads to below target inflation for 2020,

while the scenario with interest rate path extracted

14. Copom members also discussed factors that could from the Focus survey, which embodies additional
affect economic activity, in the context of the deep adjustment in the level of monetary stimuli, projects
adjustments that the Brazilian economy requires, inflation around target.
notably those of fiscal nature. They stressed that the
persistence of uncertainties regarding fiscal 18. Committee members then discussed the evolution,
sustainability tends to be contractionary. In particular, since their previous meeting, of the factors highlighted
these uncertainties affect investment decisions that in their balance of risks around the baseline inflation
involve a high degree of irreversibility and, therefore, scenario. All members agreed that the balance of risks
require greater predictability of future scenarios. In a has evolved favorably. In particular, they underlined the
context of limited fiscal space for public investment, importance of concrete progress in the process of
they emphasized the importance of the continuation of reforms and adjustments required by the Brazilian
the process of reforms and adjustments that economy, which are fundamental for maintaining the
contribute to the sustainability of fiscal policy. By benign environment for prospective inflation, with
reducing fundamental uncertainties about the Brazilian anchored expectations. The Committee considers that
economy, these reforms tend to stimulate private the risk of a possible frustration of expectations
investment. This potential expansionary effect should, regarding the continuation of reforms and necessary
to some extent, offset the impact of current fiscal adjustments in the Brazilian economy is still the main
adjustments on economic activity, as well as mitigate factor in its balance of risks.
the risk of episodes of large risk premium increases, as
witnessed in 2018. 19. Copom members assessed that economic

conditions with anchored inflation expectations,

15. The Copom stressed the understanding that an underlying inflation measures at comfortable levels,
acceleration of the pace of economic recovery to more 2020 inflation projected around or below target, and
robust levels will also depend on other initiatives aimed high level of slack in the economy prescribe stimulative
at productivity increases, efficiency gains, greater monetary policy, i.e., interest rates below the structural
flexibility of the economy, and improvements in the interest rate level. The Committee members expressed
business environment. These efforts are fundamental the view that the current level of ex-ante real interest
for the resumption of economic activity and rates provides stimulus to the economy.
development of the Brazilian economy. Initiatives in
the structural agenda of the Banco Central do Brasil – 20. The structural interest rate is a reference for the
BC# Agenda (formerly BC+ Agenda) – contribute to this conduct of monetary policy. When this policy yields a
process. real (ex-ante) interest rate below the structural rate, it

provides stimulus for economic activity and contributes

16. Regarding the global outlook, the Committee to an increase in inflation. As the structural rate is not
members considered that it evolved in a benign way. observable and economic activity and inflation depend
Central banks of several economies – some major on several other factors, estimates of this rate involve
economies included – have provided additional a high degree of uncertainty, and are continually
monetary stimuli, which contributed to easing global reassessed by the Committtee. At each meeting, the
financial conditions. Nonetheless, the Copom judges Copom assesses whether the Selic rate is at an
that the risks associated with a slowing global appropriate level, considering all factors that affect the
economy remain and that economic policy and evolution of inflation projections and expectations, the
geopolitical uncertainties – notably trade disputes and balance of risks, and economic activity. Under the
geopolitical tensions – may contribute to even lower aforementioned circumstances, this implies evaluating
global growth. Given the risks still present in the whether the degree of monetary stimulus is adequate.
external scenario, Copom members once again It is worth highlighting that the provision of monetary
highlighted the capability of the Brazilian economy to stimulus requires an environment with anchored
withstand a setback in the international scenario, given inflation expectations.
its robust balance of payments, anchored inflation
expectations, and prospects of continuation of 21. In Copom's view, the structural interest rate of the
structural reforms and of resumption of economic Brazilian economy embodies two components: risk-
growth. free structural rate and risk premium. Reforms and

other changes to the economic environment may affect

17. The Committee members discussed recent the structural rate in different ways, depending on
inflation projections and the levels of various measures their effects on these two components. The risk-free
of underlying inflation. The latter measures are component depends on the structural determinants of
deemed to be at comfortable levels. In the horizon consumption and savings, on the one hand, and
relevant to monetary policy, which includes the investments, on the other hand. Through this


-----

component, factors that persistently increase the rationality that guides its decisions, the Copom
willingness to invest push the economy's structural deemed it essential to emphasize that the
interest rate upward. However, these same factors may communication of this assessment does not constrain
contribute to the reduction of the structural rate by its next decision, and to reiterate that the next steps in
lowering its risk premium component, if they imply an the conduct of monetary policy will continue to depend
increase in the economy's growth potential and, on in the evolution of economic activity, the balance of
therefore, greater fiscal policy sustainability. risks, and inflation projections and expectations.

22. The Pension reform, by adapting retirement rules to **D) Monetary Policy Decision**
the country's demographic structure and dynamics,
slows the pace of government spending growth,

26. Taking into account the baseline scenario, the

increasing public savings. In addition, it generates

balance of risks, and the wide array of available

incentives for the population to increase its savings

information, the Copom unanimously decided to lower

rate to sustain a certain pattern of consumption after

the Selic rate to 6.00% p.a. The Committee judges that

retirement. Through these channels, the reform

this decision reflects its baseline scenario for

contributes to reducing the risk-free component of the

prospective inflation and the associated balance of

structural interest rate of the Brazilian economy.

risks, and is consistent with convergence of inflation to

Pension reform also reduces the risk premium

target over the relevant horizon for the conduct of

component of the structural rate, as the reform

monetary policy, which includes 2020.

improves the prospects for fiscal sustainability.
Additionally, the reform induces an increase in labor

27. The Copom reiterates that economic conditions

supply and tends to stimulate private investment by

prescribe stimulative monetary policy, i.e., interest

reducing uncertainties about fundamental aspects of

rates below the structural level.

the Brazilian economy. Taking into account only the last
two channels, the reform would tend to increase the
structural interest rate. Notwithstanding the 28. The Copom recognizes progress in the process of
complexity of the channels through which the Pension reforms and necessary adjustments in the Brazilian
reform may influence the structural interest rate of the economy, but emphasizes that the continuation of this
Brazilian economy, when only its net effect is process is essential for the reduction of its structural
considered, the Copom understands that the reform interest rate and for sustainable economic recovery.
contributes to the gradual decline of the structural The Committee also stresses that the perception of
interest rate of the economy. continuation of the reform agenda affects current

expectations and macroeconomic projections. In
particular, the Committee judges that concrete

23. The Copom reiterates its view that the

progress in this agenda is fundamental for the

continuation of reforms and necessary adjustments in

consolidation of the benign scenario for prospective

the Brazilian economy is essential for the reduction of

inflation.

its structural interest rate, for the full efficacy of
monetary policy, and for sustainable economic
recovery. The Committee also stresses that the 29. In the Copom's assessment, the evolution of the
perception of continuation of the reform agenda baseline scenario and, especially, of the balance of risks
affects current expectations and macroeconomic prescribes adjusting the degree of monetary stimulus,
projections. In particular, the Committee judges that lowering the Selic rate by 0.50 percentage point. The
concrete progress in this agenda is fundamental for the Committee deems that the consolidation of the benign
consolidation of the benign scenario for prospective scenario for prospective inflation should permit
inflation. additional adjustment of the degree of stimulus. The

Copom emphasizes that communicating this
assessment does not constrain its next decision, and

24. The Committee members then discussed the

reiterates that the next steps in the conduct of

monetary policy decision, in light of the evolution of

monetary policy will continue to depend on the

the baseline scenario and the balance of risks since its

evolution of economic activity, on the balance of risks,

June meeting (223[rd] meeting). They unanimously

and on inflation projections and expectations.

decided to lower the Selic rate to 6.00% p.a.

30. The following members of the Committee voted

25. The Copom also discussed the advisability of

for this decision: Roberto Oliveira Campos Neto

providing some perspective on possible monetary

(Governor), Bruno Serra Fernandes, Carlos Viana de

policy scenarios. The Committee decided to express its

Carvalho, Carolina de Assis Barros, Fernanda Feitosa

assessment that the consolidation of the benign

Nechio, João Manoel Pinho de Mello, Maurício Costa de

scenario for prospective inflation should permit

Moura, Otávio Ribeiro Damaso, and Paulo Sérgio Neves

additional adjustment of the degree of stimulus. Given

de Souza.

the decision to clarify conditionalities for the conduct
of monetary policy, which best conveys the economic


-----

