# Minutes of the 223[rd] Meeting of the  Monetary Policy Committee (Copom*) Banco Central do Brasil**

### June 18-19, 2019

#### * The Monetary Policy Committee of the Banco Central do Brasil is herein referred to as the “Copom” and the “Committee”.

 ** These minutes represent Copom's best effort to provide an English version of the minutes of its policy meeting. In case of any inconsistency, the original version in Portuguese prevails.


-----

**Date: June 18-19, 2019**

**Place:** BCB Headquarters’ meeting rooms on the 8[th] floor (June 18) and 20[th] floor (June 19) – Brasilia –
DF – Brazil
**Starting and ending times:** June 18: 11:05 AM – 1:10 PM; 3:04 PM – 7:01 PM

June 19: 2:00 PM – 6:05 PM

**In attendance:**
**Members of the Copom**
Roberto Oliveira Campos Neto – Governor
Bruno Serra Fernandes
Carlos Viana de Carvalho
Carolina de Assis Barros
João Manoel Pinho de Mello
Maurício Costa de Moura
Otávio Ribeiro Damaso
Paulo Sérgio Neves de Souza
Tiago Couto Berriel

**Department Heads in charge of technical presentations (present on June 18)**
Alan da Silva Andrade Mendes - Department of Foreign Reserves
André Minella - Research Department (also present on June 19)
André de Oliveira Amante – Department of Open Market Operations
Flávio Túlio Vilela – Department of Banking Operations and Payments System
João Barata Ribeiro Blanco Barroso – Department of International Affairs
Tulio José Lenti Maciel – Department of Economics

**Other participants (present on June 18)**
Adalberto Felinto da Cruz Júnior – Executive Secretary
Angelo José Mont’Alverne Duarte – Head of Department of Competition and Financial Market Structure
Enrico Bezerra Ximenes de Vasconcelos – Secretary of the Financial Stability Committee and Advisor to
the Board
Eugênio Pacceli Ribeiro – Head of the Deputy Governor for Economic Policy’s Office
Fabia Aparecida de Carvalho – Deputy Head of the Research Department
Fabio Araujo – Head of the Economic Advisors’ Office
Fernando Alberto Sampaio Rocha – Head of the Department of Statistics
Gilneu Francisco Astolfi Vivan – Head of the Financial System Monitoring Department
Leonardo Martins Nogueira – Head of the Governor’s Office
Márcio Antônio Estrela – Head of the Deputy Governor for International Affairs and Corporate Risk
Management’s Office
Mauro Zanatta – Press Officer
Ricardo Eyer Harris – Head of the Deputy Governor for Regulation’s Office
Rogério Antônio Lucca – Head of the Deputy Governor for Monetary Policy’s Office

The members of Copom analyzed the recent performance and prospects for the Brazilian and
international economies, under the monetary policy framework, whose objective is to comply with the
inflation targets established by the National Monetary Council.


-----

### A) Update of Economic Outlook and 8. The Copom’s baseline scenario for inflation Copom’s Baseline Scenario[1] encompasses risk factors in both directions.

9. On the one hand, (i) the high level of economic slack

1. Recent data on economic activity indicate a halt in may continue to produce lower-than-expected
the process of economic recovery in the past quarters. prospective inflation trajectory.
Copom's baseline scenario assumes resumption of this
process ahead, in a gradual fashion.

10. On the other hand, (ii) a possible frustration of
expectations regarding the continuation of reforms

2. The economy continues to operate with a high level and necessary adjustments in the Brazilian economy
of economic slack, as reflected in the low industrial may affect risk premia and increase the path for
capacity utilization indexes and, mainly, in the inflation over the relevant horizon for the conduct of
unemployment rate. monetary policy. Risk (ii) intensifies in case (iii) the

global outlook for emerging economies deteriorates.

3. The global outlook has become less challenging,
owing to changes in the prospects for monetary policy 11. The Committee judges that the balance of risks has
in major economies. Nevertheless, the risks associated evolved favorably, but risk (ii) prevails at this time.
with a slowdown in global growth remain.

4. Various measures of underlying inflation are running
at appropriate levels. This includes the components
that are most sensitive to the business cycle and
monetary policy.

## C) Discussion About the Conduct of

5. Inflation expectations for 2019, 2020 and 2021 **Monetary Policy**
collected by the Focus survey are around 3.8%, 4.0%
and 3.75%, respectively. 12. The Committee members discussed the evolution

of economic activity in light of available data. The

6. The Copom's inflation projections in the scenario members concluded that the process of economic
with interest rate and exchange rate paths extracted recovery came to a halt in the past quarters. This halt is
from the Focus survey stand around 3.6% for 2019 and clear when adopting a slightly longer perspective,
3.9% for 2020. This scenario assumes, among other which suggests that there has been a change in the
hypotheses, a path for the Selic rate that ends 2019 at dynamics of the economy after the second quarter of
5.75% p.a. and increases to 6.50% p.a. over the course 2018. From this perspective, the recovery of economic
of 2020. It also assumes a path for the exchange rate activity, which occurred at a gradual pace until then, has
that ends 2019 and 2020 at R$3.80/US$. In this lost momentum. After a slight decline in the first
scenario, inflation projections for administered prices quarter of 2019, as a result of this loss of dynamism and
are 3.9% for 2019, and 4.6% for 2020. some occasional shocks, Gross Domestic Product (GDP)

is expected to remain relatively stable in the second

7. In the scenario with a constant Selic rate at 6.50% quarter.
p.a., and a constant exchange rate at R$3.85/US$[2],
Copom’s inflation projections stand around 3.6% for 13. The Copom members assessed that, to a large
2019, and 3.7% for 2020. In this scenario, inflation extent, the effects on economic activity of the main
projections for administered prices are 3.9% for 2019, shocks suffered by the Brazilian economy throughout
and 4.6% for 2020. 2018 have dissipated. In addition, financial conditions –

which had tightened significantly between the second
and fourth quarters of 2018 – have already moved into
more stimulative territory. In this context, the Copom's
baseline scenario assumes resumption of the process
of economic recovery ahead, in a gradual fashion.

## B) Risks Around the Baseline Inflation

14. The Copom members also discussed factors that

## Scenario could hinder economic growth, in the context of the

deep adjustments that the Brazilian economy requires,
notably those of fiscal nature. They stressed that the

1 Unless explicitly stated otherwise, this update takes into 2 Value obtained according to the usual procedure of rounding
account changes occurred since the May Copom meeting (222[nd] the average R$/US$ exchange rate observed during the five
meeting). business days ending on the Friday prior to the Copom meeting.


-----

persistence of uncertainties regarding fiscal the provision of additional monetary stimuli, produce
sustainability tend to be contractionary. In particular, inflation around the target.
these uncertainties affect investment decisions that
involve a high degree of irreversibility and, therefore, 18. The Committee members then discussed the
need greater predictability of future scenarios. In a evolution, since their previous meeting, of the factors
context of limited fiscal space for public investment, highlighted in their balance of risks around the baseline
they emphasized the importance of reforms that lead inflation scenario. All members agreed that the balance
to future sustainability. By reducing fundamental of risks has evolved favorably. Nevertheless, the
uncertainties about the Brazilian economy, these Copom members stressed that the consolidation of the
reforms tend to stimulate private investment. This benign scenario reflected in inflation expectations and
potential expansionary effect should, to some extent, in the aforementioned conditional projections depends
offset the impact of short-term fiscal adjustments on on the pace of necessary reforms and adjustments in
economic activity, as well as mitigate the risk of the Brazilian economy, which are essential for the
episodes of large risk premium increases, as witnessed sustainability of the environment with anchored
in 2018. inflations expectations. A possible frustration of

expectations regarding the continuity of these reforms

15. The Copom stressed the understanding that an and adjustments may affect risk premia and increase
acceleration of the pace of recovery of the economy to the path for inflation over the relevant horizon for the
more robust levels will also depend on other initiatives conduct of monetary policy. The Committee judges
aimed at productivity increases, efficiency gains, that, at this time, this factor prevails in its balance of
greater flexibility of the economy, and improvements risks.
in the business environment. These efforts are
fundamental for the resumption of economic activity 19. The Copom members assessed that economic
and development of the Brazilian economy. conditions with anchored inflation expectations,

underlying inflation measures at appropriate levels,

16. Regarding the global outlook, the Committee 2020 inflation projected around or slightly below
members deemed it less challenging. Major central target, and high level of slack in the economy prescribe
banks clearly indicated a willingness to provide stimulative monetary policy, i.e., interest rates below
additional monetary stimuli in case of need, which the structural interest rate level. The structural interest
contributed to easing global financial conditions. rate is a reference for the conduct of monetary policy.
Nonetheless, the Copom judges that the risks When this policy yields a real (ex-ante) interest rate
associated with a slowing global economy remain and below the structural rate, it provides stimulus for
that economic policy and geopolitical may contribute economic activity and contributes to an increase in
to an even lower global growth. In light of evidence of inflation. As the structural rate is not observable and
economic slowdown in several countries, some Copom economic activity and inflation depend on several other
members considered that the global environment may factors, estimates of this rate involve a high degree of
be more relevant to the dynamics of economic activity uncertainty and are continually reassessed by the
than previously anticipated. In this context, the Copom Committee. Nevertheless, the Committee members
members once again highlighted the capability of the expressed the view that the current _ex-ante real_
Brazilian economy to withstand a setback in the interest rates provide stimulus to the economy. This
international scenario, given its robust balance of assessment is not inconsistent with recent lower-than-
payments, anchored inflation expectations, and expected economic performance, since economic
prospects of future structural reforms and resumption activity is influenced by several other factors, as
of economic recovery ahead. highlighted above.

17. The Committee members discussed recent 20. The Committee also discussed the conditionalities
inflation projections and the levels of various measures that would prescribe stimulative monetary policy. All
of underlying inflation. The latter measures are members agreed that the appropriate level of stimulus
deemed to be at appropriate levels. With regard to the depends on the outlook, particularly on inflation
shorter-term projections, they pointed out that the fall expectations, the level of slack in the economy, the
of food inflation and recent favorable movements in balance of risks, and inflation projections. Importantly,
fuel and electricity prices tend to produce lower the provision of monetary stimulus requires an
inflation than previously predicted. These revisions environment with anchored inflation expectations.
explain a substantial share of the decline in the
conditional projections for 2019 IPCA inflation. At the 21. The Committee members then discussed the
horizon relevant to monetary policy, which mainly monetary policy decision, in light of the evolution of
includes the calendar year 2020, the scenarios with the baseline scenario and the balance of risks since its
constant interest rates produce inflation slightly below May meeting (222[nd] meeting). They unanimously
target for 2020, while the scenarios with interest rate decided to maintain the Selic rate at 6.50% p.a.
path extracted from the Focus survey, which embody


-----

22. The Committee deems important to observe how continuation of the reform agenda affects current
the Brazilian economy will behave over time, with expectations and macroeconomic projections. In
reduction of the degree of uncertainty to which it particular, the Committee judges that concrete
remains exposed. progress in this agenda is fundamental for the

consolidation of the benign scenario for prospective

23. The Committee members reiterated their inflation.
preference for communicating the conditionalities for
the conduct of monetary policy, which better transmits 29. In the Copom's assessment, the evolution of the
the economic rationality guiding their decisions. This baseline scenario and the balance of risks prescribes
contributes to increase transparency and enhance keeping the Selic rate at its current level. The Copom
Copom’s communications. emphasizes that the next steps in the conduct of

monetary policy will continue to depend on the

24. The Copom reiterates its view that the continuity of evolution of economic activity, the balance of risks, and
reforms and necessary adjustments in the Brazilian on inflation projections and expectations.
economy is essential for the reduction of its structural
interest rate, for the full operation of monetary policy, 30. The following members of the Committee voted
and for a sustainable economic recovery. The for this decision: Roberto Oliveira Campos Neto
Committee also stresses that the perception of (Governor), Bruno Serra Fernandes, Carlos Viana de
continuation of the reform agenda affects current Carvalho, Carolina de Assis Barros, João Manoel Pinho
expectations and macroeconomic projections. In de Mello, Maurício Costa de Moura, Otávio Ribeiro
particular, the Committee judges that concrete Damaso, Paulo Sérgio Neves de Souza, and Tiago Couto
progress in this agenda is fundamental for the Berriel.
consolidation of the benign scenario for prospective
inflation. The Copom emphasizes that the next steps in
the conduct of monetary policy will continue to depend
on the evolution of economic activity, the balance of
risks, and on inflation forecasts and expectations.

## D) Monetary Policy Decision

25. Taking into account the baseline scenario, the
balance of risks, and the wide array of available
information, the Copom unanimously decided to
maintain the Selic rate at 6.50% p.a. The Committee
judges that this decision reflects its baseline scenario
for prospective inflation and the associated balance of
risks, and is consistent with convergence of inflation to
target over the relevant horizon for the conduct of
monetary policy, which includes 2019 and, mainly,
2020.

26. The Copom reiterates that economic conditions
prescribe stimulative monetary policy, i.e., interest
rates below the structural level.

27. The Committee deems important to observe how
the Brazilian economy will behave over time, with
reduction of the degree of uncertainty to which it
remains exposed.

28. The Copom emphasizes that the evolution of
reforms and necessary adjustments in the Brazilian
economy is essential for the reduction of its structural
interest rate and for sustainable economic recovery.
The Committee also stresses that the perception of


-----

