-----

**Date: March 19[th] and 20[th], 2019**

**Place** BCB Headquarters’ meeting rooms on the 8[th ]floor (March 19[th]) and 20[th] floor (March 20[th]) – Brasilia
– DF – Brazil
**Starting and ending time:** March 19[th: ]10:04 AM – 12:40 AM; 2:28 PM – 6:15 PM

March 20[th: ]2:00 PM – 6:04 PM

**In attendance:**
**Members of the Copom**
Roberto Oliveira Campos Neto – Governor
Bruno Serra Fernandes
Carlos Viana de Carvalho
Carolina de Assis Barros
João Manoel Pinho de Mello
Maurício Costa de Moura
Otávio Ribeiro Damaso
Paulo Sérgio Neves de Souza
Tiago Couto Berriel

**Department Heads in charge of technical presentations (present on March 19[th])**
Alan da Silva Andrade Mendes - Department of Foreign Reserves
André Minella - Research Department (also present on March 20[th])
André de Oliveira Amante – Department of Open Market Operations
Flávio Túlio Vilela – Department of Banking Operations and Payments System
João Barata Ribeiro Blanco Barroso – Department of International Affairs
Tulio José Lenti Maciel – Department of Economics

**Other participants (present on March 19[th])**
Adalberto Felinto da Cruz Júnior – Executive Secretary
Angelo José Mont’Alverne Duarte – Analyst of the Economic Advisor’s Office
Antônio Geraldo Filho – Head of Division of the BCB’s Internal Auditing
Enrico Bezerra Ximenes de Vasconcelos – Secretary of the Financial Stability Committee and Advisor to
the Board
Eugênio Pacceli Ribeiro – Head of the Deputy Governor for Economic Policy’s Office
Fabia Aparecida de Carvalho – Deputy Head of the Research Department
Fabio Araujo – Head of the Economic Advisors’ Office
Fernando Alberto Sampaio Rocha – Head of the Department of Statistics
Gilneu Francisco Astolfi Vivan – Head of the Financial System Monitoring Department
Leonardo Martins Nogueira – Head of the Governor’s Office
Márcio Antônio Estrela – Head of the Deputy Governor for International Affairs and Corporate Risk
Management’s Office
Mauro Zanatta – Press Officer
Ricardo Eyer Harris – Head of the Deputy Governor for Regulation’s Office
Ricardo José de Souza Oliveira – Analyst of BCB’s Internal Auditing
Rogério Antônio Lucca – Head of the Deputy Governor for Monetary Policy’s Office

The members of Copom analyzed the recent performance and prospects for the Brazilian and international
economies, under the monetary policy framework, whose objective is to comply with the inflation targets
established by the National Monetary Council.


-----

## A) Update of economic outlook and B) Risks around the baseline inflation Copom’s baseline scenario[1] scenario

1. Recent data on economic activity came in below 8. The Copom’s baseline scenario for inflation

encompasses risk factors in both directions.

expectations. Nevertheless, the Brazilian economy
remains on a gradual recovery path.

9. On the one hand, (i) the high level of economic slack

2. The economy continues to operate with a high level of may lead to a lower-than-expected prospective inflation
economic slack, as reflected in the low industrial capacity trajectory.
utilization indexes and, mainly, in the unemployment
rate. 10. On the other hand, (ii) frustration of expectations

regarding the continuation of reforms and necessary

3. The global outlook remains challenging. On the one adjustments in the Brazilian economy may affect risk
hand, the risks associated with normalization of interest premia and increase the path for inflation over the
rates in some advanced economies have receded since relevant horizon for the conduct of monetary policy. Risk

(ii) intensifies in case (iii) the global outlook for emerging

the previous Copom meeting. On the other hand, the
risks associated with a slowdown in global growth, as a economies deteriorates.
result of several uncertainties, are more elevated.

11. The Committee judges that the balance of risks for

4. Various measures of underlying inflation are running inflation is symmetric.
at appropriate or comfortable levels. This includes the
components that are most sensitive to the business cycle
and monetary policy;

# C) Discussion about the conduct of

5. Inflation expectations for 2019, 2020 and 2021 **monetary policy**
collected by the Focus survey are around 3.9%, 4.0%
and 3.75%, respectively.

12. The Committee members discussed the evolution of
economic activity in light of available data. They

6. The Copom's inflation projections in the scenario with

confirmed the slowdown in activity during the last quarter

interest rate and exchange rate paths extracted from the

of 2018, which ran below the expected pace. They also

Focus survey stand around 3.9% for 2019 and 3.8% for

assessed available projections for economic growth in

2020. This scenario assumes, among other hypotheses,

2019, including those from the Focus survey. The

a path for the Selic rate that ends 2019 at 6.50% p.a. and

projections have declined since the release of the

increases to 7.75% p.a. over the course of 2020. It also

2018Q4 National Accounts, reflecting, to a large extent,

assumes a path for the exchange rate that ends 2019 at

the lower level for GDP at the end of 2018 – that is, the

R$3.70/US$, and 2020 at R$3.75/US$. In this scenario,

so-called "statistical carry-over”. Part of the revisions for

inflation projections for administered prices are 5.1% for

2019 growth also seems to reflect preliminary indicators

2019, and 4.7% for 2020.

available for the first months of the current quarter.
These revisions notwithstanding, the projections for GDP

7. In the scenario with a constant Selic rate at 6.50%

growth at the margin — that is, from the first or second

p.a., and a constant exchange rate at R$3.85/US$[2],

quarters onwards, relative to previous quarters — have

Copom’s inflation projections stand around 4.1% for

not changed significantly. These dynamics are

2019, and 4.0% for 2020. In this scenario, inflation

consistent with the Copom’s baseline scenario of

projections for administered prices are 5.4% for 2019,

recovery of the Brazilian economy at a gradual pace.

and 4.8% for 2020.

13. Copom members considered that the Brazilian
economy has experienced several shocks throughout
2018, including the temporary halt in the transportation
sector in May, the adverse global environment for
emerging economies from the second quarter onwards,
and high uncertainty about the direction of Brazilian
economic policies to be pursued in the coming years.
These factors impacted the economy and led to a
relevant tightening of financial conditions, whose effects

1 Unless explicitly stated otherwise, this update takes into 2 Value obtained according to the usual procedure of rounding
account changes occurred since the February Copom meeting the average R$/US$ exchange rate observed on the five
(220[th] meeting). business days ending on the Friday prior to the Copom meeting.


-----

on economic activity persist even after their direct effects relation to the evolution of each risk in isolation, all
cease. Committee members judge that these shocks agreed that the balance of risks is symmetric.
must have significantly reduced the growth that the
Brazilian economy would have experienced in their 17. Copom members assessed that caution, serenity,
absence. They also point out that an acceleration in the and perseverance in conducting monetary policy
pace of economic recovery to more robust levels will decisions, in the face of uncertainties regarding
depend on a reduction of uncertainties regarding the economic scenarios, is the best way of keeping inflation
approval and implementation of reforms — notably those on a trajectory towards the targets.
of a fiscal nature — and adjustments that the Brazilian
economy requires. Moreover, they stress the importance

18. The Copom members assessed that economic

of other initiatives aimed at productivity increases,

conditions with anchored inflation expectations,

efficiency gains, greater flexibility of the economy, and

underlying inflation measures at appropriate or

improvements in the business environment. These

comfortable levels, inflation projected to move toward

efforts are fundamental for the resumption of economic

targets for 2019 and 2020, and high level of slack in the

activity and the development of the Brazilian economy.

economy prescribe stimulative monetary policy, i.e.,
interest rates below the structural interest rate level.

14. Regarding the global outlook, the Committee Although estimates of this rate involve a high degree of
members considered that it remains challenging for uncertainty, the Committee members expressed the
emerging economies. The Committee discussed the view that the current ex-ante real interest rates provide
contrast of different scenarios for the evolution or the US stimulus to the economy.
economy. The first scenario comprises a significant
deceleration of economic activity. The second scenario

19. The Committee also discussed the conditionalities

assumes continuity of the strength exhibited in recent

that would prescribe stimulative monetary policy. All

years. These two scenarios have opposite implications

members agreed that the appropriate level of stimulus

for the conduct of monetary policy by the Fed, which

depends on the outlook conditions, particularly inflation

signaled that it intends to wait for the resolution of this

expectations, and the level of slack in the economy,

uncertainty over time. In addition, Copom members

balance of risks and inflation projections. Importantly, the

recognized that, given the slowdown in activity in some

provision of monetary stimulus requires an environment

relevant economies, the risks associated with a

with anchored inflation expectations.

weakening in the global economy have intensified.
Europe is showing signs of a significant economic

20. The Copom stresses that the continuation of reforms

slowdown and uncertainty drivers can contribute to even

and necessary adjustments in the Brazilian economy is

slower global growth. In this context, the Copom

essential to the reduction of its structural interest rate.

members once again highlighted the capacity of the

The Committee will continue to reassess the estimates

Brazilian economy to withstand a setback in the

of this rate over time.

international scenario, given its robust balance of
payments, anchored inflation expectations, and

21. The Committee members then discussed the

prospects of economic recovery.

monetary policy decision, in light of the evolution of the
baseline scenario and the balance of risks since its

15. Committee members discussed recent inflation

February meeting (220[th] meeting). They unanimously

projections and the levels of various measures of

decided to maintain the Selic rate at 6.50% p.a.

underlying inflation. They assessed that those measures
are at appropriate or comfortable levels, and that inflation

22. The Committee members reiterated their preference

projections indicate convergence of inflation to target

for communicating the conditionalities for the conduct of

over the course of 2019 and 2020. The Committee

monetary policy, which better transmits the economic

foresees an increase in inflation during the next months,

rationality guiding their decisions. This contributes to

which should lead twelve-month inflation to reach a peak

increase transparency and enhance Copom’s

around April or May. Subsequently, twelve-month

communications. The Committee deems important to

inflation should recede and close the year at the levels

observe how the Brazilian economy will behave over

projected in paragraphs 6 and 7. The Copom members

time, with lower uncertainty and without the effects of the

emphasized, however, that the consolidation of this

various shocks that hit the economy last year. The

favorable scenario in the medium and long terms

Committee judges that this assessment takes time and

depends on the pace of necessary reforms and

should not be completed in the short run. The Copom

adjustments in the Brazilian economy, which are

emphasizes that the next steps in the conduct of

essential for the sustainability of the environment with

monetary policy will continue to depend on the evolution

anchored inflations expectations.

of economic activity, the balance of risks, and on inflation
projections and expectations.

16. The Committee members discussed the evolution of
the factors highlighted in their balance of risks around the

23. All Committee members once again emphasized

baseline inflation scenario, since its previous meeting.

that the approval and implementation of reforms —

Although with different assessments and weights in


-----

notably those of fiscal nature— and adjustments in the Carolina de Assis Barros, João Manoel Pinho de Mello,
Brazilian economy are crucial for the sustainability of the Maurício Costa de Moura, Otávio Ribeiro Damaso, Paulo
environment of low and stable inflation, for the full Sérgio Neves de Souza, and Tiago Couto Berriel.
operation of monetary policy, and for the reduction of the
structural interest rate of the economy, with widespread
benefits for society. The Committee stresses that the
perception of continuation of the reform agenda affects
current expectations and macroeconomic projections.

# D) Monetary Policy Decision

24. Taking into account the baseline scenario, the
balance of risks, and the wide array of available
information, the Copom unanimously decided to
maintain the Selic rate at 6.50% p.a. The Committee
judges that this decision reflects its baseline scenario for
prospective inflation and the associated balance of risks,
and is consistent with convergence of inflation to target
over the relevant horizon for the conduct of monetary
policy, which includes 2019 and, with gradually
increasing weight, 2020.

25. The Copom reiterates that economic conditions
prescribe stimulative monetary policy, i.e., interest rates
below the structural level.

26. The Copom emphasizes that the evolution of
reforms and necessary adjustments in the Brazilian
economy is essential to maintain low inflation in the
medium and long run, for the reduction of its structural
interest rate, and for sustainable economic recovery. The
Committee stresses that the perception of continuation
of the reform agenda affects current expectations and
macroeconomic projections.

27. In the Copom's assessment, the evolution of the
baseline scenario and of the balance of risks prescribes
keeping the Selic rate at its current level. The Committee
deems important to observe how the Brazilian economy
will behave over time, with lower uncertainty and without
the effects of the various shocks that hit the economy last
year. The Copom judges that this assessment takes time
and should not be completed in the short run. The
Copom emphasizes that the next steps in the conduct of
monetary policy will continue to depend on the evolution
of economic activity, the balance of risks, and on inflation
projections and expectations.

28. The Copom asserts that caution, serenity, and
perseverance in monetary policy decisions, even in the
face of volatile scenarios, have been instrumental in
pursuing its primary objective of keeping the inflation
path towards the targets.

29. The following members of the Committee voted for
this decision: Roberto Oliveira Campos Neto (Governor),
Bruno Serra Fernandes, Carlos Viana de Carvalho,


-----

