# Minutes of the 222[nd] Meeting of the  Monetary Policy Committee (Copom*) Banco Central do Brasil**

### May 7-8, 2019

#### * The Monetary Policy Committee of the Banco Central do Brasil is herein referred to as the “Copom” and the “Committee”. ** These minutes represent Copom's best effort to provide an English version of the minutes of its policy meeting. In case of any inconsistency, the original version in Portuguese prevails.


-----

**Date: May 7- 8, 2019**

**Place** BCB Headquarters’ meeting rooms on the 8[th] floor (May 7[th]) and 20[th] floor (May 8[th]) – Brasilia – DF
– Brazil
**Starting and ending times:** May 7[th: ] 10:03 AM – 12:46 PM; 2:33 PM – 6:11 PM

May 8[th: ] 2:00 PM – 6:00 PM

**In attendance:**
**Copom members**
Roberto Oliveira Campos Neto – Governor
Bruno Serra Fernandes
Carlos Viana de Carvalho
Carolina de Assis Barros
João Manoel Pinho de Mello
Maurício Costa de Moura
Otávio Ribeiro Damaso
Paulo Sérgio Neves de Souza
Tiago Couto Berriel

**Department Heads in charge of technical presentations (present on May 7[th]** **)**
Alan da Silva Andrade Mendes – Department of Foreign Reserves
André Minella – Research Department (also present on May 8[th])
André de Oliveira Amante – Department of Open Market Operations
Flávio Túlio Vilela – Department of Banking Operations and Payments System
João Barata Ribeiro Blanco Barroso – Department of International Affairs
Tulio José Lenti Maciel – Department of Economics

**Other participants (present on May 7[th]** **)**
Angelo José Mont’Alverne Duarte – Senior Advisor at the Deputy Governor for Licensing and Resolution’s

Office

Enrico Bezerra Ximenes de Vasconcelos – Secretary of the Financial Stability Committee and Advisor to

the Board

Eugênio Pacceli Ribeiro – Head of the Deputy Governor for Economic Policy’s Office
Fabia Aparecida de Carvalho – Deputy Head of the Research Department
Fabio Araujo – Head of the Economic Advisors’ Office
Fernando Alberto Sampaio Rocha – Head of the Department of Statistics
Gilneu Francisco Astolfi Vivan – Head of the Financial System Monitoring Department
Leonardo Martins Nogueira – Head of the Governor’s Office
Márcio Antônio Estrela – Head of the Deputy Governor for International Affairs and Corporate Risk

Management’s Office

Mauro Zanatta – Press Officer
Rogério Antônio Lucca – Head of the Deputy Governor for Monetary Policy’s Office

Copom members analyzed the recent performance and prospects for the Brazilian and international
economies, under the monetary policy framework, whose objective is to comply with the inflation targets
established by the National Monetary Council.


-----

### A) Update of economic outlook and B) Risks around the baseline inflation Copom’s baseline scenario[1] scenario

1. Recent data on economic activity suggest that the 8. The Copom’s baseline scenario for inflation

encompasses risk factors in both directions.

softening observed at the end of 2018 continued in
early 2019. The Copom's baseline scenario assumes
that the process of gradual economic recovery will 9. On the one hand, (i) the high level of economic slack
resume. may lead to a lower- than- expected prospective

inflation trajectory.

2. The economy continues to operate with a high level
of economic slack, as reflected in the low industrial 10. On the other hand, (ii) frustration of expectations
capacity utilization indexes and, mainly, in the regarding the continuation of reforms and necessary

unemployment rate. adjustments in the Brazilian economy may affect risk

premia and increase the path for inflation over the
relevant horizon for the conduct of monetary policy.

3. The global outlook remains challenging. On the one

Risk (ii) intensifies in case (iii) the global outlook for

hand, the risks associated with normalization of

emerging economies deteriorates.

interest rates in some advanced economies in the short
and medium runs are low. On the other hand, the risks
associated with a slowdown in global growth remain. 11. The Committee judges that, although the risk

associated with economic slack has increased at the
margin, the balance of risks is symmetric.

4. Various measures of underlying inflation are running
at appropriate levels. This includes the components
that are most sensitive to the business cycle and
monetary policy.

## C) Discussion about the conduct of

5. Inflation expectations for 2019, 2020 and 2021 **monetary policy**
collected by the Focus survey are around 4.0%, 4.0%
and 3.75%, respectively.

12. Committee members discussed the evolution of
economic activity in light of available data. They

6. The Copom's inflation projections in the scenario

concluded that the softening observed at the end of

with interest rate and exchange rate paths extracted

2018 continued in early 2019. In particular, the

from the Focus survey stand around 4.1% for 2019 and

available indicators suggest a relevant probability that

3.8% for 2020. This scenario assumes, among other

the seasonally adjusted Gross Domestic Product (GDP)

hypotheses, a path for the Selic rate that ends 2019 at

declined slightly in 2019Q1, when compared to the

6.50% p.a. and increases to 7.50% p.a. over the course

previous quarter. The first- quarter indicators led to

of 2020. It also assumes a path for the exchange rate

substantive revisions to expectations for 2019 GDP

that ends 2019 at R$3.75/US$, 2020 at R$3.80/US$. In

growth, as collected by the Focus survey. These

this scenario, inflation projections for administered

revisions reflect a lower- than- expected first quarter,

prices are 5.3% for 2019, and 5.0% for 2020.

with implications for the "statistical carry- over", but
also embody some reduction in the expected growth

7. In the scenario with a constant Selic rate at 6.50%

rate for the coming quarters. Copom members judge

p.a., and a constant exchange rate at R$3.95/US$[2],

that the process of gradual recovery of the economic

Copom’s inflation projections stand around 4.3% for

activity was interrupted in the recent period, but the

2019, and 4.0% for 2020. In this scenario, inflation

baseline scenario assumes its resumption ahead.

projections for administered prices are 5.6% for 2019,
and 5.1% for 2020.

13. Committee members again remarked that the
Brazilian economy experienced several shocks

throughout 2018, which affected the economy and
significantly tightened financial conditions. Although
they tend to decay over time, their effects on economic
activity persist even after their direct impacts have
ceased. Committee members judge that these shocks
must have significantly reduced the growth that the

1 Unless explicitly stated otherwise, this update takes into 2 Value obtained according to the usual procedure of rounding
account changes occurred since the March Copom meeting the average R$/US$ exchange rate observed during the five
(221st meeting). business days ending on the Friday prior to the Copom meeting.


-----

Brazilian economy would have experienced otherwise, over the course of 2019 and 2020. The Committee
and that some of their effects still persist. foresees that 12- month inflation should reach a peak in

the short term and subsequently retreat, ending 2019

14. The Committee also discussed how its previous around the inflation target. Copom members
communication was interpreted in regard to the need emphasized, however, that the consolidation of this
to observe the Brazilian economy in order to produce favorable scenario with inflation on target in the
an assessment of its performance in recent quarters. It medium and long terms depends on the pace of
is worth noting that, in addition to the shocks already necessary reforms and adjustments in the Brazilian
discussed, uncertainties about fundamental aspects of economy, which are essential for the sustainability of
the future economic environment — notably fiscal the environment with anchored inflations
sustainability — have adverse effects on economic expectations.
activity. In particular, uncertainty affects investment
decisions that involve a high degree of irreversibility 19. Committee members discussed the evolution,
and, therefore, need greater predictability of future since their previous meeting, of the factors highlighted
scenarios. in their balance of risks around the baseline inflation

scenario. Although the assessment that the risk

15. Copom members also discussed other factors that associated with economic slack has increased at the
could hinder economic growth, given the need for deep margin, all members agreed that the balance of risks is
adjustments in the Brazilian economy, notably those of symmetric.
fiscal nature. They concluded that the persistence of
uncertainties regarding fiscal sustainability tend to be 20. Copom members assessed that caution, serenity,
contractionary. Reforms that lead to sustainability of and perseverance in conducting monetary policy
fiscal policy have expansionary potential, which can decisions, in the face of uncertainties regarding
offset the effects of short- run fiscal adjustment on economic scenarios, is the best way of keeping inflation
economic activity, in addition to mitigating the risks of on a trajectory towards the targets. They then
bouts of instability with increased risk premia, as discussed the advisability of ceasing to repeat this
witnessed in 2018. message in their communication, since it is a matter of

principle that should already be well assimilated.

16. Committee members stressed that an acceleration Hence, they agreed to exclude this message as of their
of the pace of economic recovery to more robust levels next meeting, with the understanding that this should
will also depend on other initiatives aimed at not be interpreted as a change in the conduct of

productivity increases, efficiency gains, greater monetary policy.

flexibility of the economy, and improvements in the
business environment. These efforts are fundamental 21. Copom members assessed that economic
for the resumption of economic activity and the conditions with anchored inflation expectations,
development of the Brazilian economy. underlying inflation measures at appropriate levels,

inflation projected to move toward targets for 2019

17. Regarding the global outlook, Committee and 2020, and high level of slack in the economy

members considered that it remains challenging. prescribe stimulative monetary policy, i.e., interest

Taking into account recent information about rates below the structural interest rate level. Although

developed economies and the communication of major estimates of this rate involve a high degree of
central banks, Copom’s baseline scenario deem the uncertainty, Committee members expressed the view
risks associated with normalization of interest rates in that the current _ex-ante real interest rates provide_
some advanced economies to be low in the short and stimulus to the economy.
medium terms. Copom members judge that risks

associated with a slowing global economy remain and 22. The Committee also discussed the conditionalities
that uncertainties about economic policies and of that would prescribe stimulative monetary policy. All
geopolitical nature may contribute to even lower members agreed that the appropriate level of stimulus
global growth. In this context, Copom members once depends on the outlook conditions, particularly
again highlighted that the Brazilian economy is capable inflation expectations, and the level of slack in the
of withstanding a setback in the international scenario, economy, balance of risks and inflation projections.
given its robust balance of payments, anchored Importantly, the provision of monetary stimulus
inflation expectations, and prospects of economic requires an environment with anchored inflation
recovery. expectations.

18. Committee members discussed recent inflation 23. The Copom stresses that the continuation of
projections and the levels of various measures of reforms and necessary adjustments in the Brazilian
underlying inflation. They assessed that those economy is essential to the reduction of its structural

measures are at appropriate levels, and that inflation interest rate. The Committee will continue to reassess
projections indicate convergence of inflation to target the estimates of this rate over time.


-----

24. Committee members then discussed the monetary interest rate, and for sustainable economic recovery.
policy decision, in light of the evolution of the baseline The Committee also stresses that the perception of
scenario and the balance of risks since its March continuation of the reform agenda affects current
meeting (221[st] meeting). They unanimously decided to expectations and macroeconomic projections.
maintain the Selic rate at 6.50% p.a.

30. In the Copom's assessment, the evolution of the

25. Committee members reiterated their preference baseline scenario and the balance of risks prescribes
for communicating the conditionalities for the conduct keeping the Selic rate at its current level. The
of monetary policy, which better transmits the Committee deems important to observe how the

economic rationality guiding their decisions. This Brazilian economy will behave over time, without the

contributes to increase transparency and enhance remaining effects of the various shocks that hit the
Copom’s communications. The Copom deems economy last year and, especially, with reduction of the

important to observe how the Brazilian economy will degree of uncertainty to which the Brazilian economy
behave over time, without the remaining effects of the remains exposed. The Copom judges that this
various shocks that hit the economy last year and, assessment takes time and should not be completed in
especially, with reduction of the degree of uncertainty the short run. The Copom emphasizes that the next
to which the Brazilian economy remains exposed. The steps in the conduct of monetary policy will continue to
Committee judges that this assessment takes time and depend on the evolution of economic activity, the
should not be completed in the short run. The Copom balance of risks, and on inflation projections and
emphasizes that the next steps in the conduct of expectations.
monetary policy will continue to depend on the
evolution of economic activity, the balance of risks, and 31. The Copom asserts that caution, serenity, and
on inflation forecasts and expectations. perseverance in monetary policy decisions, even in the

face of volatile scenarios, have been instrumental in

26. All Committee members once again emphasized pursuing its primary objective of keeping the inflation
that the approval and implementation of reforms — path towards the targets.
notably those of fiscal nature — and adjustments in the
Brazilian economy are crucial for the sustainability of 32. The following Committee members voted for this
the environment of low and stable inflation, for the full decision: Roberto Oliveira Campos Neto (Governor),
operation of monetary policy, and for the reduction of Bruno Serra Fernandes, Carlos Viana de Carvalho,
the structural interest rate of the economy, with Carolina de Assis Barros, João Manoel Pinho de Mello,
widespread benefits for society. The Committee also Maurício Costa de Moura, Otávio Ribeiro Damaso,
stresses that the perception of continuation of the Paulo Sérgio Neves de Souza, and Tiago Couto Berriel.
reform agenda affects current expectations and

macroeconomic projections.

## D) Monetary Policy Decision

27. Taking into account the baseline scenario, the
balance of risks, and the wide array of available
information, the Copom unanimously decided to

maintain the Selic rate at 6.50% p.a. The Committee
judges that this decision reflects its baseline scenario
for prospective inflation and the associated balance of
risks, and is consistent with convergence of inflation to
target over the relevant horizon for the conduct of
monetary policy, which includes 2019 and, to a greater
extent, 2020.

28. The Copom reiterates that economic conditions
prescribe stimulative monetary policy, i.e., interest
rates below the structural level.

29. The Copom emphasizes that the evolution of
reforms and necessary adjustments in the Brazilian
economy is essential to maintain low inflation in the
medium and long run, for the reduction of its structural


-----

