# Minutes of the 227[th] Meeting of the  Monetary Policy Committee (Copom*) Banco Central do Brasil

### December 10-11, 2019

#### * The Monetary Policy Committee of the Banco Central do Brasil is herein referred to as the “Copom” and the “Committee”.

 ** These minutes represent Copom's best effort to provide an English version of the minutes of its policy meeting. In case of any inconsistency, the original version in Portuguese prevails.


-----

**Date: December 10-11, 2019**

**Place:** BCB Headquarters’ meeting rooms on the 8th floor (December 10) and 20th floor (December 11)
– Brasilia – DF – Brazil
**Starting and ending times:** December 10: 10:10 AM – 1:04 PM; 3:13 PM – 7:38 PM

December 11: 2:30 PM – 6:11 PM

**In attendance:**
**Members of the Copom**
Roberto Oliveira Campos Neto – Governor
Bruno Serra Fernandes
Carolina de Assis Barros
Fabio Kanczuk
Fernanda Feitosa Nechio
João Manoel Pinho de Mello
Maurício Costa de Moura
Otávio Ribeiro Damaso
Paulo Sérgio Neves de Souza

**Department Heads in charge of technical presentations (present on December 10)**
Alan da Silva Andrade Mendes – Department of Foreign Reserves
André Minella –Research Department (also present on December 11)
André de Oliveira Amante – Department of Open Market Operations
Flávio Túlio Vilela – Department of Banking Operations and Payments System
João Barata Ribeiro Blanco Barroso – Department of International Affairs
Tulio José Lenti Maciel – Department of Economics

**Other participants (present on December 10)**
Adalberto Felinto da Cruz Júnior – Executive Secretary
André Luiz Caccavo Miguel – Head of the Financial System Monitoring Department
Carlos Eduardo de Almeida – Senior Advisor at the Deputy Governor for Licensing and Resolution’s Office
Eduardo José Araújo Lima – Head of the Deputy Governor for Economic Policy’s Office
Enrico Bezerra Ximenes de Vasconcelos – Secretary of the Financial Stability Committee and Advisor to
the Board
Fabia Aparecida de Carvalho – Deputy Head of the Research Department
Fabio Araujo – Head of the Economic Advisors’ Office
Fernando Alberto Sampaio Rocha – Head of the Department of Statistics
Leonardo Martins Nogueira – Head of the Governor’s Office
Márcio Antônio Estrela – Head of the Deputy Governor for International Affairs and Corporate Risk

Management’s Office

Mauro Zanatta – Press Officer
Ricardo Franco Moura - Head of the Prudential and Foreign Exchange Regulation Department
Ricardo Sabbadini – Deputy Head of the Department of Economics
Rogério Antônio Lucca – Head of the Deputy Governor for Monetary Policy’s Office
Sílvio Michael de Azevedo Costa - Deputy Head of the Department of International Affairs

The members of Copom analyzed the recent performance and prospects for the Brazilian and
international economies, under the monetary policy framework, whose objective is to comply with the
inflation targets established by the National Monetary Council.


-----

### A) Update of Economic Outlook and B) Risks Around the Baseline Inflation Copom’s Baseline Scenario[1] Scenario

1. Economic activity data as of the second quarter 8. The Copom’s baseline scenario for inflation
indicate that the recovery process of the Brazilian encompasses risk factors in both directions.
economy picked up relative to the first quarter of 2019.
Copom's baseline scenario assumes that this recovery 9. On the one hand, (i) the high level of economic slack
will occur at a gradual pace. may continue to produce a lower-than-expected

prospective inflation trajectory.

2. Data suggest that the economy continues to operate
with a high level of economic slack, as reflected in the 10. On the other hand, (ii) in the context of changes in
low readings of traditional measures of industrial financial intermediation, the current degree of
capacity utilization and, mainly, in the unemployment monetary stimulus, which affects the economy with
rate. lags, increases the uncertainty about the transmission

channels and may raise the path for inflation over the
relevant horizon for the conduct of monetary policy.

3. Regarding the global outlook, the provision of
monetary stimulus in major economies, in a context of Risk (ii) intensifies in case of (iii) a deterioration of the
below-target inflation, has been able to generate a outlook for emerging economies or (iv) a possible
relatively favorable environment for emerging frustration regarding the continuation of reforms and

the perseverance in the necessary adjustments in the

economies.

Brazilian economy.

4. Various measures of underlying inflation are running
at comfortable levels, including the components that
are most sensitive to the business cycle and monetary
policy. **C) Discussion About the Conduct of**

## Monetary Policy

5. Inflation expectations for 2019, 2020, 2021, and
2022 collected by the Focus survey are around 3.8%,

11. Copom members discussed the evolution of

3.6%, 3.75%, and 3.5%, respectively.

economic activity in light of the available information
and indicators. They concluded that data released since

6. The Copom's inflation projections in the scenario

their previous meeting suggest that the Brazilian

with interest rate and exchange rate paths extracted

economy growth has picked up. Subsequent quarters

from the Focus survey stand around 4.0% for 2019,

should show some acceleration, which should be

3.5% for 2020, and 3.4% for 2021. This scenario

reinforced by the stimuli resulting from the release of

assumes a path for the Selic rate that ends 2019 at

FGTS and PIS-PASEP resources – impacting mainly the

4.50% p.a., falls to 4.25% p.a. at the beginning of 2020,

last quarter of 2019. Copom’s baseline inflation

ends that year at 4.50% p.a., and rises to 6.25% p.a. in

scenario assumes that the pace of underlying economic

2021. It also assumes a path for the exchange rate that

activity growth – which excludes the effects of

ends 2019 at R$4.15/US$, 2020 at R$4.10/US$ and 2021

temporary stimuli – will be gradual.

at R$4.00/US$. In this scenario, inflation projections for
administered prices are 5.1% for 2019, 3.6% for 2020,

12. Copom members also evaluated the evolution of

and 3.5% for 2021.

financial conditions indicators. They concluded that the
conditions are favorable, despite some volatility

7. The hybrid scenario with a constant exchange rate at

inherent to those measures. The environment with

R$4.20/US$[2] and the interest rate path from the Focus

favorable financial conditions results from the increase

survey yields inflation projections around 4.0% for

in the degree of monetary stimulus, the relatively

2019, 3.7% for 2020, and 3.7% for 2021. In this scenario,

favorable external environment for emerging

inflation projections for administered prices are 5.1%

economies and the prospects for improving the

for 2019, 3.9% for 2020, and 4.1% for 2021.

fundamentals of the Brazilian economy, as a result of
the reform agenda and necessary adjustments. This
easing of financial conditions has been more clearly
reflected in the dynamics of non-earmarked credit and
capital markets, which are growing at robust rates in
this stage of the economic cycle. Some Copom

1Unless explicitly stated otherwise, this update takes into 2 Value obtained according to the usual procedure of rounding
account changes occurred since the October Copom meeting the average R$/US$ exchange rate observed during the five
(226[th] meeting). business days ending on the Friday prior to the Copom meeting.


-----

members pointed out that there is evidence of the the structural level. The Committee members
beginning of a gradual process of financial expressed the view that the current level of ex-ante real

disintermediation. interest rates provides stimulus to the economy.

13. The Committee also discussed the characteristics
of the current business cycle, with a smaller role for the
public sector in the economy, and its possible **D) Monetary Policy Decision**
implications for monetary policy. Some Copom
members pointed out that changes in the credit market

18. Taking into account the baseline scenario, the

and financial intermediation, such as the greater role

balance of risks, and the broad array of available

played by non-earmarked credit and capital markets,

information, the Copom unanimously decided to lower

may have an impact on the monetary policy

the Selic rate by 0.5 percentage point, to 4.50% p.a. The

transmission channel. Copom members also

Committee judges that this decision reflects its

conjectured about the sensitivity of macroeconomic

baseline scenario for prospective inflation and the

variables to monetary policy, since there are no

associated balance of risks, and it is consistent with

historical precedents in the Brazilian history for the

convergence of inflation to its target over the relevant

current degree of stimulus.  Copom members judge

horizon for the conduct of monetary policy, which

that changes in the credit and capital markets tend to

includes 2020 and, to a lesser extent, 2021.

bolster the power of monetary policy.

19. The Copom reiterates that economic conditions

14. Copom members also reflected on the level of

prescribe stimulative monetary policy, i.e., interest

economic slack. Some members argued that the latest

rates below the structural level.

activity data and the greater efficiency of the credit and
capital markets may result in a faster decline in
economic slack than anticipated, and thus produce 20. The Copom sees progress in the process of reforms
upward pressure on inflation. On the other hand, the and necessary adjustments in the Brazilian economy.
members of the Committee stressed that the dynamics The Committee emphasizes that persevering in this
of the inflation cores measures indicate that the level process is essential to allow for the consolidation of the
of economic slack is still high. reduction of the structural interest rate and for a

sustainable economic recovery. The Committee

stresses that the perception of the continuation of the

15. Regarding the global outlook, the Committee

reform agenda affects current expectations and

members deemed the scenario as relatively favorable

macroeconomic projections.

for emerging economies. Central banks of several
economies – some major economies included – have
provided monetary stimuli, which contribute to easing 21. The Copom judges that the current stage of the
global financial conditions. business cycle recommends caution in the conduct of

monetary policy. The Copom emphasizes that its next
steps will continue to depend on the evolution of

16. In the relevant horizon for monetary policy, the

economic activity, the balance of risks, and inflation

scenario with the interest rate path from the Focus

projections and expectations.

survey and a constant exchange rate results in inflation
slightly below the 2020 target and around the 2021
target. Short-term projections were particularly 22. The following members of the Committee voted

affected by the effects of the proteins price shock, for this decision: Roberto Oliveira Campos Neto
which occurred more intensely and earlier than (Governor), Bruno Serra Fernandes, Carolina de Assis
anticipated. The projections consider a direct effect Barros, Fabio Kanczuk, Fernanda Feitosa Nechio, João
more concentrated in the last two months of this year, Manoel Pinho de Mello, Maurício Costa de Moura,
constituting the main factor that increased 2019 Otávio Ribeiro Damaso, and Paulo Sérgio Neves de
projections. Regarding administered prices, benign Souza.
conditions for the occurrence of minor adjustments in
electricity rates were mentioned. This process has been
occurring in recent months and will probably continue
over the next quarters.

17. The Copom members assessed that the economic
conditions with anchored inflation expectations,
underlying inflation measures at comfortable levels,
scenarios with projected inflation below or around
target for the relevant horizon of monetary policy, and
the high level of slack in the economy prescribe
stimulative monetary policy, i.e., interest rates below


-----

