**HIGHLIGHTS OF THE MEETING OF THE MONETARY BOARD ON THE MONETARY POLICY**

**STANCE HELD ON 13 AUGUST 2015[1]**


**I.** **Monetary Policy Decision**

The Monetary Board (MB) decided to:

a) Maintain the BSP’s key policy interest rates at 4.00 percent for the overnight RRP
(borrowing) facility and 6.00 percent for the overnight RP (lending) facility;

b) Maintain the current interest rates on term RRPs, RPs and SDAs; and

c) Maintain the current reserve requirement ratios.

**II.** **Key Considerations in the Formulation of the Monetary Policy Stance**

  - The MB’s decision was based on its assessment that prevailing price and output conditions
support maintaining current monetary policy settings. Latest baseline forecasts indicate
that average inflation is likely to settle slightly below the target range for 2015 but will
nevertheless remain within the target range of 3.0 percent ± 1 percentage point over the
rest of the policy horizon. The forecasts are also supported by well-anchored inflation
expectations.

  - The MB likewise noted that upside risks to the inflation outlook continue to emanate from
pending petitions for power rate adjustments and the impact of stronger-than-expected El
Niño dry weather conditions on food prices and utility rates. Meanwhile, a modest rise in
food and commodity prices, and slower global economic activity could pose downside risks
to inflation.

  - The MB observed that recent benign inflation outturns have been the result of favorable
supply-side conditions, which are largely seen as having a transitory impact on the inflation
path. Over the policy horizon, inflation is projected to rise gradually and stabilize within
the lower half of the inflation target range. At the same time, the MB noted that recent
developments on the global front require careful monitoring, as they could pose threats to
financial stability.

  - Given these considerations, the MB was of the view that current monetary policy settings
remained appropriate. The MB reiterated that it will continue to monitor closely domestic

1 The discussions herein reflect the assessment made by the Monetary Board based on a comprehensive set of economic information available at
the time of the policy meeting. The highlights of the discussions on the 13 August 2015 meeting were approved by the Monetary Board during its
regular meeting held on 3 September 2015. The next meeting of the Monetary Board on monetary policy issues is scheduled on 24 September
2015


-----

and external developments to ensure that the monetary policy stance stays in line with
maintaining price and financial stability.

**III.   Recent Developments and Inflation Outlook**

The MB considered the following developments in deciding on the monetary policy stance:

**A. Domestic price conditions**

  - Year-on-year headline inflation eased further to 0.8 percent in July. Other indicators of
price pressures also decreased, such as the official core inflation rate, two out of three
alternative measures of core inflation estimated by the BSP, and the number and weight of
the above-threshold CPI items. Meanwhile, the seasonally-adjusted month-on-month
headline and core inflation and the 3-month moving average annualized core inflation rate
were higher, while the seasonally adjusted 3-month moving average annualized headline
inflation rate was broadly steady during the month.

  - Slower food inflation due to adequate domestic supply of key food items—particularly
rice, fish, milk, fruits, and sugar—helped push inflation down. Meanwhile, non-food
inflation was steady as the slight uptick in actual rentals for housing and out-patient health
services was offset by the decline in electricity, gas, and other fuels and operation of
personal transport equipment. The inflation for electricity, gas, and other fuels likewise fell
as a result of the downward adjustment in electricity rates and price reductions in
kerosene and LPG, while inflation in operation of personal transport equipment declined
on lower pump prices of diesel and gasoline

  - By geographical location, inflation in the National Capital Region (NCR) rose to 0.8 percent
in July from 0.6 percent in June. By contrast, inflation in areas outside NCR decelerated to
0.8 percent in July from 1.4 percent a month earlier.

**B.  Inflation expectations**

  - Inflation expectations depicted in forecast surveys of private sector economists by the BSP
and by Consensus Economics are lower but continue to be within the target band over the
policy horizon. Results of the July 2015 BSP’s survey of private sector economists yielded
generally lower mean inflation forecasts for 2015 at 2.1 percent (from 2.3 percent in June)
and for 2016 at 3.0 percent (from 3.1 percent). Meanwhile, the mean forecast for 2017
was slightly higher at 3.1 percent from 3.0 percent in the previous month. Similarly, results
of the July 2015 Consensus Economics inflation forecast survey showed lower mean
inflation forecasts for 2015 and 2016 at 2.1 percent (from 2.4 percent in June) and 3.4
percent (from 3.5 percent), respectively.

**C.  Inflation outlook**

  - Inflation could settle slightly below the low-end of the government’s announced target
range in 2015. The reduction in the forecasted inflation path for 2015 could be attributed
mainly to the lower-than-projected inflation in June and July 2015 as well as the continued
reduction in global crude oil prices. Petitions for upward adjustments in transport fares


-----

were also removed from the baseline forecasts as a result of the decline in domestic price
of petroleum products. Moreover, the forecast path shows that inflation could rise
gradually to approach the midpoint of the target range in 2016 – 2017.

 - Slower global economic activity and moderate pressures on international commodity
prices continue to pose downside risks, while potential adjustments in electricity rates
given pending petitions and the impact of stronger-than-expected El Niño conditions are
the upside risks to inflation.

**D. Demand conditions**

 - Indicators of domestic demand remain firm. The composite Purchasing Managers’ Index
(PMI) has remained above the 50-point expansion threshold in May, while vehicle and
energy sales continue to be robust. Meanwhile, the Philippine business cycle was still on
an expansion phase in Q2 2015.

**E.  Supply-side indicators**

Developments in Agriculture

 - As of the third week of June 2015, the average retail price of well-milled rice increased as
the summer harvest ended, while the price of regular-milled rice was broadly steady.

 - The Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO) Food Price Index decreased in June due
mainly to the lower prices of dairy and sugar. The decline in the prices of dairy and sugar
were brought about by ample supply of dairy products, the abolition of the milk quota
system in Europe, uncertainty over China’s dairy import demand, and higher-thanexpected sugar production in India and Thailand. These aforementioned declines more
than offset the rise in prices of cereal and vegetable oil. Cereal prices rose as unfavorable
weather conditions adversely affected the supply of wheat and coarse grains, while
increased demand from China and India drove the prices of vegetable oils higher.

 - The MB noted PAGASA’s observation that El Niño conditions in the tropical Pacific Ocean
have intensified from weak to moderate last June and have shown signs of intensifying
into a strong episode in Q3 2015 before gradually weakening around early 2016.

Oil Price Developments

 - Oil prices extended their retreat in July following the signing of the Iran nuclear deal. Dubai
crude further declined in early August on expectations of lower demand amidst an
oversupplied oil market. Meanwhile, on a year-to-date basis, the domestic prices of
petroleum products, except for gasoline, were generally lower as of 4 August 2015.

Developments in the Utilities Sector

 - Electricity rates fell for a third consecutive month in July as the provisional decrease in the
distribution charge offset the higher generation charge. According to Meralco, settlement
prices at the Wholesale Electricity Spot Market and generation charges of Independent


-----

Power Producers increased mainly on account of power plant outages and the use of more
expensive alternative fuels due to Malampaya gas restrictions.

**F. Financial market developments**

 - The equities market continued to retreat in July on increased risk aversion amid signs of a

slowdown in the Chinese economy. However, the bailout deal between Greece and its
creditors as well as expectations of strong domestic corporate earnings in Q2 2015 buoyed
market sentiment and tempered the slide.

 - The peso weakened in July as favorable indicators of US economic activity reinforced the

likelihood of an interest rate hike in the US later this year. The peso depreciated further in
early August, breaching the P46-level following the devaluation of the Chinese yuan.
Nonetheless, the sustained inflows of foreign exchange from overseas Filipino remittances,
BPO and tourism receipts, as well as the ample level of the country’s gross international
reserves provided support to the peso.

 - Meanwhile, debt spreads widened in early July amid uncertainty over the Greek debt crisis

as well as concerns over the stock market sell-off in China. Debt spreads started to ease by
mid-July after Greece and its creditors agreed on a bailout package and after the Chinese
government intervened to arrest the stock market rout.

 - Volatility in global and local financial markets increased following the devaluation of the

yuan by Chinese authorities in early August. Consequently, the Philippine stock market
index declined and the peso depreciated, tracking the movement of other bourses and
currencies in the region.

**G. Domestic liquidity and credit conditions**

 - Preliminary data show that M3 grew by 9.0 percent year-on-year in June 2015 to reach
P7.7 trillion. This was slightly slower than the 9.3-percent expansion recorded in May. On a
month-on-month seasonally-adjusted basis, M3 decreased by 0.3 percent.

 - Outstanding loans of commercial banks, net of reverse repurchase (RRP) placements with
the BSP, expanded by 14.5 percent in June which is the same growth rate as in May. On a
month-on-month seasonally-adjusted basis, commercial bank lending for loans net of RRPs
increased by 0.7 percent.

**H.  Fiscal developments**

 - The National Government (NG) recorded a fiscal surplus of P13.7 billion for the period

January-June 2015, reversing the P54.0-billion deficit incurred in the same period in 2014.
Netting out the interest payments in the expenditures, the primary surplus amounted to
P169.9 billion, P64.1 billion or 60.6 percent higher than the level recorded in the same
period a year ago.


-----

**I.  External developments**

 - Growth in the US has found greater traction, increasing the likelihood of a lift-off in
interest rates by the US Federal Reserve before the end of the year. Meanwhile, the
recovery in the euro area and Japan continues to improve. By contrast, economic activity
across major emerging markets weakens further. With these developments, the outlook
for global economic growth for 2015 has been downgraded in the July update of the IMF’s
World Economic Outlook, with the risks to the projections remaining on the downside.
Inflation pressures are likely to remain subdued amid soft prospects for the prices of oil
and other commodities.


-----

