#                                 Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas


**HIGHLIGHTS OF THE MEETING OF THE MONETARY BOARD ON**

**MONETARY POLICY ISSUES  HELD ON 11 APRIL 2002[∗]**


**Background**

The Monetary Board held its fourth meeting for the year on monetary
policy issues on 11 April 2002.  This  followed the meeting of the Advisory
Committee  on  9 April 2002  where the members discussed their assessment
of the inflation outlook and macroeconomic conditions, which formed the basis
for their recommendations on the appropriate monetary policy stance.[1] The
Advisory Committee submitted, for the consideration of the Monetary Board, a
policy paper and various information relevant for the deliberation on monetary
policy. In particular, the Monetary Board discussed factors affecting inflation and
inflation expectations, particularly the uptrend in global and local oil prices,
possible power rate adjustments  and the impact of the El Niño weather
phenomenon on food supply in the latter part of 2003, monetary conditions,
external developments  and  the global economic  outlook, demand and output
indicators and the implications of these factors on monetary policy.

**I. Considerations in  the Formulation of the Monetary Policy Stance**

**Current inflation and the inflation outlook**

**1.  Inflation in March 2002 was recorded at 3.6 percent year-on-year. This was a**
slight increase from the level in the previous month, but well within the BSP’s
and the range of market expectations for the period. The uptick in March
inflation was attributed to adjustments in electricity rates, higher costs for
housing and repairs, and a seasonal increase in food prices due to the Lenten

∗ The highlights of the discussions of the  11 April  2002 Monetary Board meeting were
approved by the Monetary Board during its meeting held on 16 May 2002.
1 The Advisory Committee is composed of the Governor of the BSP as Chairman and four
members, namely the Deputy Governor for the Banking Services Sector, Research and Treasury,
the Deputy Governor for Supervision and Examination Sector, the Director of the Department of
Economic Research, and the Director of the Treasury Department

**11-04-2002** **1**


-----

#                                 Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas

season. The first quarter average inflation rate of 3.6 percent was well below the
government’s target of 5-6 percent for the year.

**2. The various measures of core inflation have been on a downtrend since**
August 2001. The sustained  slowdown in headline and core inflation affirms
further the broad outlook of a low inflation environment for the rest of 2002,
given that past and current inflation influence expectations of price movements
going forward. Generally good food supply conditions are expected to exert a
favorable  influence on consumer prices in 2002. In addition,  continued  spare
capacity in manufacturing (at 74.4 percent average capacity utilization in January
2002 from 76.5 percent (revised) in December 2001), relatively high
unemployment  (10.2 percent in January 2002 from 9.8 percent in the previous
month)  along with  still soft domestic demand  indicate broadly stable price
movements in the near term.

**3. Inflation readings—based on the most recent macroeconomic assumptions on**
economic growth, monetary aggregates, Treasury bill rates, the Government’s
fiscal position, the exchange rate, domestic oil prices and prices of non-oil
imports and the expected  yearly increase in wages—paint a benign inflation
picture in 2002 and 2003, in line with the targets.

**Latest forecast readings of the BSP paint a generally benign inflation**
**picture despite some uptick  beginning in the latter part of 2002.**

**Impact of the El Niño weather disturbance on future inflation**

**4.  Based on the assessment of the Department of Agriculture (DA), the  El**
Niño weather disturbance in 2002 is likely to manifest itself in a weak  form in
the second half of the year. However, this warming phenomenon is expected to
have a muted impact on agricultural production,  since it is expected to come
during the rainy season. At the same time, the DA has  implemented various
measures to mitigate the impact of dry weather conditions, particularly through
the construction and upgrading of irrigation systems as well as the rehabilitation
of shallow tube wells in order  to provide adequate water facilities to  farmlands
across the country.  For the period January-June 2002, the DA has forecasted
palay and corn production at 5.72 million metric tons and 2.05 million metric
tons, respectively, up by 2.7 percent and 4.7 percent from the previous year’s

**11-04-2002** **2**


-----

#                                 Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas

level.[2] These reflected gains from  expansion in hectarage and productivity.
Moreover, rice inventory  rose by 5.5 percent to 2.3 million metric tons as of 1
January 2002.[3]

**Forecasts of favorable  food supply conditions for the rest of 2002 by**
**the DA along with measures to mitigate  the impact of the El Niño cyclical**
**warming condition have reinforced expectations of favorable food prices  for**
**the whole year. However, the full impact of the El Niño weather disturbance**
**in 2003 could weigh heavily on food production, leading to lower  food**
**supply unless adequate water provisions and water-saving measures are**
**instituted promptly. Moreover, timely importation of grains, in particular of**
**rice, will be important in meeting any domestic shortfall and mitigating**
**upward price pressures.**

**Exchange rate developments**

**5.** The peso continued to strengthen, supported by strong inflows of foreign
portfolio investments and dollar remittances of overseas Filipino workers
(OFWs). For the period  1-9 April 2002, the peso-dollar rate averaged  at
P51.09/US$1 from P51.41/US$1 in December 2001. At the same time, the
exchange rate has been stable—with its standard deviation estimated at about 6
centavos during the period 1-9 April 2002, a sustained improvement from 11
centavos in the previous month, 18 centavos in January  2002 and 31 centavos
in December 2001.

**The sustained strength and  stability of the peso is expected to have**
**a positive  influence on future inflation.**

**Oil price developments**

**6.  As of 3 April 2002, the spot international price of crude oil (Dubai)—reached**
US$25.59  per barrel, up sharply by 43.5 percent from the US$17.83 per barrel
average in December 2001.[4] Reflecting the uptrend in world oil prices, the three
major oil companies—Caltex Philippines, Shell Petroleum Corporation and
Petron Corporation—raised pump prices twice after the 11  September events:

2 Department of Agriculture (DA), Rice and Corn Situation and Outlook, January 2002
3 Source: Bureau of Agricultural Statistics (BAS)
4 Source: Department of Energy

**11-04-2002** **3**


-----

#                                 Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas

by  35 centavos per liter  for gasoline and 30 centavos per liter  for diesel and
kerosene on 21  March 2002 and by  an average of 50 centavos across domestic
petroleum products on 6 April 2002.[5]  These price hikes brought the increase in
domestic oil prices to an average of  about 82.5 centavos since the beginning of
the year.

**7.** In the futures market, benchmark Brent crude oil for May 2002 deliveries
were traded at a high of US$27.35 per barrel.[6] The  recent spike in world oil
prices was driven by fears over the impact of Iraq’s oil embargo  due to  the
escalating Israel-Palestinian conflict in the Middle East. The uptrend in world oil
prices was also attributed to the decision of OPEC and non-OPEC countries to
sustain production cuts  to support  oil prices. OPEC member-countries reduced
their production by 1.5 million barrels per day while non-OPEC countries such as
Russia, Mexico and Norway have cut oil production by some 500,000 barrels so
far this year. Apart from the supply-side pressures, signs of a faster-than-expected
US rebound also influenced the uptrend in world oil prices on expectations of
increased demand for oil.

**8.  A simulation of the inflation impact of a  possible sustained  increase in**
Dubai  crude oil from US$24.00 per barrel for the period January-March 2002
to  an average of US$24.00-US$27.50 per barrel  for the whole year  would
translate directly to an increase in the average inflation for 2002  of about 0.2-0.4
percentage points.[7]  Based on the  assumption that oil prices  for the rest of the
year would increase—to an average of US$27.50 per barrel—the indirect impact
on inflation was estimated to be about  twice that of the direct impact, for a total
impact of 1.22 percentage points.[8]

**The pass-through impact of higher oil prices is expected to translate**
**into a generalized increase in the price level since oil is a major input in the**
**production and delivery of a broad range of goods and services.**

5 Source: Department of Energy
6 IMF, Global Markets Monitor, 4 April 2002
7 The assumptions on world oil prices were based on two scenarios: (1) oil prices would track the
Brent futures  prices (as of 5 April 2002) for May-December 2002  to reach an average of
US$24.00 per barrel  in 2002; and (2) oil prices would reach  US$30.00 per barrel  for the
period April-December 2002 to settle at  an average of US$27.50 per barrel for the whole year.
8 Based on the simulation results using input-output (I-O) analysis and the  structural inflationforecasting model for estimating the total impact and direct impact of an oil price increase on
inflation, respectively.

**11-04-2002** **4**


-----

#                                 Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas

**Petitions for upward adjustment in power rates**

**9.  In a revised petition for the “unbundling” of power rates submitted to the**
Energy Regulatory Commission (ERC) on 2 April 2002, the Manila Electric
Company (Meralco) proposed graduated power rate adjustments. The revised
petition provided  for  moderate increases for  residential customers consuming
not over 300 kilowatt-hours (kwh) per month of electricity, which comprised
about 70 percent of total residential customers. In particular, those consuming
less than 50 kwh per month or the so-called “lifeline consumers” will not be
affected by the planned increase. However, power costs of households consuming
electricity over 300 kwh per month are expected to increase by an average of
13.0-13.7 percent depending on  power usage bracket.  Based on the revised
petition of Meralco, the proposed rates will likely raise the cost of electric power
consumption by an average of P0.65 per kwh or about 10 percent across all
residential users.[9]  Based on the input-output (I-O) analysis, a 10 percent increase
in power rates would raise average inflation by about 0.48 percentage points.
While  light  accounts for  only 2.73 percent of the CPI basket, the passthrough impact of an increase in power cost could have a cascading impact on
prices of other commodity groups.

**The  flow-on effects of possible  power rate adjustments  could  lead**
**to a cascading  impact on the prices of other commodities.**

**Interest rates and interest rate differentials**

**10.** As of 1 April 2002, the  differential between the RP 91-day T-bill rate (net
of RP withholding tax) and the 90-day LIBOR narrowed further to 2.11 percent
while the differential between the RP 91-day (net of RP withholding tax) and the
US 90-day T-bills fell to 2.37 percentage points. These differentials were the
lowest since 26 March 2001 when the differentials reached 2.32 percent and 2.54
percent, respectively.  The narrowing interest rate differentials between the
Philippines and the US can be traced mainly to the steep decline in the benchmark
RP 91-day T-bill rate, accompanied by the steady rise in the 90-day US LIBOR
and US 90-day T-bill rates as markets priced expectations of future increases in
US interest rates.  Compared to the historical levels, the current interest rate

9 Meralco, Press Release entitled, Meralco Submits New Alternative on Rate Unbundling,” 2 April
2002

**11-04-2002** **5**


-----

#                                 Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas

differentials with the US are lower  than the 3.82-4.23 percent average recorded
for the period 1995-2001.

**11.  The differential between the BSP’s policy interest rate (overnight borrowing**
or RRP rate) and the US federal funds target rate declined further to 525 basis
points following the 25 basis-point cut in the BSP’s RRP rate effective 15 March
2002. This differential was lower than the average differential in 2001 of about
5.9 percentage points; however, it was higher than the differential  that
prevailed  for the most part  in  2000, which averaged at about 4.7 percentage
points. Meanwhile, adjusted for the risk premium—as measured by the
differential between the 10-year ROP note and the 10-year US Treasury note—
the differential between the BSP policy interest rate and the US federal funds
target rate has been on an uptrend, as the risk premium for the Philippines
continued to fall sharply in March 2002. As of 22 March 2002, the risk premium
was estimated at 359 basis points, reflecting a  58 basis points decline  from
that recorded on 7 January 2002 level of 417 basis points.

**With the sustained decline in the market interest rates, the country’s**
**interest rate differentials with the US have narrowed further. The continued**
**drop in interest rate differentials could limit the scope  for a further cut  in**
**the BSP’s policy rates  as this  could  threaten  the relative stability in the**
**foreign exchange market in case of a dramatic shift in market sentiment.**

**12.  For the period 1-3 April 2002, the spread of the Philippine lending rate over**
the benchmark T-bill rate stood at about 356 basis points. This differential was
slightly higher than the average of 344  basis points for a sample of countries.
The highest spread observed was that for Taiwan at 526 basis points, while the
lowest was that for Indonesia at 60 basis points. In general, the  spread between
the Philippine lending rate and the average benchmark 91-day T-bill rate
continued to trend downward. Since the BSP started to ease policy rates in
December 2000, the 91-day T-bill rate has dropped by 10.63 percentage points for
the period November 2000-1 April 2002 while the low-end of the range of bank
lending rates has declined by about 9.25 percentage points during the same
period.

**13. In general, the real lending rate—measured as the difference between the**
low-end of the range of banks’ lending rates and the inflation rate—of most Asian
countries declined due to the faster rate of decline in banks’ lending rate relative
to inflation across the region. In particular, the  Philippines’ real lending rate

**11-04-2002** **6**


-----

#                                 Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas

dropped further  to 5.09 percent during the period 1-3 April 2002 from 6.05
percent  in March 2002. Relative to other Asian countries, the Philippines’ real
lending rate at 5.09 percent was lower compared to most countries surveyed
(Hong Kong, India, Singapore, Taiwan and Thailand and Malaysia).

**Banks’ lending rates in the Philippines  continue to be on a downtrend,**
**reflecting, in part, the impact of the BSP’s past monetary easing.**

**14.  The yield curve for government securities in the secondary market as of 1**
April 2002 was steeper at the longer end of the curve (5-10 years) compared to
that at the beginning of 2002.

**The slope of the yield curve indicates higher inflationary expectations**
**over the medium-term. Meanwhile, the sharper downward shift at the**
**shorter end of the curve reflected the impact of monetary policy on short-**
**term instruments.**

**Domestic stock market movements**

**15. The domestic stock market underwent a period of consolidation during the**
period 1-26 March 2002 as most investors opted to stay in the sidelines ahead of
the Lenten season. The consolidation was expected considering the substantial
appreciation that has been realized since the middle of November 2001. The
PHISIX averaged 1,405.72 index points in March, up slightly by 7.25 index
points  from the  average of 1,398 index points recorded in February 2002. The
upturn in share prices in the domestic stock market was limited as investors
took advantage of the opportunity to collect gains  after  significant increases
in share prices  in the last three months and as they wait for more positive
fresh news  on the performance of the corporate sector and the Philippine
economy. However, analysts generally view the domestic stock market’s overall
positive tone as sustainable over the long term.

**16. Foreign participation in the stock market strengthened as its share to total**
transactions increased slightly to 43 percent  in March 2002 from 42 percent in
January and February 2002.  Net foreign buying rose by more than twice  to
about P862.0 million  in March 2002 from P370.3 million in the previous
month.  The steady stream of portfolio investments during the month could be
attributed to the  steep decline in market interest rates, which prompted the shift
from low-yielding fixed income instruments to local shares of stocks.  With

**11-04-2002** **7**


-----

#                                 Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas

money market yields at historic lows, market analysts  are of the view that
stocks  could outperform other types of investments.

**While monetary policy is focused mainly  on  controlling inflation in**
**the market for goods and services, the BSP looks  at  the movements of asset**
**prices as leading indicators of underlying movements in the economy. Asset**
**prices also contain useful incremental information about macroeconomic**
**fundamentals. Despite consolidation in the domestic stock market in March**
**2002, the long-term outlook continues to be positive given active foreign**
**participation and the steady stream of  portfolio investments.**

**Monetary aggregates and bank lending**

**17. Domestic liquidity (M3)  grew  by a stronger 7.2 percent as of end-**
February 2002 from the level a year ago, reflecting  an upturn from  the 5.3
percent year-on-year slowdown  in the previous month.  Banks, however,
continue to be circumspect in their lending activities as the volume of
outstanding loans of commercial banks dropped by 3.2 percent in January
2002 from the level a year ago. The  January 2002  contraction in bank lending
marked the sixth month of successive decline in bank lending since August 2001
due to constraints posed by  persistently high non-performing loans (NPLs) and
the presence of spare capacity in manufacturing, which has dampened demand
for new loans.

**18.  Meanwhile, based on data from the BSP and the National Government**
(NG), banks continued to place their excess funds in government securities and in
the BSP’s RRP and SDA facilities. As of 18 March 2002, banks’ placements in
the RRP window rose to P66.5 billion from P28.2 billion while placements under
the SDA window amounted to P42.0 billion from zero as of end-December 2001.
Using seasonally adjusted data, the levels of RRPs and SDAs rose by 10.5 percent
and 72.8 percent, month-on-month, respectively compared to the 5.9 percent
growth and 77.0 percent contraction recorded a year ago. Thus, both the
seasonally adjusted and non-seasonally adjusted data on RRPs and SDAs of 18
March 2002 showed reflows of banks’ excess liquidity into the BSP. It may be
noted, however, that the consolidated tiering scheme had, to a certain extent,
capped the  volume  of banks’ placements  with the BSP.

**11-04-2002** **8**


-----

#                                 Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas

**Despite successive monetary policy easing in the past, banks remain**
**circumspect in lending, due in part to still relatively large NPLs and the slow**
**pick up in corporate demand. Meanwhile, a large part of banks’ excess**
**liquidity continues to be placed in government securities and the BSP’s RRP**
**and SDA windows.**

**External developments and outlook**

**19.** The US Fed shifted to a neutral monetary stance as it kept the target federal
funds rate at 1.75 percent during its meeting on 19 March 2002.[10]  The US
Federal Open Market Committee noted that the US economy is already expanding
at a significant pace, driven in part by increases in inventory investments and
improving industrial production as well as continued resilience in consumer
spending.  US GDP data show positive growth in the fourth quarter of 2001, a
sharp recovery from the contraction seen in the previous quarter. Unemployment
fell to 5.5 percent in February 2002 from 5.8 percent in December, and payroll
employment showed an increase in February following successive declines in the
previous six months. Declining business inventory levels and evidence of
expansion in US manufacturing have also improved the outlook for US
consumption and external trade. These developments have given rise to
expectations of an increase in the US federal funds target rate  by  25-50 basis
points  at the Fed’s next policy meeting on 7 May 2002.[11] Moreover, the Chicago
Board of Trade survey on the federal funds futures contract  indicates that target
US federal funds target rate could increase by a cumulative 165 basis points by
December 2002 from the current level.[12]

**20.  Strengthening economic conditions  in other major countries—boosted by**
the upturn in employment and confidence—particularly in the Euro zone and in
the UK have  heightened expectations that  their central banks are also poised to
increase interest rates in the near term. The Reserve Bank of  New Zealand and
the Swedish National Bank have in fact raised their policy interest rates following
the neutral monetary policy stance of the US Fed during its meeting on 19 March
2002.  Market analysts believe that these developments  reflect more an end to
the overly accommodative monetary policy stance, particularly by the US—

10 The US Fed was on an accommodative monetary policy stance for the period 3 January 2001 to
11 December 2001. The US Fed maintained its weakness bias until 30 January 2002 and moved to
a neutral bias on 19 March 2002. (Source: www.Bloomberg.com)
11 IMF, Global Markets Monitor, 22 March 2002
12 Quoted from the Bloomberg News, 28 March 2002

**11-04-2002** **9**


-----

#                                 Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas

which was a response to the abnormally weak global conditions exacerbated by
the 11 September attacks—rather than  genuine  fears of rising inflation.  News
of the US rebound has raised expectations of an end to the monetary easing mode
in Europe and Asia as well.

**Steady signs of a US-led global economic turnaround have set the**
**stage for possible end to the accommodative monetary policy stance and**
**eventual increase in  the US federal funds target rate  to contain the possible**
**build-up in inflationary pressures coming from stronger demand.**

**II. Discussion  on the Review of the Monetary Policy Stance**

**21.** The members of the Monetary Board agreed that favorable food supply
conditions  and continued broad stability  in the exchange rate  combined with
still relatively weak domestic demand and the presence of spare capacity
pointed to generally subdued inflation in 2002. However, uncertainty over the
impact of El Niño weather phenomenon on agricultural crop production in 2003,
the uptrend in oil prices, and the expected adjustment in power rates  posed
downside risks to the inflation outlook. The Board noted that these developments
underscored the need to carefully monitor and assess underlying inflationary
pressures as well as supported a case for greater caution in monetary policy
settings, going forward.

**22. Some members of the  Monetary Board noted the latest advisory of the**
Department of Agriculture (DA), citing that  the El Niño weather phenomenon
is expected to occur during the last quarter of the year when the planting season
has already been  finished. In addition,  the  DA has  also encouraged farmers
to plant ahead to mitigate the  possible adverse impact of the dry spell on food
crops. This  advisory  of the DA reinforced its earlier expectations  that the
impact of the warming phenomenon on agricultural output  would likely be
minimal, indicating  relative stability in  food prices in the near term.

**23. Given the concerns over inflationary risks  posed by the upswing in world oil**
prices and possible power rate adjustments, a likely increase in election-related
spending and indications that demand pressures would pick up as the global
economic recovery strengthens, some Monetary Board members emphasized the
need to monitor and assess more carefully the evolving environment, with

**11-04-2002** **10**


-----

#                                 Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas

particular focus on the impact of the current Middle East conflict on the oil
market.[13]

**24.** The members of the Monetary Board shared the view that the  monetary
authorities should also monitor closely the movements in interest rate
differentials. While the current interest rate margins remain comfortable and
broadly supportive of the peso, such margins could be pared down in the course
of the year as the cycle of monetary easing comes to an end in the world’s major
economies, notably the US. In turn, a further  narrowing of  interest rate
differentials could trigger renewed volatility in the foreign exchange market as
investors shift from peso-denominated assets to foreign-currency denominated
assets.  The possibility of excessive volatility in the exchange rate could feed into
inflationary expectations and thus increase the overall price level. This also
argued for greater caution in pursuing further monetary easing.

**25. Moreover, the members of the Monetary Board agreed that the  scope for**
cutting policy rates was partly limited by the fact that the overnight RRP rate has
reached a decade low level, and monetary conditions have already been eased to a
significant extent over the past year. As of 15 March 2002, the BSP’s policy
rates have declined by 800 basis points  since  the BSP started to ease policy
rates in December 2000. The benchmark 91-day T-bill rate stood at 5.174
percent during the 1 April 2002 auction, the lowest rate recorded since the
auction for T-bills started in October 1986. This has also contributed to the sharp
decline in bank lending rates by about  925 basis points for the period
November 2000-March 2002.

**26. The members of the Monetary Board emphasized that the presence of**
inflationary  risk factors  suggested the need for greater caution in setting the
monetary policy stance. In this regard, a cautious monetary stance involves
allowing the cumulative  interest rate cuts in the past to work their way through
the economy. The Monetary Board members believed that well-calibrated
monetary policy settings would preclude the need for any dramatic tightening in
the near term should the economy start to recover more quickly than anticipated.

13 The synchronized election of Sangguniang Kabataan (SK) and Barangay Officials is scheduled
on 15 July 2002.

**11-04-2002** **11**


-----

#                                 Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas

**III.  Monetary Policy Decision**

**27.  Based on the above discussion, the Monetary Board decided to:**

a. Maintain the BSP’s policy rates at the current levels of 7.0 percent for
the overnight RRP (borrowing) rate and 9.25  percent for the
overnight RP (lending) rate; and

b. Maintain the current structure of the tiering scheme for the overnight
RRP  placements with the BSP  at 7.0 percent for the first P5.0 billion;
4.0 percent for the next P5.0 billion and 1.0 percent for placements in
excess of P10 billion.

The next meeting of the Monetary Board to discuss the monetary policy
setting was scheduled on 9 May  2002.

**—The Monetary Board of the Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas**

o:\mdgparaso\__MB minutes\11-04-2002 meeting

**11-04-2002** **12**


-----

