#                                 Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas


**HIGHLIGHTS OF THE MEETING OF THE MONETARY BOARD ON**

**MONETARY POLICY ISSUES  HELD ON 29 AUGUST 2002[∗]**


**Background**

The Monetary Board held its ninth meeting on monetary policy issues on
29 August 2002. This followed the 27 August 2002 meeting of the Advisory
Committee where the members discussed their assessment of the inflation
outlook and macroeconomic conditions, which formed the basis for their
recommendations for  the appropriate monetary policy stance.[1] The Advisory
Committee submitted, for the consideration of the Monetary Board, a policy
paper and a comprehensive set of economic and financial indicators relevant for
the deliberation on monetary policy. In particular, the Monetary Board discussed
the factors affecting inflation and inflationary expectations, including agricultural
production,  movements of the exchange rate, direction of world oil prices,
possible adjustments in power and water rates, monetary conditions, trends in
demand and output indicators, fiscal developments, developments and outlook in
the world economy, and the implications of these factors on the BSP’s
monetary policy stance.

**I. Considerations in  the Formulation of the Monetary Policy Stance**

**Current inflation and the inflation outlook**

**1. Headline inflation decelerated anew in July 2002, falling to 2.6 percent from**
3.0 percent in the previous month. Declining fuel prices as well as lower food
inflation were behind this development. The average inflation for the first seven
months of the year stood  at 3.4 percent, more than a full percentage point lower
than the low-end of the government’s target range of 4.5-5.5 percent.

∗ The highlights of the discussions of the 29 August 2002 Monetary Board meeting were approved by the Monetary Board
during its meeting held on 3 October 2002.
1 The Advisory Committee is composed of the Governor of the BSP as Chairman and four members, namely the Deputy
Governor for the Banking Services Sector, Research and Treasury, the Deputy Governor for Supervision and Examination
Sector, the Managing Director, In-Charge of Research or the Director of the Department of Economic Research, and the
Director of the Treasury Department.

**29-08-2002** **1**


-----

#                                 Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas

**2. Among the supply or cost-side factors, food and fuel prices were the main**
drivers of slower inflation. Food prices continued to benefit from ample supply,
while fuel and transport costs have been tempered by reductions in local pump
prices during the period 26 June-1 July 2002 as well as the postponement of
planned transport fare increases. Although there were signs of improvement,
demand-side factors remained generally soft. Real gross domestic product (GDP)
grew stronger than expected in the second quarter, rising by 4.5 percent as
industry recovered and services continued to gain strength. Bank lending, fell by
3.7 percent as of end-June 2002 from the level a year ago.  Meralco power sales
have also made a turnaround, rising  for two consecutive months, by  2.9
percent and  4.6 percent  in April and May, respectively, compared to  their
levels a year ago. This followed four consecutive months of declining power
sales. Cement sales—an indicator of  activity in the construction sector—rose
by 23.5 percent year-on-year in April, a significant increase  over the 4.1
percent growth registered in the same period  a year ago.  Similarly, the  value
of building permits  surged  by  56.7 percent to P33.7 billion  in the first quarter
of 2002 from P21.5 billion during the same period in 2001, a further evidence of
improving prospects in construction. These developments could be indicative of
gradual strengthening in aggregate demand.

**The continued deceleration in headline inflation—owing to the**
**positive supply-side factors and the relatively soft but improving demand**
**conditions—provides further indications that inflationary pressures are well**
**under control in the near term.**

**Agricultural output forecasts**

**3. The Department of Agriculture (DA) reported that agricultural production in**
the first semester grew by a respectable  3.2 percent  from the level a year ago
despite the onset  of the monsoon season and the dry spell in some regions of
the country. This growth could be attributed largely to gains  in the agricultural
crops sector, livestock and fishery production. The growth in agricultural
production in the first semester was well within the 2.7-3.6 percent growth
target of the agricultural sector  for the whole year.[2]

2 Department of Agriculture,  Press Release entitled “Agricultural production  grows  3.17 percent in the first half,”
15 August 2002, www.da.gov.ph

**29-08-2002** **2**


-----

#                                 Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas

**4. As of 16 August 2002, the national rice inventory was estimated  at 1.5**
million metric tons (MT), equivalent to 59 days of rice sufficiency.[3] Out of the
total national rice stock, 30 percent or 452,000 MT is held by the National Food
Authority (NFA). The  rice import program of the government,  through the
NFA, could serve as safeguard against the possible adverse impact of the recent
typhoons and the El Niño weather phenomenon on palay production. The
volume of the country’s rice imports as of 26 August 2002 reached 446,804
metric tons out of the total authorized rice imports of 890,000 metric tons for the
year.[4]

**The favorable performance of the agricultural sector supported by**
**adequate national inventory strengthen expectations of adequate food supply**
**at relatively stable prices.**

**Exchange rate developments**

**5. The peso-dollar exchange rate averaged P51.81/US$1 for the period 1-27**
August 2002, P1.17 higher relative to its average in July.  The  peso  fell to a
year-low of  P52.34 on 26 August 2002.  The recent weakness of the peso
could be attributed to the market’s continued concerns over the rising fiscal
deficit;  the  resignations of key Cabinet officials and the weakness in regional
currencies owing to the concerns over the vulnerability of emerging markets,
including the Philippines to the Brazilian debt contagion. The seasonal demand
for foreign exchange of oil companies combined with banks’ short covering
also contributed to the pressure on the peso.  The peso, however, exhibited
lower volatility during the period 1-27 August 2002 as the standard deviation
declined  to 31  centavos from  36 centavos in July.[5]

**6. On a trade-weighted basis and in real terms, the peso appreciated slightly**
relative to the basket of currencies of major trading partners by about 0.1
percent in July 2002 relative to the level in December 2001.  By contrast, the
peso tracked a depreciation trend vis-à-vis the currency baskets of competitor
countries as reflected in the decline in the real effective exchange rate (REER)
of the peso against the broad and narrow baskets of competitor currencies by

3 Estimated based on the daily consumption of 25.7 MT of rice; The security level benchmark for rice sufficiency of the
NFA is 15 days (Source: NFA).
4 Source: NFA
5 Based on real time foreign exchange transactions in the Philippine Dealing System (PDS)

**29-08-2002** **3**


-----

#                                 Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas

about 1.5 percent and 8.1 percent, respectively. These developments indicated
that the country’s external competitiveness weakened  slightly relative to its
major trading partners, but  improved compared to the broad and narrow baskets
of competing countries’ currencies.[6]

**Despite the recent weakening trend, the peso remains broadly stable**
**and supportive of the low inflation environment.**

**Oil price developments**

**7.  The price of Dubai crude in the international market reached  US$25.97 per**
barrel on 23 August 2002 to settle at an average US$24.96 for the period 1-23
August 2002. This was slightly higher than the US$24.67 per barrel average price
posted in July 2002. Concerns over the intensification of the US-Iraq conflict
and its impact on the production of Middle East countries have contributed to the
recent uptick in oil prices.

**8.  In the domestic market,  oil companies have raised the pump prices of**
gasoline and fuel products on 10-11 August 2002 by  30 centavos per liter.
Similarly, some oil companies have also raised the price of liquefied petroleum
gas (LPG) by a range of P5.00-P10.00 per 11 kilogram (kg.) on  25-27 August
2002.[7]  The net increase in domestic oil prices in 2002  thus far, stood at P1.21
per liter for gasoline, diesel and kerosene.[8]

**The uptick in domestic pump prices of petroleum products reflects the**
**lagged impact of the recent increase in world oil prices and the depreciation**
**of the peso.**

**9. In the futures market, the price of the benchmark Brent crude oil  was**
slightly higher as October 2002 deliveries settled at US$27.00 per barrel.[9]
Meanwhile, crude oil futures prices for West Texas Intermediate (WTI) climbed

6 The basket of major trading partners’ currencies  include those of US, Japan, Germancy and the United Kingdom. The
broad basket is composed of the currencies of Singapore, South Korea, Taiwan, Malaysia, Thailand, Indonesia and Hong
Kong while the narrow basket is composed of the currencies of Indonesia, Malaysia and Thailand.
7 The  price per 11 kg of  LPG  was raised  by P5.00 by Liquigas,  P10.00 by Total Corporation and P9.00 by
Pilipinas Shell Corporation and Petron Corporation on 25-27 August 2002. (Source: Department of Energy)
8 In 2001, pump price of petroleum products  declined by  P1.81 per liter for  gasoline and P 1.30 per liter for
kerosene and diesel oil (Source: Department of Energy).
9 Source: Asian Wall Street Journal, 27 May 2002, The futures price for Brent crude—a close substitute for Dubai
crude— is used as indicator of future world oil prices since futures data on Dubai crude are not readily available.

**29-08-2002** **4**


-----

#                                 Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas

above US$30.00 per barrel  for September deliveries due to rising fears that a
possible US attack on Iraq could cause large-scale disruptions of oil supplies from
the Middle East.[10] Reports that the Organization of Petroleum Exporting
Countries (OPEC) would keep production tight for member-countries, that
Iraq has reduced its oil production by 1.3 million barrels per day and that US
oil inventories were declining have also heightened  supply concerns.  These
developments could exert pressures on the general price level and inflation
expectations. An  increase in domestic oil prices following an increase in
world oil prices could raise average annual CPI inflation directly  by about
0.15 percentage points.  This could trigger a second round effect on the prices
of other commodities estimated to be about  twice that of the direct impact,
raising the average annual inflation for  2002 by about 0.48 percentage
points.[11]

**Uncertainties concerning geo-political developments and other supply**
**concerns could pose upside pressures on the spot international price of crude**
**oil and could subsequently raise domestic oil prices. In turn, an increase in**
**local oil prices could feed into adjustments in the prices of other goods and**
**services, including wages and transport fares.**

**Petitions for upward adjustment in user charges on utilities**

**10. The purchased power adjustment (PPA) charges of the Meralco have declined**
by a cumulative P1.59 for the period May-July 2002. The reduction in PPA
charges of Meralco was due mainly to the reduction in the purchased power cost
adjustment (PPCA) of the National Power Corporation (NPC).[12] Apart from the
recent reduction in power rates, electricity rates could also go down further with
the establishment of Wholesale Electricity Spot Market (WESM) and the
introduction of Special Program to Enhance Electricity Demand (SPEED) .

**11.  The Electric Power Industry Reform Act of 2001 (R.A. 9136) provided for**
the creation of an electricity spot market where generators will compete against

10 AP World Politics, “Crude prices above US$30 per barrel for the first time since May 2001,“ 22 August 2002
11 These findings were based on the simulation results using Input-Output (I-O) analysis and the structural inflation
forecasting model for estimating the total impact and direct impact of an oil price increase on inflation, respectively.
This simulation was  based on the assumption that the average price of Dubai crude would  increase to $30 per barrel
for the period September –December 2002.
12 Upon the orders of President Arroyo, NPC reduced its PPCA to P0.40/kwh effective 8 May 2002 (Source: Meralco
News Online, Credit Adjustment in July Bills, 6 June 2002, www.meralco.com.ph).

**29-08-2002** **5**


-----

#                                 Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas

each other for the right to supply power to distributors.[13] Based on DOE’s
estimates, the operations of the proposed WESM could reduce further  the cost
of electricity  by  about P0.40/kwh.[14] The DOE also planned to introduce
SPEED—a price incentive scheme for large end-users of electricity. This program
is aimed at enhancing demand for electricity by providing price incentives to large
users so that excess power capacity could be utilized. Under the SPEED scheme,
NPC and Meralco would grant industrial users a fixed discount of P0.80/kwh and
P0.92/kwh, respectively, for incremental use of energy above a specified base
load.[15] However, this price incentive scheme might not be implemented yet as the
Energy Regulatory Commission (ERC) still has to evaluate and approve the
SPEED.

**12.  Meanwhile, the ERC has yet to decide also on Meralco’s proposed graduated**
power rate adjustments as contained in its  petition for  the “unbundling” of
power rates,  submitted on 2 April 2002. The  proposed rates would likely raise
the cost of electric power consumption by an average of P0.65/kwh or about 10.3
percent across all residential users.[16] Meanwhile, the  proposed power rate
increases for commercial and industrial establishments would be moderate,
estimated at about 2.7 percent and 3.2 percent, respectively.

**13.  The Manila Waterworks and Sewerage System (MWSS) Board  has**
decided  to freeze temporarily water rate hikes this year. In an earlier petition,
the  water concessionaires, Manila Water Company (MWC) and Maynilad
Water Services Inc. (MWSI)  proposed an increase in their water rates by
P1.00 and P6.00 per cubic meter, respectively, representing an average increase
of 26.8 percent from current levels.[17] The MWSS  indicated that the proposed
increase in water rates  could be implemented  in 2003.[18]  Given the relatively

13 Pursuant to RA No. 9136, the Power Sector Assets and Liabilities Corp. (PSALM) shall manage an orderly sale and
privatization of all existing independent power producers (IPP) contracts and generation facilities of the NPC.  After
the sale and privatization  of  generation companies and IPP contracts owned by the NPC, these private companies  are
expected to participate in retail competition under the WESM for the sale of power to distributors.
14 The target date for the  full commercial operations of WESM is December 2003 (Source: Department of Energy).
15Source: Department of Energy: “PEPOA pledges support on SPEED pricing program”, 1 August 2002, www.doe.gov.ph
16 According to Meralco, the unbundling of power rates  is not expected to result in any power rate  increase for
residential users at the lowest  consumption bracket. (Source: Meralco, Press Release entitled, “Meralco Submits New
Alternative on Rate Unbundling,” 2 April 2002)
17 The current water rates charged by MWC and MWSI are P6.75 and P15.46 per cubic meter, respectively.
18 MWC services Metro Manila’s east zone which covers Mandaluyong City, Pasig City, Pateros, San Juan, Taguig, and
portions of Makati City, Manila City, Marikina City and Quezon City as well as Angono, Antipolo, Baras, Binangonan,
Cainta, Jala-Jala, Morong, Pililia, Tanay, Teresa, Rodriguez and San Mateo, all in Rizal.  MWSI services Metro Manila’s
west zone which covers Valenzuela, Bulacan, Malabon, Navotas, parts of Quezon City and Makati City, Manila City,
Pasay City, Las Piñas, Parañaque City, Muntinlupa City and areas in Cavite.

**29-08-2002** **6**


-----

#                                 Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas

small share of water to the CPI basket of 0.7 percent, the proposed increase in
water rates is estimated to result in an increase in the CPI inflation by a minimal
0.1 percentage point in 2003.[19]

**Power rates are likely to remain low for the rest of the year with the**
**planned implementation of WESM and SPEED while deferred adjustments**
**in Meralco rates and water rates could result into an increase in utility**
**charges in 2003.**

**Interest rates and interest rate differentials**

**14. The differentials between RP interest rates and foreign interest rates**
continued to widen in August 2002 as RP market interest rates trended upward
while foreign interest rates declined steadily. As of 19 August 2002, the
differentials between the RP 91-day T-bill rate (net of RP withholding tax) and
the 90-day LIBOR and US 90-day T-bill rate widened further to 2.2 percent and
2.3 percent respectively, up from the levels registered in the previous four
months.

**15.  The differential between the BSP’s policy interest rate (overnight borrowing**
or RRP rate) and the US federal funds target rate was unchanged at 525 basis
points as the BSP policy rates and the US federal funds target rate remained
steady at their 15 March 2002 and December 2001 levels, respectively.

**16.  However, adjusted for the risk premium—as measured by the differential**
between the 10-year ROP note and the 10-year US Treasury note—the differential
between the BSP policy interest rate and the US federal funds target rate
narrowed significantly in August by an average of  61 basis points, as the risk
premium rose to an average of 464 basis points in the same period.

**17.  In the domestic market, the RP 91-day T-bill rate for the month of August**
demonstrated a generally increasing trend as the yield rose from an average of
4.77 percent in July to 4.978 percent at the 19 August 2002 auction.

**The differentials between the RP interest rate and foreign interest rates**
**have increased in August. However, adjusted for risk premium, the**

19Based on analysis using input-output (I-O) tables published by the National Statistical Coordination Board (NSCB)

**29-08-2002** **7**


-----

#                                 Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas

**differentials have narrowed down. These developments indicate the need to**
**monitor closely factors that could impact adversely on market sentiment and**
**expectations.**

**18.  For the period 8-14 August 2002, the spread of the RP lending rate over the**
benchmark 91-day T-bill rate narrowed anew to 304 basis points from 317 basis
points during the period 11-17 July 2002[20] as the increase in the low-end of
banks’ lending rate (by about 8 basis points) was accompanied by a larger
increase in the RP 91-day T-bill rate ( by about 10 basis points). This differential
was below the average of 358 basis points for a sample of countries,  which
have displayed a general decrease in lending rates during the review period.

**19.  The Philippines’ real lending rate  (based on the low-end of the range of**
banks’ lending rates) for the period 8-14 August 2002 increased to 5.4 percent
from the 4.9 percent registered during the review period 11-17 July 2002 due to
the increase in the nominal lending rate along with the decline in the inflation
rate in July. However, the Philippines continued to register  one of the lowest real
lending rates in the Asian region.  In particular, the  Philippines’ real lending rate
of 5.4 percent was the fourth lowest in a sample of Asian countries.

**The RP real lending rate increases anew in August but remains lower**
**relative to those of other Asian countries.**

**20.  The yield curve for government securities in the secondary market as of 26**
August 2002 shifted upward  from that which prevailed on 22 July 2002.[21]
However, compared to 4 January 2002, the yield curve has shifted downward,
with the  general drop in the yields on government securities  ranging from
141-380 basis points across all maturities.

**The general increase in the yields of government securities in the**
**secondary market is due, in part, to market concerns over the widening**
**budget deficit.**

20 Review period during the last meeting on monetary policy by the Monetary Board on 1 August 2002
21 Yield curve presented in the last meeting on monetary policy by the Monetary Board on 1 August 2002

**29-08-2002** **8**


-----

#                                 Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas

**Domestic stock market movements**

**21. Trading in the domestic stock market remained sluggish. The average**
PHISIX for the period 1-22 August 2002 dropped by 32.3 index points relative
to its month ago level as it fell to a year-low of 1,114.9 index points.[22] The
bearish sentiment in the market could be attributed to persistent concerns over
widening budget deficit, the depreciation of the peso and the lack of positive
corporate news.

**22.  The weakness in the domestic stock market was also evident in the thin**
volume and value of transactions. The volume of transactions during the period 122 August reached 3.5 billion shares, 5.4 percent lower than the 3.7 billion
shares registered during the comparable period  in the previous month  while
value turnover slid by 24.6 percent to P4.9 billion from P6.5 billion during the
same period.  Meanwhile, foreign investors have remained net sellers for the
fifth consecutive month as foreign selling outpaced foreign buying by P225.8
million. Total foreign transactions in August accounted for 58 percent of the total
transactions, higher than the 38 percent (revised) registered a month ago.[23]

**The domestic stock market remains in the consolidation phase in**
**August with bargain hunting providing support to the market. The recovery**
**of the local bourse would depend on the sustainability of the growth in the**
**domestic economy and positive developments in the US and other major**
**economies.**

**Monetary aggregates and bank lending**

**23. The growth in domestic liquidity slowed down to 5.1 percent to reach P1.55**
trillion as of end-June 2002. At this level, however, the growth in M3 decelerated
from the 6.9 percent year-on-year growth registered in May 2002. The  rise in
M3 in June could be attributed partly to the increase in net foreign assets (NFA)
of the monetary system, following the increase in investments in foreign
currency-denominated securities by banks and the BSP along with the decline in
their foreign currency-denominated liabilities.  In addition, increased preference
for peso deposits relative to foreign currency deposits contributed to the increase
in M3.

22 Source: Philippine Stock Exchange
23 Ibid.

**29-08-2002** **9**


-----

#                                 Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas

**24.  The volume of commercial banks’ (KB) loans outstanding  reached P1.38**
trillion as of end-June 2002,  about  3.7 percent  lower than the level
recorded a year ago. The restraint in bank lending could be traced, in part, to
banks’ cautious stance in extending new loans in an effort to curb any further
weakening in the quality of their assets as banks’ non-performing loans (NPLs)
remained relatively high.  As of end-June 2002, the NPL to total loans ratio
eased slightly to 18.1 percent from 18.4 percent in the previous month.

**25. The volume of banks’ placements with the BSP under the RRP window**
declined  by P13.0 billion to reach P92.9 billion as of 20 August  2002  from
P105.9 billion as of end-July 2002 while placements under the SDA window
declined only slightly to reach P5.6 billion from P5.7 billion during the same
period.  Compared to the levels as of end-December 2001, RRP and SDA
placements registered an increase of P64.7 billion and P5.6 billion, respectively,
from P28.2 billion and zero worth of placements.

**Lending activities of banks remain weak due to  constraints posed**
**by relatively high NPLs. Moreover, the presence of spare capacity**
**combined with the lack of buoyancy in domestic demand have limited**
**firms’ need for additional bank financing. Meanwhile, banks’ placements**
**with the BSP’s RRP and SDA windows have declined in August relative to**
**the levels in July as banks shifted their investments into government**
**securities, particularly in longer-dated instruments.**

**26.  The National Government (NG) budget deficit for the period January-July**
2002 was P133.1 billion, exceeding the full-year target of P130 billion.  The
continuing weakness in tax revenue collections combined with the frontloading
of expenditures for agricultural-related projects—to cushion the possible
adverse impact of the El Niño weather disturbance in 2003—have constrained the
ability of the NG to rein in the fiscal deficit.  In the short-term, a  breach of the
target deficit could be manageable, given  adequate fiscal resources, especially
since the NG has  earlier on prefunded  its  financing requirements.  In the
long run, the sustainability of the fiscal deficits and the costs they impose in terms
of debt servicing could pose some constraints on macroeconomic management.
Large fiscal deficits could lead to higher domestic borrowings or net drawdowns
in the deposits of the NG with the BSP.  These alternative measures to finance
the deficit  have implications on market interest rates and domestic liquidity,
which, in turn, could affect inflation and inflationary expectations.

**29-08-2002** **10**


-----

#                                 Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas

**Developments and outlook in the rest of the world**

**27.  The growth of the  US economy slowed down to 1.1 percent (in terms of**
real GDP on an annualized basis) in the second quarter of 2002 from  5.0
percent in the previous quarter. The slower-than-initially anticipated recovery of
the US underpinned the decision of the US Fed to keep the federal funds target
rate steady at  1.75 percent during its last meeting on 13 August 2002.

**28.  Consumer sentiment  in the US remained soft amidst mixed economic**
signals. The University of Michigan consumer confidence index  fell to 88.1
in July from 92.4 in June and 96.9 in May.[24] The unemployment rate also
remained relatively high at 5.9 percent as companies continued to hold back
plans to hire additional workers. The continuing uncertainty in  the global
economic environment suggested the possibility that the US Fed would further
cut the federal funds target rate in order to boost  economic activity.  Trading
in the futures markets  indicated that investors anticipate a possible rate cut
by at least a quarter percentage point before the end of the year.

**29.  In the euro zone, the European Central Bank (ECB) kept policy rates**
unchanged during its 1 August 2002 meeting  as recent economic and financial
developments continued to show mixed signals. The ECB noted that the main
risk elements in the outlook on the euro economy relate to the pressures in the
labor market, the huge  declines in the stock prices which could dampen
consumer spending and weaken corporate performance,  and the  uncertainty in
global economic recovery. In Japan, signs of economic  rebound  in the first
quarter have largely been  confined to the export sector. The long-standing
structural weaknesses in the banking system have constrained the recovery of the
Japanese economy.[25] In its latest assessment, the International Monetary Fund
(IMF) noted that the Japanese economy continued to face  downside  risks  as
growth  remained weak amidst a deflationary environment.

**External developments in the US and other major economies suggest**
**that the pace of the global economic recovery remains uncertain, reinforcing**
**the market’s view that the Fed as well as the central banks in other major**
**economies would uphold their accommodative monetary policy stance.**
**Worries over a possible global market slide and a “double-dip” recession in**

24 University of Michigan, Surveys of Consumers, 2002, www.umich.edu
25 IMF, World Economic Outlook—Prospects and Policies, September 2002, www.imf.org

**29-08-2002** **11**


-----

#                                 Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas

**the US could put a drag on the growth prospects of emerging economies,**
**including the Philippines.**

**II. Discussion  on the Review of the Monetary Policy Stance**

**30.** The members of the Monetary Board noted that the uneven pattern of
indicators continued to point to uncertainty in the strength of  the domestic
economy as well as  the global recovery. While there were signs of
improvement in domestic economic activity—as indicated by the higher-thanexpected growth in real GDP as well as increases in  energy sales by Meralco
and in  the volume of cement sales—domestic demand still lacked bouyancy.
Domestic liquidity  growth also decelerated in June as  bank lending
contracted further. In addition, the pace of  global economic recovery led by
the US has slowed down due to the sharp falls in the equities market and the
spate of  revelations of corporate reporting and governance irregularities,
which have dented consumer and business sentiment.  Given the uncertainty
about the timing and pace of  the world economic upturn, the Monetary
Board believed that monetary policy should thus be focused  on providing
conditions to lift  domestic demand while ensuring that  inflationary pressures
are well contained.

**31.  The members of the Monetary Board shared the view that continued**
moderation in price movements could be expected for the rest of the year.
However, the members of the Monetary Board agreed that inflationary
headwinds could loom over the policy horizon. The uncertainty over the impact
of the El Niño weather on agricultural crop production in 2003, possible uptrend
in  world oil prices, delayed but eventual adjustment in user charges, the
anticipated  fiscal underperformance  relative to the full-year target  budget
deficit,  and of late, exchange rate volatility posed risks to inflation and
inflationary expectations.  Indications  of potential upside pressures to future
inflation and inflationary expectations combined with the uncertainty about the
strengthening of domestic demand  argued  for   a cautious monetary policy
stance, one that  remains supportive of the economy’s growth objective  while
ensuring a low and stable inflation environment.

**32.** The members of the Monetary Board also discussed the implications of a
further easing of  monetary policy settings  through  a reduction either in the
BSP’s policy rates or in the reserve requirement or both. The members of the
Monetary Board pointed out that a further easing of the BSP’s monetary policy

**29-08-2002** **12**


-----

#                                 Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas

stance  would lead to  greater liquidity in the system.  However, given that
monetary policy affects inflation with a lag,  a more accommodative stance now
could undermine the attainability of the inflation target  in  2003.   In
particular, the members of the Monetary Board identified the following risk
factors to  inflation and inflationary expectations that could arise from
reducing policy rates:

a. The present scope for monetary easing is already limited by the fact that
policy rates  have already been reduced to a significant extent over the past
year;

b. A reduction in the BSP’s policy rates  could narrow down further  the
country’s interest rate differentials with foreign interest rates, which could
trigger renewed volatility in the foreign exchange market and  undermine
the stability of the peso, thus impacting adversely on inflation and
inflationary expectations;

c. Concerns  about the increasing NG’s budget deficit  could  limit the  scope
of the BSP’s monetary policy actions; and

d. Further monetary easing, either through a reduction in the BSP’s policy rates
or the  liquidity reserve requirement,  would  infuse  more liquidity in the
system, which is already characterized by ample liquidity, thus generating
inflationary pressures.

**33. The members of the Monetary Board noted that a reduction in liquidity**
reserves would infuse additional  liquidity into the system  estimated at about
P13.8 billion for every one percentage point cut in the liquidity reserves
ratio.[26]  Given the ample liquidity in the system—as evidenced by the ability of
the system to readily absorb the P63.0 billion Retail Treasury Bonds (RTBs),
the continued placements by banks in the RRP and SDA windows and the
continued oversubscription in the T-bill auctions—a further infusion of liquidity
into the system, given the still weak lending activity,  could find its way into
the foreign exchange market, which could lead to greater volatility in the foreign
exchange market and raise inflationary expectations.

26 Estimated as one percent  of the total level of deposits and deposit substitute liabilities of deposit money banks as of
end-June 2002 amounting to P1381.5 billion

**29-08-2002** **13**


-----

#                                 Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas

**34. The members of the Monetary Board also noted that the BSP has maintained**
its inflation target for 2003 at  4.5-5.5 percent, given that the economy
continues to face some downside risks to inflation.

**III.  Monetary Policy Decision**

**35.  Based on the  analysis of data that have become available since the last**
meeting of the Monetary Board on 1 August 2002  and a careful assessment of
the balance of risks on inflation and inflationary expectations, the members of
the Monetary Board—by a unanimous vote—decided as follows:

a. maintain the BSP’s policy rates at the current levels of 7.0 percent for
the overnight RRP (borrowing) rate and 9.25 percent for the overnight
RP (lending) rate;

b. maintain the tiering scheme on banks’ placements with the BSP under
the RRP and SDA windows;

c. maintain the  current interest rates on the term RRPs, RPs, and SDAs;
and

d. maintain the reserve requirements at their current levels given the
adequate level of liquidity in the system.

The next meeting of the Monetary Board to discuss the monetary policy
setting was scheduled on 26 September 2002.

**- The Monetary Board of the Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas**

**29-08-2002** **14**


-----

#                                 Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas

**29-08-2002** **15**


-----

