#                                 Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas


**HIGHLIGHTS OF THE MEETING OF THE MONETARY BOARD ON**

**MONETARY POLICY ISSUES  HELD ON 4 JULY 2002[∗]**


**Background**

The Monetary Board held its seventh meeting on monetary policy issues
on 4 July 2002.  This followed the 2 July 2002  meeting of the Advisory
Committee where the members discussed their assessment of the inflation
outlook and macroeconomic conditions, which formed the basis for their
recommendations on the appropriate monetary policy stance.[1] The Advisory
Committee submitted, for the consideration of the Monetary Board, a policy
paper and a comprehensive set of economic and financial indicators relevant for
the deliberation on monetary policy. In particular, the Monetary Board discussed
the factors affecting inflation and inflation expectations, including the direction
of world oil prices, possible  adjustments in power and water rates, monetary
conditions, demand and output indicators, fiscal performance of the national
government, global economic developments  and outlook,  and the
implications of these factors on the BSP’s monetary policy stance.

**I. Considerations in  the Formulation of the Monetary Policy Stance**

**Current inflation and the inflation outlook**

**1. After a deceleration in the first quarter, headline inflation was steady in April**
and May at 3.6 percent year-on-year. Upticks in non-food inflation caused by
increases in electricity rates and domestic oil prices were mostly offset by lower
food inflation. Average headline inflation for the first five months of 2002

∗ The highlights of the discussions of the  4 July 2002 Monetary Board meeting were approved
by the Monetary Board during its meeting held on 8 August 2002.
1 The Advisory Committee is composed of the Governor of the BSP as Chairman and four
members, namely the Deputy Governor for the Banking Services Sector, Research and Treasury,
the Deputy Governor for Supervision and Examination Sector, the Managing Director, In-Charge
of Research or the Director of the Department of Economic Research, and the Director of the
Treasury Department.

**04-07-2002** **[1]**


-----

#                                 Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas

reached 3.6 percent, lower than both the 6.7 percent average recorded a year
earlier and the government’s revised target of 4.5-5.5 percent for the year.

**2.** Inflation continued to be well contained  in April and May 2002  due  to
favorable food prices—owing to ample food  supply—and broadly stable
exchange rates.  In addition, the impact of the series of oil price increases during
the period was cushioned by the action of  transport operators to hold back
plans to raise  fares.  Moreover, pressures from  the demand side continued to
be tame  given the  current levels of unemployment,  bank lending  and  spare
capacity. The jobless rate rose to 13.9 percent in April  from 13.3 percent a year
ago. After posting an upturn in March—following an 8-month contraction—
bank lending  dropped by 2.2 percent from the level a year ago. At the same
time, capacity utilization in manufacturing has continued to be sluggish as it
slipped slightly to 75.3 percent in April 2002 from 75.9 percent in the previous
month. Meanwhile, the value and volume of production indices (VAPI and VOPI)
grew strongly in April 2002 by 14.8 percent and  17.0 percent, year-on-year,
reflecting a significant turnaround from the negative growth rates of 3.7 percent
and 1.6 percent registered in the previous month.

**Historical inflation performance and the BSP’s latest forecast**
**readings suggest that inflation would remain well-behaved in the near term.**
**In particular, ample food supply conditions and broad stability in the**
**exchange rate support a benign inflation picture. The lack of buoyancy in**
**aggregate demand also contributed to subdued inflationary expectations.**

**Agricultural output forecasts**

**3.** The Philippine Atmospheric Geophysical and Astronomical Services
Administration (PAGASA) announced that the warming conditions in the Central
and Eastern Pacific Ocean and the weakening of the easterly winds supported the
development of a weak El Niño starting July 2002, which may last up to the
first quarter of 2003. [2]  The PAGASA noted that the peak of the El Niño episode
is likely to occur  from October to December this year although this is not
expected to be as severe as the episode in 1997-98, according to recent general

2 The Southern Oscillation Index (SOI) is a measure commonly used by meteorologists to monitor
monthly fluctuations in the air pressure difference between the Central Pacific and Indian oceans.
Sustained negative values of the SOI often indicate episodes of the El Niño weather phenomenon
in the tropical Pacific region.

**04-07-2002** **[2]**


-----

#                                 Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas

circulation computer model results.[3] Despite the dry weather, the Climatology
and Agrometeorology Branch (CAB) of the PAGASA reported generally
favorable planting conditions in May for most parts of the country, particularly
for rice and corn.[4] For the third quarter,  the Department of Agriculture (DA)
expects palay output to approximate last year’s harvest crop of 2.4 million metric
tons.[5]

**4. The potential adverse effects of warm weather on agricultural output could**
be cushioned by well-timed importation and implementation of mitigating
measures such as the construction and rehabilitation of irrigation and water
improvement facilities. The DA has announced its plans to conduct cloud seeding
operations in Pantabangan Dam in Nueva Ecija to help raise the water level of
the dam to service farmlands in Central Luzon.[6] The President  has also
approved the importation of  250,000 metric tons of rice to shore up the National
Food Authority’s (NFA) buffer stock and ensure  adequate supply and stable rice
prices.[7]

**The implementation of various government initiatives to counter the**
**negative impact of the El Niño weather disturbance such as the improvement**
**of water facilities and programmed rice importation suggests that, going**
**forward, the impact of the El Niño episode on overall prices  should be well-**
**contained.**

**Exchange rate developments**

**5. The peso weakened slightly in June by 0.8 percent relative to its level in May**
to average P50.41/US$1 from P49.83/US$1 in the previous month. The large
end-of-quarter and end-of-semester demand for dollars by corporates for servicing
their foreign obligations contributed to the peso decline. In addition, market’s
concerns over the fiscal deficit weighed on the peso. Higher demand for dollars
by banks as investors’ reduced their Asian bond holdings on concerns over the
post-election results in Brazil and their repercussions on emerging markets added

3 PAGASA, El Niño Watch, Update on the Development of El Niño, No.02/03, 3 July 2002
4 Climatology and Agrometeorology Branch (CAB), PAGASA, Seasonal Climate Outlook for the
Philippines for Year 2002
5 Department of Agriculture, “Rice and Corn Situation and Outlook”, www.da.gov.ph
6 Department of Agriculture, “DA prepares to hold cloud seeding on Pantabangan Dam,”
www.da.gov.ph
7 Department of Agriculture, “DA Statement on Additional Rice Imports”, www.da.gov.ph

**04-07-2002** **[3]**


-----

#                                 Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas

some pressures on the peso. However, the peso decline  in June  was, in part,
capped  by  steady inflows of  remittances  from overseas Filipino workers
(OFWs).  As a result, the variability of the peso was reduced, as standard
deviation fell to 21 centavos in June 2002 as against 37 centavos in the previous
month.

**6. On a trade-weighted basis and in real terms, the peso appreciated relative to**
the basket of currencies of major trading partners by about 1.9 percent during
the first six months of the year.  In contrast, the peso tracked a depreciation
trend vis-à-vis the currency baskets of competitor as reflected in the decline in
the real effective exchange rate (REER) of the peso against the broad and
narrow baskets of competitor currencies by about 1.3 percent and 8.8 percent,
respectively.[ 8]

**The relative stability of the peso continued to exert a favorable**
**influence on inflation and inflation outlook.**

**Oil price developments**

**7.** Oil prices in the world market were softer in June 2002 compared to the levels
in the previous month. The international spot price of crude oil (Dubai) eased  by
1.6 percent to US$24.29 per barrel as of 26 June 2002 from the US$24.69 per
barrel average price in May 2002. Reduced hostilities in the Middle East,
reports of a build-up in US oil inventories and  claims that Venezuela would
raise its production level in violation of the OPEC production limits have
tempered the movements of oil prices in the world market. Softening  world oil
prices have  encouraged  local oil companies to cut  local pump prices of
petroleum products anew by 35 centavos per liter on 25-26 June 2002.  The net
increase in  domestic oil prices thus far in 2002  amounted to 91 centavos  per
liter  for  gasoline, diesel and kerosene. [9]

8 The broad basket is composed of the currencies of Singapore, South Korea, Taiwan, Malaysia,
Thailand, Indonesia and Hong Kong while the narrow basket is composed of the currencies of
Indonesia, Malaysia and Thailand.
9 In 2001, pump price of petroleum products  declined by  P1.81 per liter for  gasoline and
P1.30 per liter for kerosene and diesel oil (Source: Department of Energy).

**04-07-2002** **[4]**


-----

#                                 Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas

**8. In the futures market, the price of the benchmark Brent crude oil moved**
steadily, with August 2002 deliveries settling at US$24.98 per barrel.[10]  For the
second half of 2002, the price of Brent crude oil in the futures market showed a
slight uptrend to reach an average of  US$25.03 per barrel.  However, even with
relative calm in world oil market, a  spike  in oil prices cannot entirely be
ruled out  should   hostilities in the Middle East intensify anew and  OPEC
decide to impose tougher quota limits on its members.

**9.** It is estimated that an increase in domestic  oil prices could raise average
annual inflation directly  by about  0.38 percentage points.  Meanwhile, the
indirect impact arising from the pass-through of the price shock to other
commodity groups is estimated to be about  twice that of the direct impact, for
a total  impact of 1.22 percentage points.[11]

**As a major input of production, an increase in the price of oil could**
**trigger a second round impact on the cost of transport and other**
**commodities as well as wages.**

**Petitions for upward adjustment in user charges on utilities**

**10.** The reduction in the purchased power cost adjustment (PPCA) of the
National Power Corporation (NPC) to just 40 centavos per kwh effective 8 May
2002 was reflected in the 50 centavos per kwh initial reduction in the Manila
Electric Company’s (Meralco) purchased power adjustment (PPA) charges.[12]
Similarly, the Department of Energy (DOE) noted that the implementation of
the Wholesale Electricity Spot Market (WESM) by September  2002 could
also bring down the cost of electricity by  another  40 centavos per kwh.  With
the operationalization of a WESM, electricity will be traded at the spot market,
where generators will compete against each other to supply power to distributors.
The creation of the WESM is aimed at ensuring efficiency and transparency in

10 Source: Asian Wall Street Journal, 27 May 2002, The futures price for Brent crude—a close
substitute for Dubai crude— is used as indicator of future world oil prices since futures data on
Dubai crude are not readily available.
11 These findings were based on the simulation results using Input-Output (I-O) analysis and the
structural inflation forecasting model for estimating the total impact and direct impact of an oil
price increase on inflation, respectively.  This simulation was  based on the assumption that the
average price of Dubai crude would reach about  US$27.50 per barrel  in 2002.
12 The purchased power adjustment (PPA) refers to the automatic cost recovery mechanism used
by the NPC and Meralco, which covers the fluctuations in the exchange rate, fuel prices and the
cost of electricity generated.

**04-07-2002** **[5]**


-----

#                                 Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas

generation charges.[13] Meanwhile, the  proposed  graduated power rate
adjustments by Meralco—under its  petition for  the “unbundling” of power
rates dated 2 April 2002—still have to be decided upon by  the Energy
Regulatory Commission (ERC).  The  proposed rates would likely raise the cost
of electric power consumption by an average of P0.65 per kwh or about 10.3
percent across all residential users.[14] Meanwhile, the  proposed power rate
increases for commercial and industrial establishments will be moderate,
estimated at about 2.7 percent and 3.2 percent, respectively. Combined with the
reduction in the PPA, the  unbundling of power rates could  result in a net
increase in the cost of electricity by  about 15 centavos per kwh or an increase
of about 2.4 percent.

**11.** While the reduction in  PPA charges  would ease  the strain on the
consumer, this could have  repercussions on the future fiscal position of the
National Government (NG). Specifically, this could constrain the financial
position of the NPC, which could impact adversely on the NG’s fiscal budget in
case the contingent liabilities arising from the NG-guaranteed loans of  NPC
become real obligations of the NG.

**12. Even with the relatively small share of light  to the total CPI basket**
(only 2.73 percent), the pass-through impact of  an increase in power cost
could lead to a price-spiral on other commodity groups. Based on I-O analysis,
a net increase in power rate, equivalent to 2.4 percent of  the current rates,
would raise average annual inflation  by about  0.11 percentage points.

**13.** The Manila Water Company Inc. (MWCI)[15] and Maynilad Water Services
Inc. (MWSI)[16] have applied for increases in water rates with the regulatory

13 Pursuant to RA No. 9136 entitled the Electric Power Industry Reform Act, the Power Sector
Assets and Liabilities Corp. (PSALM) shall manage an orderly sale and privatization of all
existing independent power producers (IPP) contracts and generation facilities of the NPC.
After the sale and privatization  of  generation companies and IPP contracts owned by the NPC,
these private companies  are expected to participate in retail competition under the WESM for
the sale of power to distributors.
14 According to Meralco, the unbundling of power rates  is not expected to result in any power
rate  increase for residential users at the lowest  consumption bracket. (Source: Meralco, Press
Release entitled, “Meralco Submits New Alternative on Rate Unbundling,” 2 April 2002)
15 MWCI services Metro Manila’s east zone which covers Mandaluyong City, Pasig City, Pateros,
San Juan, Taguig, and portions of Makati City, Manila City, Marikina City and Quezon City as
well as Angono, Antipolo, Baras, Binangonan, Cainta, Jala-Jala, Morong, Pililia, Tanay, Teresa,
Rodriguez and San Mateo, all in Rizal.

**04-07-2002** **[6]**


-----

#                                 Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas

agency, the Metropolitan Waterworks and Sewerage System (MWSS).  MWCI
and MWSI have asked to increase their water rates by  P1.00 and P6.00 per
cubic meter, respectively, representing an average increase of 26.8 percent from
current levels.[17] The  planned adjustments in water rates are expected to be
implemented within the year. Given the relatively small share of water to the CPI
basket of 0.7 percent, the proposed increase in power rates would likely result in a
slight increase in the CPI inflation of 0.1 percentage point.[ 18]

**14. The  combined  impact of the  proposed adjustments in power and water**
rates along with the  possible increase in oil prices could raise the average
annual CPI inflation by an estimated  1.43 percentage points.

**The pass-through impact on inflation of the proposed unbundling of**
**power rates by Meralco could be mitigated by the reduction in PPA and the**
**proposed implementation of the WESM. Meanwhile, the impact of the**
**planned adjustments in water rates pose downside risks to inflation and**
**inflation outlook.**

**Interest rates and interest rate differentials**

**15.** The differentials between the RP 91-day T-bill rate (net of RP withholding
tax) and the 90-day US LIBOR and 90-day US T-bill rate for the month of June
widened to 1.9 percent and 2.1 percent, respectively, compared to the previous
month’s average differentials of 1.6 percent and 1.8 percent. The widening trend
could be attributed to the rise in the RP 91-day T-bill rate since 3 June 2002 by
a total of  21 basis points, which was accompanied by  declines in both the
90-day US LIBOR and 90-day US T-bill rate.  Meanwhile, foreign interest rates
have continued to  drop  as the weakness in the U.S. equities market  as well
as the slow pick-up  in consumer  spending and  business  investments  have

16 MWSI services Metro Manila’s west zone which covers Valenzuela, Bulacan, Malabon,
Navotas, parts of Quezon City and Makati City, Manila City, Pasay City, Las Piñas, Parañaque
City, Muntinlupa City and areas in Cavite.
17 The MWC and MWSI have proposed increases in water rates by P1.00 and P6.00 per cubic
meter or by 38.8 percent and 14.8 percent, respectively, from P6.75 and P15.46 per cubic meter,
respectively, for an average increase of 26.8 percent.
18 Based on analysis using input-output (I-O) tables published by the National Statistical
Coordination Board (NSCB)

**04-07-2002** **[7]**


-----

#                                 Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas

reinforced market expectations that the Fed will not likely raise interest rates
until the end of the year.

**16. The differential between the BSP’s policy interest rate (overnight borrowing**
or RRP rate) and the US federal funds target rate was unchanged at 525 basis
points as the BSP policy rates and the US federal funds target rate remained
steady  at their 15 March 2002 and December 2001 levels, respectively. Adjusted
for the risk premium—measured by the differential between the 10-year ROP
note and the 10-year US Treasury note—the differential between the BSP policy
interest rate and the US federal funds target rate narrowed anew in June, as the
risk premium for the Philippines started to rise after trending downward in
January 2002.

**17. The RP 91-day T-bill rate rose gradually from 4.381 percent during the 13**
May 2002 auction  to 4.778 percent in the 5 June 2002 auction. The steady
upward movement of the RP 91-day T-bill rate in May-June 2002 was driven
mainly by market concerns over the higher-than-target fiscal deficit figure for
January-April 2002.

**The country’s average interest rate differentials with the US widened in**
**June as the RP benchmark market interest rate moved up while US interest**
**rates trended downward.**

**18. The spread of the RP lending rate over the benchmark 91-day T-bill rate for**
the period 17-21 June 2002 narrowed down slightly to 312 basis points  from
315 basis points in the previous week due mainly to the decline in the low-end of
bank lending rates by about 3 basis points. This differential was below the
average of 347 basis points for a sample of Asian countries.

**19. During the period 17-21 June 2002, the  Philippines’ real lending rate**
(based on the low-end of the range of banks’ lending rates) remained at
approximately the same level as in the previous week of 4.3 percent. At this
level, the Philippines’ real lending rate was lower compared to almost all of the
countries surveyed: Hong Kong, India, Malaysia, Singapore, Taiwan, Indonesia
and Thailand, with the exception of South Korea and Japan.

**RP lending rates remained steady and lower than the lending rates of**
**other Asian countries. The current low interest rate environment—due in**
**part to the past monetary easing  measures  of  the BSP—is expected to**

**04-07-2002** **[8]**


-----

#                                 Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas

**support the underlying strength in consumption spending and to pave the**
**way for a steady growth in bank lending as well as a brisker economic**
**activity ahead.**

**20.** The slope of the yield curve for government securities in the secondary
market as of 25 June 2002  has dropped but steepened slightly compared to that
at the beginning of 2002 due to sizeable declines in the yields reflected in the
shorter maturities. This was mainly on account of the general drop in yields of
government securities, which ranged from 111-454 basis points across all
maturities  since 4 January 2002, with the higher decline at the short-end of the
yield curve (2 years and below). However, compared to 27 May 2002, the yield
curve has shifted upward in tandem with the rise in the yields of government
securities in the primary market.[19]

**The general steepness of the yield curve reflected the larger declines in**
**the short-dated government securities in the secondary market.**

**Domestic stock market movements**

**21. The domestic stock market consolidated further in June 2002 as the average**
Phisix slid to 1,262 index points, the lowest level recorded since January 2002.
Investors’ appetite for local stocks was tempered by concerns over the higherthan-expected fiscal deficit, the lack of positive corporate news as well as the
corporate equity battle over an index heavyweight firm. Moreover,
uncertainties sparked by the political impasse in the Senate and the still fragile
recovery of the global economy dampened market sentiments and investor
confidence.

**22. The sluggish mood in the market was reflected in the thin market activity.**
Total volume of transactions for the period 3-25 June 2002 fell by 6.0 percent to
4.7 billion shares from  5.0 billion shares recorded in May 2002 while total value
turnover in June amounted to P6.6 billion, 34 percent lower than the P10 billion
turnover in May. Meanwhile, foreign participation in the domestic stock market
declined to 52 percent from 54 percent in the previous month. Foreign investors

19 Yield curve presented in the previous meeting of the Monetary Board on monetary policy dated
6 June 2002

**04-07-2002** **[9]**


-----

#                                 Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas

remained net sellers for the third consecutive month as foreign selling dominated
foreign buying by P601.8 million.[20]

**The domestic stock market continued to consolidate in June with the**
**bulk of the trading activities supported mainly by bargain hunting. The**
**recovery of the local bourse would depend on firmer signs of improved**
**corporate performance and the pace of the strengthening of the US and other**
**major economies.**

**Monetary aggregates and bank lending**

**23.** Domestic liquidity (M3) growth slowed down as of end-April 2002,
increasing by 6.6 percent year-on-year compared to the 8.6 percent growth as of
end-March 2002. This developed as the growth in net domestic credits eased
despite recent signs of improvement in economic activity. The slowdown in
domestic liquidity growth was accompanied by a decline in the outstanding
loans of commercial banks (KBs) in April 2002, which  fell  anew by 2.2
percent, year-on-year,  after posting a 0.1 percent growth in the preceding month.
On a monthly basis, KB loans grew by P5.83 billion or 0.4 percent to reach P1.42
trillion as of end-April 2002 from the previous month’s level. At 0.4 percent, the
month-on-month growth in bank lending for April was slower than the 0.7 percent
posted in March due, in part, to the efforts of banks to preserve asset quality given
the relatively large non-performing loans (NPLs), which stood at 18.2 percent of
total loans outstanding in April 2002. In addition, the relatively low rate of
capacity utilization in manufacturing continued to rein in firms’ financing plans
for reinvestment or expansion.

**24.** Banks’ excess funds continued to be channeled to placements with the BSP
and government securities. Based on latest data, banks’ placements under the
RRP window rose by  P8.8 billion to reach P110.2 billion as of 17 June 2002
from P28.2 billion as of end-December 2001 while placements under the SDA
window amounted to P13.5 billion from zero during the same period.

**Bank lending continued to be weak although the rate of decline has**
**eased in April. Banks have maintained their cautious lending stance due to**
**the still high NPLs and weak corporate credit demand. At the same time,**

20 Source: Philippine Stock Exchange (Figures as of 25 June 2002)

**04-07-2002** **[10]**


-----

#                                 Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas

**banks have opted to park their excess funds in government securities and**
**placements with the BSP.**

**25. For the period January-April 2002, the NG budget deficit reached P82.96**
billion, P4.7 billion or 6.0 percent above the programmed deficit for the
period.  The higher-than-programmed budget deficit of the NG was due to the
combined shortfall in revenue collections and the frontloading of expenditures as
well as the payment of accrued accounts payable. The possibility that the NG
would breach its programmed deficit for the year could have implications on the
BSP’s conduct of monetary policy as the need to finance the deficit could compel
the NG to raise its domestic borrowing or withdraw from its deposits with the
BSP.

**Developments and outlook in the rest of the world**

**26.** After slipping into recession starting March 2001, the US economy grew
strongly by 6.1 percent (revised) year-on-year in the first quarter. However, more
recent  statistics  suggested that the pace of the  US recovery has slackened in
the second quarter. Consumers have turned cautious amid concerns about the
possibility of more job losses, internal security and global tensions.  The
University of Michigan’s consumer sentiment index fell to 90.8 in June from
96.9 a month ago which was reinforced by retail sales figures which showed a
0.9 percent slowdown in consumer spending in May. Capacity utilization in
industry has stayed at historically low levels of around 75 percent, significantly
below the 83 percent level that has traditionally been associated with capacity
constraints and inflation.

**27. The decision of the US Fed to keep the federal funds target rate unchanged**
following its two-day meeting on 25-26 June 2002 highlighted the Fed’s
assessment which maintains that “the degree of strengthening of the US economy
remains uncertain”.[21] The specter of continued high unemployment and the
belief that consumers do not have a lot of pent-up demand coming out of
recession combined with depressed stock prices have shaped markets’ perception
that the US Fed would likely keep its accommodative stance  by holding
interest rates steady in the near term.

21 Cranford, Jan, C. Torres and M. McKee, “Fed leaves Benchmark Lending Rate at 1.75 percent”,
www.Bloomberg.com

**04-07-2002** **[11]**


-----

#                                 Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas

**28. In the euro zone, the European Central Bank (ECB) kept policy rates**
unchanged during its 6 June 2002 meeting, noting that economic recovery, while
under way, still lacks strength. The mixed turnout in leading economic indicators
across the euro zone indicated that the growth outlook in the area has remained
uncertain. The Bank of England has also kept policy rates steady on its 6 June
2002 meeting as weaknesses in the manufacturing sector in the United Kingdom
(UK) continued to cloud the strength of the economic recovery. Meanwhile, in
Japan, evidence of  sustained economic recovery has been focused mainly on
the export and service sectors. Reflecting these developments, the monetary
policies of the central banks in the UK, euro zone and Japan have been
accommodative, aimed at allowing growth to firm up.

**The uneven pace of the US-led global economic recovery indicate that**
**less reliance could be placed on external demand as a source of growth for**
**the Philippine economy.**

**II. Discussion  on the Review of the Monetary Policy Stance**

**29. The members of the Monetary Board noted that despite signs of improving**
economic activity, overall domestic demand conditions remain subdued, as
indicated in sluggish bank lending activity and weak corporate credit demand.
The global slowdown has shown firm indications of bottoming out but questions
have remained about the pace of the recovery and its durability. This meant that
domestic demand would continue to be the main source of impetus for economic
expansion in the near term and should thus be the focus of supportive
macroeconomic policies.

**30. However, the members of the Monetary Board shared the view that the**
presence of downside risks to future inflation and inflationary expectations amid
the slow improvement in domestic demand  provided a case for   navigating
carefully monetary policy  so as to  maintain stimulus for growth   while
guarding closely against  inflationary threats.  The risks to the inflation
objective relate to the uncertainty over the impact of El Niño weather
phenomenon on agricultural crop production in 2003, the uncertainty in the
direction of world oil prices, and the expected adjustment in power and water
rates as well as the possible increase in transport charges. Moreover, the present
scope for monetary easing has also been capped by the fact that policy rates
have already been reduced to a significant extent over the past year.

**04-07-2002** **[12]**


-----

#                                 Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas

**31. The members of the Monetary Board agreed that the potential risks factors on**
inflation and inflationary expectations,  the still weak—though improving—
economic activity and the uncertainty over the  pace of the global economic
recovery have created a case for maintaining a cautious monetary policy stance
so as to ensure that price pressures remain well-contained.

**III.  Monetary Policy Decision**

**32.** Based on the  analysis of data that have become available since the last
meeting of the Monetary Board on 6 June 2002  and a careful assessment of
the balance of risks on inflation and inflationary expectations, the members of
the Monetary Board by a unanimous vote decided as follows:

a. maintain the BSP’s policy rates at the current levels of 7.0 percent for
the overnight RRP (borrowing) rate and 9.25 percent for the overnight
RP (lending) rate;

b. maintain the tiering scheme on banks placements with the BSP under
the RRPs and SDA windows;

c. maintain the  current interest rates on the term RRPs, RPs, and SDAs;
and

d. maintain the reserve requirements at their current levels given the
adequate level of liquidity in the system.

The next meeting of the Monetary Board to discuss the monetary policy
setting was scheduled on 1 August 2002.

**- The Monetary Board of the Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas**

o:\mdgparaso\_MB minutes\MB minutes 04-07-2002 meeting-rev

**04-07-2002** **[13]**


-----

