#                                 Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas


**HIGHLIGHTS OF THE MEETING OF THE MONETARY BOARD ON**

**MONETARY POLICY ISSUES  HELD ON 14 MARCH 2002[∗]**


**Background**

The Monetary Board held its third meeting for the year on monetary
policy issues on 14 March 2002. This followed the meeting of the Advisory
Committee on 12 March 2002 where the members discussed the assessment of
the inflation outlook and macroeconomic conditions as the basis for the
formulation of recommendations on the appropriate monetary policy stance.[1]
The Advisory Committee submitted, for the consideration of the Monetary
Board, a policy paper and various information relevant to the deliberations on
monetary policy. In particular, the Monetary Board discussed inflation
developments and expectations—notably the uptrend in oil prices, possible
power rate adjustments and the impact of the El Niño weather phenomenon on
food supply in 2002 and 2003—monetary conditions, external developments
and the global economic outlook, demand and output indicators and the
implications of these factors on monetary policy.

**I.** **Considerations in  the Formulation of the Monetary Policy Stance**

**Current inflation and the inflation outlook**

**1.** Inflation in February 2002 decelerated to a two-year low of 3.4 percent
from 3.8 percent in January 2002. This reflected a sustained decline in inflation
for the past seven months and brought the average inflation for 2002 to 3.6
percent. February’s inflation performance was marked by the continued
slowdown in price increases across all commodity groups.  Similarly, the
various measures of core inflation tracked a continued downtrend since August
2001.

∗ The highlights of the discussions of the 14 March 2002 Monetary Board meeting were approved
by the Monetary Board during its meeting held on 25 April 2002.
1 The Advisory Committee is composed of the Governor of the BSP as Chairman and four
members, namely the Deputy Governor for the Banking Services Sector, Research and Treasury,
the Deputy Governor for Supervision and Examination Sector, the Director of the Department of
Economic Research, and the Director of the Treasury Department

**14-03-2002** **1**


-----

#                                 Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas

**2.** Continued restraint in demand and indications of good food supply
conditions in 2002 are expected to exert a favorable influence on the general price
levels during the year. Still weak demand means that firms have little pricing
power. Average capacity utilization in the manufacturing sector remained
broadly steady at 76.9 percent in December 2001 from 76.6 percent in the
previous month. In addition, the unemployment rate—at 9.8 percent—as of
October 2001 was still high, suggesting that labor costs are not expected to rise
sharply.[2]

**3.** Based on the latest macroeconomic assumptions on output growth,
money supply, Treasury bill rates, the government’s fiscal position, the
exchange rate, domestic oil prices and prices of non-oil imports and the
expected yearly increase in wages, future inflation is expected to track broadly
the inflation target for 2002. Inflation, however, could trend upward in the
first half of 2003 due to the possible impact of the El Niño weather disturbance
on food prices and the expected wage adjustments in the latter part of 2002.[3]

**The sustained slowdown in headline and core inflation affirms further**
**the broad outlook of a benign inflation environment for 2002 due, in part,**
**to the inertial component of price movements. Based on the latest forecast**
**of the BSP, an uptick in inflation would likely be manifested  in the**
**latter part of 2002 heading through 2003. This can be traced to the**
**expected annual wage adjustments and as the full impact of the expected El**
**Niño weather phenomenon is felt in 2003. The average inflation rates for**
**2002 and 2003, however, are expected to track broadly the targets set by**
**the Government for the period.**

**Impact of the El Niño weather disturbance on future inflation**

**4.** The Department of Agriculture (DA) noted that the expected El Niño
weather phenomenon in 2002 would likely manifest itself in a weak form in the
second half of the year. This is thus expected to have a minimal impact on
agricultural production in the last half of 2002. Meanwhile, the DA has
implemented various measures to mitigate the impact of the expected dry spell,
particularly the construction and upgrading of irrigation systems as well as
rehabilitation of shallow tube wells in order  to provide adequate water facilities

2 Sources: NSO, Report on the Quarterly  Labor Force Survey as of October 2001 and Report
on the Monthly Integrated Survey of Selected Industries (MISSI) as of November 2001
3 Based on the results of the single equation and multi-equation inflation forecasting models of
the BSP as of 11 February 2002

**14-03-2002** **2**


-----

#                                 Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas

to farmlands across the country. However, the DA expressed caution that “unless
adequate water provision and water-saving measures are instituted for the dry
season  from December 2002-May 2003, agricultural production could fall
below target in 2003.”[4]

**The weak form of the expected El Niño weather disturbance and**
**timely implementation of mitigating measures by the DA would likely**
**contribute to generally favorable agricultural production conditions in 2002**
**but agricultural output could fall below target in 2003.**

**Exchange rate**

**5.** The peso-dollar rate appreciated steadily  to reach  P50.951  as of 8
March 2002. This brought the average peso-dollar rate to P51.109 for the
period 1-8 March  2002 from P51.41 in December 2001. The steady
improvement in the peso-dollar rate can be traced to increased inflows from the
proceeds of the recent bond issuances by the government and private corporations
as well as remittances by overseas Filipino workers (OFWs). Moreover, the
exchange rate was  broadly stable as measured by the standard deviation, which
remained  at  about 10.5 centavos during the period 1-8 March 2002. This
was a significant drop in volatility from 17.6 centavos in January 2002 and 31
centavos in December 2001.  The steady improvement in the peso-dollar rate also
mirrored the increasing market confidence amidst brighter prospects for sustained
economic recovery.

**The broad stability of the peso—both in terms of levels and**
**variance—is expected to have a favorable influence on inflationary**
**expectations and the inflation outlook.**

**Oil prices**

**6.** As of 5 March 2002, the world price of crude oil (Dubai) rose to
US$21.72 per barrel, an uptrend from the US$17.83 per barrel in December
2001.[5] In the futures market, the price of crude oil (Brent) for April-December
2002 was quoted at an average of US$21.61 (as of 1 March 2002), up from
US$19.55 per barrel (as of 28 January 2002). Because of the uptrend in oil prices

4 Source: Press Release entitled, “DA Bares Mitigating Measures for El Niño,” Department of
Agriculture (DA) website, 4 March 2002
5 Source: Department of Energy

**14-03-2002** **3**


-----

#                                 Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas

in the world market, domestic oil companies announced plans to increase pump
oil prices before the end-March 2002.

**7.** Meanwhile, the American Petroleum Institute reported a decline in
crude oil inventories by about 4 million barrels in February 2002, the first time
this year because of declining oil imports.[6] Concerns over the outcome of the
meeting of OPEC member countries in March—where additional production cuts
are part of the agenda—also contributed to the observed uptick in oil prices in the
world market. In addition, apprehensions over the news that the US may turn its
attention toward Iraq in its ongoing battle against global terrorism contributed to
the  increasing price quotes in the futures oil market.  However,  some analysts
consider compliance with the agreed production cuts among OPEC members to
be weak as stocks remained relatively high. Demand has also been
constrained by the unusually warm weather and  weakness in global economic
conditions.  At the same time, observers say that Russia—the biggest non-OPEC
oil exporter—could potentially raise its output countering the objective of
supporting oil prices by tightening supply conditions. While petroleum and other
energy-related products account for 4.62 percent of the total CPI basket, an
increase in petroleum prices could have a cascading impact over a  broad range
of  other commodities.

**Despite adequate supply, world oil prices have trended up, indicating**
**uncertainty in the direction of prices over the long run. A sharp rise in oil**
**prices could lead to upward pressures in the general price level.**

**Petitions for an upward adjustment in power rates**

**8.** The current petition for the “unbundling” of power rates by the Manila
Electric Company (Meralco)—which would also entail updating its asset
valuation using 2000 as the base year from the current 1993 base year—could
raise the cost of electric power consumption in Metro Manila and nearby
provinces by an estimated average of P1.10 per kilowatt-hour (kwh) consumption.
According to the Energy Regulatory Commission (ERC), the proposed rate
increase  by  Meralco is equivalent to about 19.3 percent hike  from the current
rate of P5.70 per kwh consumption.  While light accounts for only 2.7 percent
of the CPI basket, the flow-on effects of increased power rates could lead to a
price spiral in the general price level.

6 Source: Global Markets Monitor, 21 February 2002

**14-03-2002** **4**


-----

#                                 Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas

**The possible increase in power rates could raise inflationary**
**expectations as the expected  flow-on effects of power adjustments could feed**
**through the prices of other commodities.**

**Domestic interest rates and interest rate differentials**

**9.** Interest rate differentials (adjusted for taxes) with the US continued to
narrow in  January and February 2002, but still remained considerable at 3.9-4.0
percent in February.  As of 4 March 2002, the interest rate differential between
the RP 91-day T-bill rate (net of RP withholding tax) and the 90-day LIBOR
stood at 3.627 percent while the interest rate differential between the RP 91-day
(net of RP withholding tax) and the US 90-day T-bills reached 3.757 percentage
points.

**10.** The differential between the BSP’s policy interest rate (overnight
borrowing or RRP rate) and the US target federal funds rate declined further to
550 basis points following the latest 25 basis-point cut in the BSP’s RRP rate
effective 15 February 2002. This differential was lower than the average
differential in 2001 of about 5.9 percentage points, but higher than the differential
that prevailed for the most part in 2000, which averaged at about 4.8 percentage
points. Meanwhile, adjusted for the risk premium—as measured by the
differential between the 10-year ROP note and the 10-year US Treasury note—
the differential between the BSP policy interest rate and the US target federal
funds rate posted an uptrend, due mainly to the declining risk premium for the
Philippine debt papers.

**11.** As of 6 March 2002, the spread of the Philippine lending rate over the
benchmark T-bill rate stood at about 322 basis points. This differential compared
favorably with the spreads for a sampling of Asian countries during the period.
The highest spread observed was that for Taiwan at 524 basis points, while the
lowest was that for Indonesia at 66 basis points.  Meanwhile, the  margin
between the Philippine lending rate and the benchmark 91-day T-bill rate
continued to decline from  its peak level of about 5.7 percentage points in
October 2000. The observed narrowing in differential between the lending rates
and the 91-day T-bill rate  suggested  that the impact of the monetary easing
measures of the BSP have already started to gradually work its way to the real
economy and the financial sector.

**12.** The country’s real lending rate—measured as the difference between the
low-end of the range of banks’ lending rates  and the inflation rate—dropped  to

**14-03-2002** **5**


-----

#                                 Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas

6.7 percent during the period 28 February-6 March 2002 due to sustained
declines in the lending rate, which were greater than the declines in the inflation
rate.  However, with the exception of Taiwan and Hong Kong—which have
real lending rates of 9.2 percent and 8.7 percent, respectively during the same
reference period due to deflationary pressures—the Philippines’ real lending rate
remained one of the highest relative to other countries in the region.

**Interest rate differentials with other countries have narrowed but**
**remained high relative to historical trends and to other countries in the**
**region. As the interest margins remained comfortable, the broad stability of**
**the peso would not be  endangered.**

**13.** The yield curve for government securities in the secondary market as of 4
March 2002 showed a downward shift  relative to that which prevailed at the
start of 2002,  but remained  steep at the longer-term maturities (5-10 years).
This indicated higher inflationary expectations over the long term.

**The steeper long end of the yield curve indicates higher inflationary**
**expectations over the long run.**

**Domestic stock market movements**

**14.** The domestic stock market remained buoyant in  February 2002,
continuing the rally that began in January 2002. Market sentiment was spurred
mainly by recent positive economic data, particularly lower-than-expected
inflation in January and February 2002, favorable market sentiment toward
Philippine bonds and improved refinancing possibilities of private companies.
Investors’ optimism about the economy’s growth outlook translated into steady
foreign demand for local stocks.  Foreign participation in the domestic stock
market remained considerable  at about 42  percent of total transactions in
January and February 2002 from 45 percent in 2001.  In terms of value, net
foreign buying of domestic stocks reached P10.43  billion in January and
February 2002, a significant increase compared to the P2.33 billion recorded in
the same period a year ago. Stronger activity in the equity market was also
attributed, in part, to the sustained drop in market interest rates which led to a
shift in investors’ preference from fixed-yielding instruments to equities.  In
addition, the local bourse was positively affected by the better-than-expected US
manufacturing data.

**14-03-2002** **6**


-----

#                                 Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas

**The strengthening performance of the domestic stock market amid**
**active foreign participation points to favorable market sentiment and**
**positive outlook on the country’s economic growth. Encouraging signs of**
**growth, in turn, could make the case for an accommodative monetary**
**stance less compelling.**

**Monetary aggregates and bank lending**

**15.** The year-on-year growth of domestic liquidity or M3 slowed down further
to 5.3 percent in January 2002, from the 6.8 percent growth in December 2001.
The deceleration in liquidity growth could be traced partly to banks’ cautious
lending stance amidst restrained credit demand by the corporate sector. The
volume of outstanding loans of commercial banks dropped further by 3.2 percent
in January 2002 from the level a year ago, as bank lending to most sectors
registered declines. While this is a slight improvement  from the 3.6 percent
year-on-year decline in  December 2001,  the January 2002  contraction
marked the sixth month of successive decline in bank lending since August
2001 due to constraints posed by banks’ persistently high non-performing loans
(NPLs). Thus, despite the observed downtrend in lending rates, bank lending
has remained sluggish. Corporate demand for fresh loans has also been held
back, in part, by the need to manage cash flows to finance maturing obligations
rather than to undertake expansion plans given that external demand remains
weak in the near term.

**16.** Meanwhile, based on data from the BSP and the National Government
(NG), banks continue to place their excess funds in government securities and
placements with the BSP under the RRP and SDA facilities.  Excess liquidity in
the system  was also evident in the continued oversubscriptions and
aggressive bidding by banks during the auctions for T-bills and bonds,  which
contributed to the downtrend in the T-bill yields.  As of 4 March 2002,  banks’
placements under the RRP and SDA windows  rose to P43.2 billion and P31.9
billion from P28.2 billion and P12.6 billion as of end-December 2001. Using
seasonally adjusted data,  the levels of RRPs and SDAs  in February 2002 rose
by 28.7 percent and 30.1 percent, month-on-month, respectively, compared to
the 1.3 percent growth and 27.8 percent contraction recorded a year ago.
Thus, both the seasonally adjusted and non-seasonally adjusted data on  RRPs
and SDAs in February  2002 showed reflows of banks’ excess liquidity into the
BSP.

**14-03-2002** **7**


-----

#                                 Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas

**Bank lending continued to be sluggish, in part due to high NPLs and**
**weak corporate demand. At the same time, banks continue to place their**
**excess funds in government securities and placements with the BSP under**
**the RRP and SDA facilities.**

**External developments and outlook**

**17.** There have been encouraging signs that a turning point in the  business
cycle has been reached and that the global economy is poised for a faster-thanexpected recovery.  In particular, recent data showed that the US economy
grew positively in the fourth quarter—a steep recovery from the contraction in the
previous quarter.  There were also improvements in the unemployment rate and
jobless numbers.  In addition, the Institute of Supply Management reported that
the index of manufacturing activity  reached 54.7 index points in February,
exceeding  the benchmark level of 50 index points, which implies  rising
manufacturing activity.

**18.** A stronger and earlier-than-expected US recovery buoyed up expectations
of an increase in the US federal funds target rate toward the second half of 2002.
A survey of the US federal funds futures contract showed that the US federal
funds target rate was expected to rise by 25 basis points by July and by a
cumulative 100 basis points by December 2002 from the current level of 1.75
percent.[7]  Some market analysts, however, believe that the US could raise policy
interest rates even ahead of the May meeting of the Fed.

**19.** Signs of a US rebound have raised expectations in Europe and Asia as
well. In the Euro area, business confidence has perked up due to the positive
turnout of the most recent European leading indicators led by an increase in
manufacturing output. Meanwhile, in the Asian region, technology-driven
economies such as Korea, Malaysia, Singapore and Taiwan showed improved
export numbers, reduced inventory stockpiles and rising consumer confidence due
mainly to the perceived bottoming-out of the slump in the electronics sector.
Growing expectations of recovery have also been particularly apparent in
financial markets across the globe. Currency and equity markets in the US,
Europe, Asia—and even Japan—continued to post gains. Most economists
believed that these developments indicate that the monetary easing cycles across
the globe were nearing their end.

7 Based on the summary of implied Fed Funds rate contract at the Chicago Board of Trade as of 5
March 2002 as  quoted from the Bloomberg News, 6 March 2002

**14-03-2002** **8**


-----

#                                 Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas

**20.** In his recent testimony before the US Congress on the economic outlook,
US Fed Chairman Alan Greenspan noted that while the recovery of the US
economy has kicked off, the bounce back will be milder than past recoveries.
This indicates that the economic rebound may not match the quick
resurgences from previous recessions.  Some analysts  maintain  that,  while
there are clearer signs of recovery in the US, there is uncertainty on the depth or
magnitude of the recovery.  Greenspan has suggested that the Fed is likely to
proceed with caution in setting the monetary policy stance in the months
ahead.[8]

**Signs that the monetary easing cycle of major economies have**
**bottomed out and that recovery is gaining strength could limit scope for**
**further monetary easing.**

**II.** **Discussion  on the Review of the Monetary Policy Stance**

**21.** Majority of the Monetary Board members were of the view that the
generally subdued inflation outlook for the year—given expectations of
favorable food supply conditions  and continued  stability  in the exchange
rate—suggested a case for further monetary easing.  They supported the
position that, in an environment  marked by continued softness in domestic
demand and excess capacity in the manufacturing sector,  monetary policy should
continue  to be supportive of growth.  Recognizing, however, that there are
risks to  the inflation outlook,  majority of the Monetary Board members
expressed support  for  a modest cut in the BSP’s policy rates.

**22.** A further cut in the BSP’s policy rates could be interpreted by the market
as growth spurring. A 25-basis point cut in the BSP’s policy rates—to 7.0
percent for the overnight RRP rate and 9.25 percent for the overnight RP rate—
would help create conditions  for promoting increased bank lending activities
and propelling domestic demand to support the country’s growth objectives.
The last time the overnight RRP rate reached 7.0 percent was in May 1992.

**23.** With continued low capacity utilization in manufacturing, some members
of the Monetary Board believed that there is some leeway for a further cut in
the BSP’s policy rates.  This would influence a further decline in domestic

8 Reuters, “Greenspan hints at a rate hike without major tremors”, 12 March 2002

**14-03-2002** **9**


-----

#                                 Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas

interest rates, which would  translate into lower cost of capital. This, in turn,
would help stimulate investment spending.

**24.** Majority of  the members of the Monetary Board also noted that  the
current interest rate differentials remained comfortable, suggesting a case for
further monetary easing  without raising concerns on a possible adverse impact
in the foreign exchange market.

**25.** Meanwhile, majority of the members of the Monetary Board noted that
while bank lending rates have declined by more than the magnitude of the policy
rate cuts—by 856 basis points against 775 basis points for the period December
2000-February 2002—banks’ lending activity continued to be sluggish due to
persistently high NPLs of the banking system and weak corporate demand.  The
members of the Monetary Board  underscored the need to pursue structural
reforms that would address banks’ NPLs, particularly, the passage of the
legislation on the creation of Special Purpose Asset Vehicles (SPAVs).

**26.** A further cut in the BSP’s policy rates  could pave the way for a further
decline in the benchmark 91-day T-bill rates and bank lending rates, which
would be supportive of the fiscal position of the National Government and
enhance the repayment capabilities of corporates. Easier repayment terms, in
turn,  would help ease pressures  on banks’ NPLs  and create conditions for
renewed bank lending activity.  As the impact of the  rate easing works its
way in the real sector, the resulting favorable environment—one that fosters
consumer spending and increased investments—would help restore confidence in
the market.  Meanwhile, the impact on inflation of a 25-basis point cut in the
BSP’s policy rates is estimated to be minimal, i.e., a one-basis-point increase in
the average annual inflation.[9]

**27.** To complement  the monetary easing measures undertaken by the BSP,
some members of the Monetary Board underscored the need to encourage wider
availments of loan guarantees for  small enterprises  under the Small Business
Guaranty Fund Corporation (SBGFC).

**28.** Some members of the Monetary Board  noted  that a further reduction in
the BSP’s policy rates combined with the rationalization of the tiering scheme
would discourage banks from placing large volume of excess funds with the BSP.
This move would encourage banks to invest in longer-dated government securities

9 Based on the DER’s multiple-equation VAR forecasting model as of 11 February 2002

**14-03-2002** **10**


-----

#                                 Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas

such as the 5-year and 10-year Treasury bonds, which carry more attractive
yields. Over time, this would also compel banks to resume active lending to the
private sector for productive purposes.

**29.** Meanwhile, the possibility  that the monetary easing cycle of advanced
economies has ended would limit the case for a further policy rate cut  in the
future.  Majority of the members of the Monetary Board, therefore, shared the
view that a  modest cut in the policy rates now would be warranted given that
the US Fed has not yet shifted to a monetary policy tightening mode.

**30.  Some members of the Monetary Board, however, raised the observation**
that monetary policy is not the only factor influencing the growth in credit,
noting that prevailing generally weak business conditions have continued to
restrain domestic demand .

**31.** Some  members of the Monetary Board  raised  the following issues in
connection with  a further cut in the BSP’s policy rates:

a. There are downside risks to the inflation outlook posed by the
uncertainty over the impact of El Niño weather phenomenon on
agricultural crop production in 2003,  the uptrend in  oil prices and  the
possible adjustment in power rates.  Maintaining a strong bias against
inflationary risks could reinforce expectations of continued price stability
in the long run, thus, providing an anchor for certainty in investment and
business decisions.

b. Given strong indications that the monetary easing cycles of major
economies have reached their troughs, a further cut in the BSP’s policy
rates could imply the need for a more dramatic tightening of monetary
policy by the BSP should the major industrial  economies shift to
monetary tightening mode.

c. Raising interest rates in the Philippines would not be as easy as in other
countries, particularly under conditions of still weak demand  and  high
NPLs.  These concerns reinforce the need for a cautious monetary policy
stance.

d. While results from the inflation forecasting model show that average
inflation would track the targets for 2002 and 2003, the observed

**14-03-2002** **11**


-----

#                                 Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas

uptrend  beginning in the latter part of 2002 argues for a cautious
monetary policy stance.

**32.** Going forward, the members of the Monetary Board agreed that
monetary policy should proceed with greater caution. Specifically, monetary
authorities should  continue to monitor carefully the potential risks to future
inflation, particularly the direction of oil prices as well as power rates and the
impact of the  El Niño phenomenon on agricultural  output in 2003 in order to
ensure  a pre-emptive response to any possible threat to the BSP’s  primary
objective of maintaining price stability.

**III.** **Monetary Policy Decision**

**34.** Based on the weight of  evidence and  assessment of the balance of
risks on inflation and inflationary expectations, particularly as they relate to the
inflation outlook,  the members of the  Monetary Board approved the
following measures:

a. Reduction in the  BSP’s policy rates  by 25 basis points each to 7.0
percent for the overnight RRP (borrowing) rate and 9.25 percent for the
overnight RP (lending) rate effective 15 March 2002.

b. Adjustment in the interest rates on  banks’ overnight  RRP placements
with the BSP under the tiering system as follows: 7.0 percent for
placements of up to P5 billion, 4.0 percent for the next P5 billion, and 1.0
percent for placements in excess of P10 billion.

The next meeting of the Monetary Board to discuss the monetary policy
setting will be held on 11 April 2002.

**— The Monetary Board of the Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas**

o:\mdgparaso\__MB minutes\14-03-2002 meeting

**14-03-2002** **12**


-----

