Not to be released until 8:50 a.m.
Japan Standard Time on Wednesday,
June 20, 2007.

June 20, 2007

Bank of Japan

# Minutes of the Monetary Policy Meeting
## on April 27, 2007

(English translation prepared by the Bank's staff based on the Japanese original)


-----

Please contact the Bank of Japan at the address below in advance to request permission

when reproducing or copying the content of this document for commercial purposes.

Secretariat of the Policy Board, Bank of Japan

C.P.O. Box 203, Tokyo 100-8630, Japan

Please credit the source when quoting, reproducing, or copying the content of this

document.


-----

-----

-----

-----

consumer prices had risen due to higher food prices. The NIEs and ASEAN economies

continued to expand at a moderate pace on the whole as domestic demand remained firm.

In financial markets, stock prices in the United States had risen due mainly to

favorable corporate results, returning to the level before the adjustment at the end of

February. Stock prices in Europe and many emerging economies had been on an upward

trend.

**D. Economic and Financial Developments in Japan**

1. Economic developments

Exports as a whole had continued to increase against the background of the

expansion of overseas economies, although those to the United States had weakened

somewhat due to the economic slowdown there. Real exports increased by 3.0 percent in

the January-March quarter from the previous quarter. Exports were expected to continue

to rise as overseas economies taken as a whole continued to expand.

In the corporate sector, profits had remained high and business fixed investment

had continued to increase. As for machinery orders, a leading indicator of machinery

investment, the average for January and February was higher than that for the months in the

October-December quarter, which was also higher than in the previous quarter.

With regard to the household sector, in a situation where labor market conditions

had been tightening, household income had continued rising moderately, supported by the

increase in the number of employees. Under these circumstances, private consumption

had been firm. Sales at department stores and some other indicators relating to private

consumption decreased in March due to the return of cold weather, but in terms of the

average for the months in the January-March quarter, many consumption indicators

increased from the previous quarter.

Production had been on an increasing trend against the background of the growth

in domestic and external demand. Although it decreased marginally in the January-March

quarter from the October-December quarter, the decline was largely due to a reaction to the

high growth in the previous quarter and production was likely to remain on an upward trend.

Inventories had been more or less in balance with shipments in the industrial sector as a

whole, although inventories of electronic parts and devices had remained at a high level.

On the price front, compared with three-month-earlier levels, the domestic

4


-----

corporate goods price index (CGPI) stayed about the same as the decline in international

commodity prices had come to a halt. It was expected to start increasing, since

international commodity prices had been rising again recently. The year-on-year rate of

change in the CPI (excluding fresh food, on a nationwide basis) was minus 0.3 percent in

March, mainly due to the drop in crude oil prices. It was likely to continue to be around 0

percent in the short run, although this would depend on developments in the price of crude

oil. From a longer-term perspective, however, the rate of change in the CPI was projected

to continue to follow a positive trend, as the output gap continued to be positive.

2. Financial environment

The environment for corporate finance was accommodative. The issuing

environment for CP and corporate bonds was favorable, and the lending attitudes of private

banks had continued to be accommodative. Credit demand in the private sector had been

increasing. Under these circumstances, the amount outstanding of lending by private

banks had been increasing. The amount outstanding of CP and corporate bonds issued was

slightly above the previous year's level. The year-on-year rate of growth in the money

stock (M2+CDs) was around 1.0 percent.

**II. Summary of Discussions by the Policy Board on Economic and Financial**

**Developments**

**A. Economic Developments**

On the current state of Japan's economy, members concurred that it continued to

expand moderately.

Members agreed that overseas economies taken as a whole continued to expand

with momentum being gained across a wide range of economies, although it was becoming

clear that the U.S. economy was decelerating. With regard to the U.S. economy, many

members said that close attention should be paid to the adjustments in the housing market,

which were still ongoing. A few members noted, however, that there had been no sign of

the increase in delinquency rates for subprime mortgage loans affecting the overall economy.

Meanwhile, one member commented that although private consumption had been firm

recently, the pace of growth might decelerate in the future as the consumer confidence index

had declined substantially. Some members said that business fixed investment, which had

5


-----

been relatively weak recently, should also be watched carefully. On the price front, many

members noted that there was a risk of inflation remaining at a high level mainly due to the

tightening of labor market conditions. Given these developments in the U.S. economy,

members concurred that although it would be appropriate to maintain the main scenario, in

which the economy was heading for a soft landing, both upside and downside risks

continued to warrant attention. Regarding the Chinese economy, some members noted

that the pace of growth in real GDP had been high and there was a risk of the economy

overheating.

Members agreed that Japan's exports as a whole had continued to increase against

the background of these developments in overseas economies.

As for domestic private demand, members concurred that, in the corporate sector,

high profits had been maintained and business fixed investment had continued to increase.

With regard to the household sector, members agreed that as labor market

conditions had been tightening, household income had been trending upward, albeit

moderately. Many members said, however, that nominal wages per worker, which had

been sluggish recently, should be watched carefully. One of these members added that

improvement in business conditions was lagging behind in certain industries and for firms

of a certain size, and this might be one of the factors constraining wage growth. A

different member pointed out that wages per working hour were increasing, albeit only to a

small extent. As for private consumption, many members expressed the view that it had

been firm, with some fluctuations.

Members concurred that production had remained on an increasing trend although

it was relatively weak in the January-March quarter partly due to production adjustment in

some industries in reaction to the high growth in the previous quarter. Some members said

that recent developments in production had been somewhat weaker than expected, and one

of these members commented that attention should be paid to the risk that adjustments in

production might continue for a while longer. Members agreed that inventories had been

more or less in balance with shipments in the industrial sector as a whole, although

inventories of electronic parts and devices had remained at a high level.

Members concurred that the year-on-year rate of change in the CPI (excluding

fresh food) continued to be around 0 percent, partly reflecting the continuing effects of the

drop in crude oil prices. One member said that the 0.3 percent decline in the CPI in March

6


-----

seemed to be due partly to a temporary increase in the negative contribution of falls in

airfares and to the reduction in mobile telephone charges. A different member commented

that rounding in the process of calculating the index might have contributed to the larger

year-on-year rate of decline in the CPI for March.

Meanwhile, a few members said that it was confirmed in the reports at the April

meeting of general managers of the Bank's branches that all the regional economies were

improving moderately, although there were differences in degree.

**B. Financial Developments**

On the financial front, members agreed that the financial environment remained

extremely accommodative.

Members concurred that financial markets were generally stable. One member,

noting that stock prices in major economies in North America and Europe had recovered to

the levels before the adjustment at the end of February, said that the pace of recovery in

Japanese stock prices had been somewhat slow relative to that of other major economies,

and that this seemed to be attributable to investors' concern about future business

performance and their cautiousness about the potential risk of an appreciation of the yen.

A different member said that although the foreign exchange market had recently been stable,

attention should continue to be paid to market developments, including those in yen carry

trades.

**C. Outlook for Economic Activity and Prices**

With regard to the outlook for economic activity and prices, members agreed on

the following assessment: from fiscal 2007 through fiscal 2008, Japan's economy was likely

to continue its sustained expansion with a virtuous circle of production, income, and

spending in place.

Members noted the following as the background to this economic outlook. First,

exports were likely to remain on the increase, as overseas economies taken as a whole were

expected to keep expanding with momentum being gained across a wide range of

economies, although the pace of growth in the U.S. economy had recently been decelerating.

Second, strong corporate performance was likely to continue. Third, it was expected that

the positive influence of the strength in the corporate sector would continue to feed through

7


-----

into the household sector slowly but steadily. And fourth, the extremely accommodative

financial conditions were likely to continue to support private demand.

Members were of the view that the year-on-year rate of growth in real GDP was

likely to register around 2 percent, somewhat higher than the potential growth rate, for both

fiscal 2007 and fiscal 2008. One member added that assuming that the accommodative

financial conditions were maintained, there was a possibility that the year-on-year rate of

growth in real GDP in and after fiscal 2007 might be slightly higher than in recent years.

With regard to prices, members agreed that, given this economic outlook, the

environment surrounding prices was likely to improve gradually, as estimates of the output

gap suggested that supply and demand conditions would continue to tighten and downward

pressure from declining unit labor costs was likely to weaken. Members concurred that

the domestic CGPI had recently been somewhat lower than the previous projection in

October, reflecting declines in international commodity prices, but, as for the outlook, it

was likely to maintain its upward trend, although this would be subject to future

developments in prices of crude oil and other commodities as well as foreign exchange rates.

Members agreed that movements in the CPI (excluding fresh food) were currently

somewhat weaker than previously projected, mainly due to the fall in crude oil prices.

They also concurred that going forward, the year-on-year rate of change in the CPI was

likely to be around 0 percent in the short run, depending on developments in crude oil prices,

but was likely to rise gradually in the longer run. One member said, however, that the

year-on-year rate of change in the CPI might remain slightly below 0 percent for a while,

and the risk that consumer prices might not rise smoothly warranted close attention.

Members raised the following upside and downside risks to the above outlook: in

relation to economic activity, (1) developments in the global economy, (2) supply and

demand conditions for IT-related goods, and (3) possible larger swings in financial and

economic activity based on optimistic assumptions regarding, for example, financial

conditions; and in relation to the outlook for prices, (1) uncertainty regarding the sensitivity

of prices to changes in the output gap and (2) developments in the prices of crude oil and

other commodities.

As for developments in the global economy, members concurred that there was a

risk that U.S. economic growth might decelerate more than expected due to longer housing

market adjustments and weaker business fixed investment than had been projected. Some

8


-----

members expressed the view that if this situation materialized, other economies might also

be adversely affected. A different member said that, even if the U.S. economy decelerated

more than expected, the global economy taken as a whole would not be harmed seriously as

European and Asian economies were strong on the whole. Many members noted that

concern regarding inflation in the U.S. economy had persisted. One of these members said

that the possibility of stagflation, the risk of economic deceleration and inflation

materializing simultaneously, could not be ruled out. Many members noted that there were

upside risks in the Chinese economy. A few members said that developments in

international commodity prices, such as crude oil prices, continued to require close

monitoring, as there was a risk that they might have an impact on the global economy and

international financial markets.

With regard to supply and demand conditions for IT-related goods, some members

expressed the view that, although inventories of electronic parts and devices had remained

at a high level and thus production adjustment was likely to continue, these developments

had not been widespread so far and demand for IT-related goods, on a global basis,

remained steady. These members said, however, that attention should be paid to the risk of

a serious deterioration in supply and demand conditions triggered by, for instance, a

deceleration in the global economy, since the pace of increase in the global supply of

IT-related goods had been rapid.

As for the effects of the accommodative financial environment, members were of

the view that Japan's current economic circumstances were such as potentially to encourage

assertive financial and economic activity, with the financial positions of both firms and

financial institutions improving and real interest rates remaining very low. Members also

agreed that in this situation, if greater assertiveness should be based on optimistic

assumptions regarding future profitability, the result could well be a misallocation of

resources in the long run as agents became over-extended in financial markets or poured

funds and other resources into inefficient economic activities. One member, referring to

the upturn in land prices in _Land Price Publication and the buoyancy in the real estate_

investment trust (REIT) market, said that there was no need at present to be concerned

about possible excessive rises in land prices, but developments in asset prices continued to

warrant close monitoring, since the real estate market seemed to be somewhat overheated in

certain areas.

9


-----

With regard to the outlook for prices, members were of the view that it was

uncertain whether prices were more sensitive or less than the Bank's assumption to changes

in the output gap. Some members commented that there was a possibility that prices

would turn out to be weaker than the projection, since firms had remained cautious about

raising wages and prices. A few other members said that the potential growth rate might

be higher than had been assumed and the size of the labor force might increase more than

expected, and if this turned out to be the case, growth in wages and prices might deviate

downward from the projection. On the other hand, one member said that a closer look at

recent developments surrounding prices suggested that wages for workers with specialized

skills and costs such as commercial rents had been on an upward trend, and thus due

attention should also be paid to upside risks to the outlook for prices. Members agreed

that considerable uncertainty surrounded developments in the prices of crude oil and other

commodities, leaving the potential for movement in either direction.

One member, citing Japan's situation where prices, especially services prices, and

wages tended not to rise, said that it might be an option to stabilize inflation expectations of

firms and households by conducting monetary policy based on a framework that made it

easy for them to form an idea of future price levels. In response, a different member

commented that people's views with regard to prices and the economic structure were

formed fundamentally based on their past experiences, and therefore it might cause

confusion if a hasty attempt was made to affect them by means of monetary policy.

Members assessed economic activity and prices from the "two perspectives"

taking into account the above outlook and upside and downside risks. They first made an

assessment in terms of the first perspective, that is to say, they assessed the most likely

outlook for economic activity and prices through fiscal 2008 with reference to the view of

market participants regarding the future course of the policy interest rate -- a view that is

incorporated in market interest rates. They agreed that Japan's economy was likely to

continue its sustained expansion with a virtuous circle of production, income, and spending

in place.

Members then made an assessment in terms of the second perspective, that is to

say, they examined risks considered most relevant to the conduct of monetary policy,

extending the time horizon. They concurred that attention should be paid to a medium- to

long-term risk of larger swings in economic activity and prices and of inefficient allocation

10


-----

of resources as the stimulative effect of monetary policy might be further amplified. It

was also agreed that, if the downside risks mentioned earlier should materialize, the

improvement in the economic situation might stall or prices might continue not to rise

despite an improvement in economic conditions.

With regard to the future conduct of monetary policy, as a result of the assessment

of economic activity and prices described above, members agreed that it would be

appropriate to keep their basic thinking on the future conduct of monetary policy

unchanged: while confirming that Japan's economy remained likely to follow a path of

sustainable growth under price stability in light of the "understanding of medium- to

long-term price stability" and assessing relevant risk factors, the Bank would adjust the

level of interest rates gradually in accordance with improvements in the economic and price

situation.

**III. Summary of Discussions on Monetary Policy for the Immediate Future**

On the monetary policy stance for the immediate future, members agreed that,

based on their assessment of the economic and financial situation, it was appropriate to

maintain the current guideline for money market operations that the Bank would encourage

the uncollateralized overnight call rate to remain at around 0.5 percent.

**IV. Remarks by Government Representatives**

The representative from the Ministry of Finance made the following remarks.

(1) Japan's economy continued to recover but should continue to be watched closely as

there were weak developments in wages and in production of, for example, electronic

parts and devices.

(2) In view of the fact that the year-on-year rate of change in the CPI remained negative,

price conditions required careful monitoring to see whether upward pressure on prices

developed.

(3) Given the current developments in economic activity and prices, the government would

like the Bank to continue to support the economy from the financial side based on the

Bank's current guideline for money market operations so as to ensure the sustainability

of the ongoing economic recovery.

(4) Market participants were focusing on the April 2007 Outlook for Economic Activity and

11


-----

_Prices, whose text would be decided at the meeting, because it would include the_

Bank's projection for economic activity and prices in fiscal 2008 and the results of its

first review of the "understanding of medium- to long-term price stability" since its

original release in March 2006. The government would like the Bank to give due

consideration to overall financial market developments. In order to prevent financial

markets from becoming unstable due to speculation regarding the future conduct of

monetary policy, the government would also like the Bank to clearly explain its

assessment of economic activity and prices and its thinking on the future conduct of

monetary policy to market participants and the public.

The representative from the Cabinet Office made the following remarks.

(1) Japan's economy continued to recover, despite weakness in production in some sectors.

A comprehensive review of developments in prices suggested that the economy had not

yet overcome deflation.

(2) With regard to the outlook for economic activity and prices, the government considered

that particular attention should be paid to downside rather than upside risks, since one

of the key factors for the future course of Japan's economy would be the effects of

developments in overseas economies.

(3) In order to achieve sustainable economic growth led by private demand based on price

stability, it was important for the government and the Bank to make joint efforts, with a

shared basic perspective on macroeconomic management. The government would like

to request the Bank to implement effective monetary policy that was consistent with the

government's policy efforts and with its outlook for the economy while giving due

consideration to developments in financial markets, and to firmly support the economy

from the financial side in a responsible manner by maintaining the accommodative

financial conditions ensuing from very low interest rates, taking into account downside

risks to the outlook for economic activity and prices.

(4) The government was pursuing strengthening of the economy's growth potential with the

hope of achieving in the next five years a nominal GDP growth rate of around 3.5

percent or higher and a real GDP growth rate of around 2 percent or substantially higher,

as presented in the "Direction and Strategy for the Japanese Economy." The

government therefore hoped that the Bank would firmly support these efforts from the

12


-----

financial side. At meetings of the Council on Economic and Fiscal Policy, the

"understanding of medium- to long-term price stability" had been taken up from the

perspective of dispelling deflationary concern among market participants. The

government would like the Bank to explain clearly its thinking on price stability.

**V. Votes**

Based on the above discussions, members agreed that it was appropriate to

maintain the current guideline for money market operations, which encouraged the

uncollateralized overnight call rate to remain at around 0.5 percent.

To reflect this view, the chairman formulated the following proposal and put it to

the vote.

**The Chairman's Policy Proposal on the Guideline for Money Market Operations:**

The guideline for money market operations for the intermeeting period ahead will

be as follows, and will be made public by the attached statement (see Attachment).

The Bank of Japan will encourage the uncollateralized overnight call rate

to remain at around 0.5 percent.

Votes for the proposal: Mr. T. Fukui, Mr. T. Muto, Mr. K. Iwata, Ms. M. Suda, Mr.

A. Mizuno, Mr. K. G. Nishimura, Mr. T. Noda, Mr. S. Nakamura, and Mr. H.

Kamezaki.

Votes against the proposal: None.

**VI. Review of the "Understanding of Medium- to Long-Term Price Stability"**

In March 2006, the Bank announced, in the publication of "The Bank's Thinking

on Price Stability," that the "understanding of medium- to long-term price stability" (the

level of inflation that each member of the Policy Board understood, when conducting

monetary policy, as being consistent with price stability over the medium to long term,

hereafter "understanding") would be, in principle, reviewed annually. Since about a year

had passed since this announcement, a review was conducted at this meeting.

Members reaffirmed the basic thinking on price stability and concurred that it was

13


-----

appropriate to maintain the current thinking that price stability was a state where various

economic agents including households and firms could make decisions regarding such

economic activities as consumption and investment without being concerned about

fluctuations in the general price level. They also agreed that, given factors such as the

considerable time the effects of monetary policy took to work through the economy, the

Bank should forecast developments in economic activity and prices from a sufficiently

long-term viewpoint and strive to realize price stability over the medium to long term.

Some members said that this forward-looking approach to achieving price stability was very

important for the conduct of monetary policy, but it had not yet been fully understood by the

public. These members were therefore of the view that the Bank should continue to

explain it at every opportunity.

With regard to points that should be discussed in examining the "understanding,"

one member commented that discussion should be based on a price index which the public

at large was accustomed to, and therefore, in the case of Japan, it was appropriate to

continue to use the CPI. As for measurement bias in the CPI, some members said that it

seemed to remain insignificant even after taking account of last year's rebasing of the index.

In relation to the "safety margin" that acted as a buffer against the risk of falling into a

vicious circle of declining prices and deteriorating economic activity, some members said

that the risk seemed to be small, since the strength of the corporate sector and of the

financial system had been enhanced, the potential growth rate seemed to have increased,

and the degree of downward rigidity of wages seemed to be sufficiently small. With

regard to the level of inflation perceived by households and firms as consistent with price

stability, many members expressed the view that it had remained low and stable.

Based on the above considerations, members exchanged views regarding the

specific figures that would represent the "understanding" in terms of the year-on-year rate

of change in the CPI. Figures presented by many members were centered around 1

percent, with ranges of approximately 0.5 to 1 percentage point in either direction attached;

some of these members added that their median figures were slightly below 1 percent.

There was one member who expressed the member's "understanding" as a range

approximately from 1 to 2 percent. A different member said that the member's range lay

between 0.5 and 1 percent, and another member said that the member's median figure was a

positive number closer to 0 percent than to 1 percent. After stating their individual views,

14


-----

members agreed, as on the previous occasion a year ago, that they could be summarized as

follows: the "understanding," expressed in terms of the year-on-year rate of change in the

CPI, took the form of a range approximately between 0 and 2 percent, with most members'

median figures falling on one side or the other of 1 percent.

**VII. Discussion on the Outlook for Economic Activity and Prices**

Members discussed the draft of the _Outlook for Economic Activity and Prices_

(consisting of "The Bank's View" and "The Background"), and put "The Bank's View" to

the vote. The Policy Board decided, by a unanimous vote, the text of "The Bank's View."

It was confirmed that "The Bank's View" would be published on April 27, 2007 and the

whole report on May 1, 2007.

Votes for the proposal: Mr. T. Fukui, Mr. T. Muto, Mr. K. Iwata, Ms. M. Suda, Mr.

A. Mizuno, Mr. K. G. Nishimura, Mr. T. Noda, Mr. S. Nakamura, and Mr. H.

Kamezaki.

Votes against the proposal: None.

**VIII. Approval of the Minutes of the Monetary Policy Meeting**

The Policy Board approved unanimously the minutes of the Monetary Policy

Meeting of March 19 and 20, 2007 for release on May 7, 2007.

15


-----

Attachment

April 27, 2007

Bank of Japan

At the Monetary Policy Meeting held today, the Bank of Japan decided, by a

unanimous vote,[[Note]] to set the following guideline for money market operations for the

intermeeting period:

The Bank of Japan will encourage the uncollateralized overnight call rate

to remain at around 0.5 percent.

[Note] Voting for the action: Mr. T. Fukui, Mr. T. Muto, Mr. K. Iwata, Ms. M. Suda, Mr. A. Mizuno,
Mr. K. G. Nishimura, Mr. T. Noda, Mr. S. Nakamura, and Mr. H. Kamezaki.
Voting against the action: None.

16


-----

