Not to be released until 8:50 a.m.
Japan Standard Time on Wednesday,
December 26, 2007.

December 26, 2007

Bank of Japan

# Minutes of the Monetary Policy Meeting
## on November 12 and 13, 2007

(English translation prepared by the Bank's staff based on the Japanese original)


-----

Please contact the Bank of Japan at the address below in advance to request permission

when reproducing or copying the content of this document for commercial purposes.

Secretariat of the Policy Board, Bank of Japan

C.P.O. Box 203, Tokyo 100-8630, Japan

Please credit the source when quoting, reproducing, or copying the content of this

document.


-----

A Monetary Policy Meeting of the Bank of Japan Policy Board was held in the

Head Office of the Bank of Japan in Tokyo on Monday, November 12, 2007, from 2:00 p.m.

to 4:09 p.m., and on Tuesday, November 13, from 9:00 a.m. to 12:25 p.m.[1]

**Policy Board Members Present**

**Mr. T. Fukui, Chairman, Governor of the Bank of Japan**

**Mr. T. Muto, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Japan**

**Mr. K. Iwata, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Japan**

**Ms. M. Suda**

**Mr. A. Mizuno**

**Mr. K. G. Nishimura**

**Mr. T. Noda**

**Mr. S. Nakamura**

**Mr. H. Kamezaki**

Government Representatives Present

Mr. H. Moriyama, Senior Vice Minister of Finance, Ministry of Finance[2]

Mr. M. Suzuki, Deputy Vice Minister for Policy Planning and Coordination, Ministry

of Finance[3]

Mr. J. Hamano, Vice Minister for Policy Coordination, Cabinet Office

Reporting Staff

Mr. N. Inaba, Executive Director

Mr. A. Horii, Executive Director (Assistant Governor)

Mr. K. Ido, Executive Director

Mr. M. Amamiya, Director-General, Monetary Affairs Department

Mr. S. Uchida, Associate Director-General, Monetary Affairs Department

1 The minutes of this meeting were approved by the Policy Board at the Monetary Policy Meeting
held on December 19 and 20, 2007 as "a document which contains an outline of the discussion at the
meeting" stipulated in Article 20, Paragraph 1 of the Bank of Japan Law of 1997. Those present
are referred to by their titles at the time of the meeting.
2 Mr. H. Moriyama was present on November 13.
3 Mr. M. Suzuki was present on November 12.

1


-----

Mr. H. Nakaso, Director-General, Financial Markets Department

Mr. K. Momma, Director-General, Research and Statistics Department

Mr. E. Maeda, Associate Director-General, Research and Statistics Department

Mr. T. Idesawa, Director-General, International Department

Secretariat of the Monetary Policy Meeting

Mr. K. Osugi, Director-General, Secretariat of the Policy Board

Mr. K. Shigyoh, Director, Deputy Head of Secretarial Services for the Board, Secretariat

of the Policy Board

Mr. A. Otani, Senior Economist, Monetary Affairs Department

Mr. K. Suzuki, Senior Economist, Monetary Affairs Department

2


-----

**I. Summary of Staff Reports on Economic and Financial Developments[4]**

**A. Money Market Operations in the Intermeeting Period**

The Bank conducted money market operations in accordance with the guideline

decided at the previous meeting on October 31, 2007.[5] As a result, the uncollateralized

overnight call rate had been at around 0.5 percent.

**B. Recent Developments in Financial Markets**

In the money market, interest rates on term instruments, such as yields on

financing bills (FBs) and treasury bills (TBs), and interest rates on Euroyen futures had

been more or less flat.

Japanese stock prices had followed U.S. stock prices. The Nikkei 225 Stock

Average had recently dropped to the range of 15,000-15,500 yen.

Long-term interest rates declined, mainly in response to long-term interest rate

movements in the United States and Europe, and had recently been at around 1.5 percent.

The yen appreciated against the U.S. dollar, mainly due to the financial statements

of some U.S. financial institutions. The yen was currently being traded in the range of

109-111 yen against the dollar.

**C. Overseas Economic and Financial Developments**

The U.S. economy continued to be in a moderate adjustment phase. Housing

investment continued to decrease, and the pace of decrease had recently been accelerating.

Business fixed investment remained on a gradual uptrend, although the pace of increase was

decelerating. Private consumption continued to be on an increasing trend, although the

pace of increase was slower than before. In this situation, the pace of increase in the

number of employees had been slowing moderately with some fluctuations. As for prices,

the year-on-year rate of increase in the consumer price index (CPI) for all items less food

and energy, or the core CPI, had been slightly over 2 percent. Underlying inflation

pressures had not subsided yet as labor market conditions had continued to be tight. As for

4 Reports were made based on information available at the time of the meeting.
5 The guideline was as follows:
The Bank of Japan will encourage the uncollateralized overnight call rate to remain at
around 0.5 percent.

3


-----

the financial environment, financial institutions had tightened their stance with regard to

providing a broad range of loans, including prime mortgages and commercial real estate

loans, because of the subprime mortgage problem.

In the euro area, the economy continued to expand with domestic and external

demand well in balance. Business fixed investment and private consumption remained on

an upward trend while exports continued to grow steadily. However, there seemed to be

some signs of deceleration in exports and production. The U.K. economy continued to

show relatively high growth, led mainly by domestic demand.

In China, both domestic and external demand continued to expand strongly.

India's economy continued to show high growth, led mainly by domestic demand. The

NIEs and ASEAN economies continued to expand at a moderate pace on the whole.

In global financial markets, adjustments stemming from the U.S. subprime

mortgage problem continued. Repricing of securitized products had continued, and credit

spreads had widened somewhat. Under these circumstances, stock prices in the United

States had fallen, mainly due to growing concerns about financial institutions' performance,

and long-term interest rates there had decreased. In Europe, developments in stock prices

and long-term interest rates had followed those in the United States. In many emerging

economies, stock prices had fallen along with those in the United States and Europe, and

yield differentials between their sovereign bonds and U.S. Treasuries had expanded.

**D. Economic and Financial Developments in Japan**

1. Economic developments

Exports had continued to increase against the background of the expansion of

overseas economies. They remained more or less unchanged in the April-June quarter

from the previous quarter due in part to the weakness in exports to the United States, but

following this weakness they returned to relatively high growth in the July-September

quarter. Exports were expected to continue to rise against the background of the

expansion of overseas economies as a whole.

As for domestic private demand, business fixed investment had continued to trend

upward. Shipments of capital goods (excluding transport equipment) and machinery

orders (private demand, excluding shipbuilding orders and orders from electric power

companies) both rose in the July-September quarter. Construction starts (floor area,

4


-----

private, nondwelling use) rose substantially in the April-June quarter as a result of a rush of

demand just before the revised Building Standard Law came into force, but mainly in

reaction to this they fell back sharply in the July-September quarter. Business fixed

investment was expected to continue to trend upward since the growth in domestic and

external demand and the high level of corporate profits were likely to be maintained.

Private consumption had been firm. With regard to durable consumer goods, the

number of new passenger-car registrations, which previously were declining, had picked up

since August, supported mainly by strong sales of new models, and in the area of electrical

appliances, sales of digital appliances such as flat-panel televisions and of game consoles

had continued to be strong, while those of cellular phones had also been on an increasing

trend with the introduction of new models in progress. Sales at department stores and

supermarkets, which primarily sold nondurable and semi-durable consumer goods, had been

more or less unchanged, with fluctuations caused by the weather. As for services

consumption, sales in the food service industry had continued to trend upward, albeit with

large fluctuations caused by the weather, and outlays for travel had generally been firm.

Indicators of consumer sentiment had generally been at favorable levels, although some had

shown a slight deterioration most recently. Private consumption was expected to follow a

gradual uptrend, reflecting the gradual increase in household income.

As for housing investment, housing starts had recently dropped sharply, affected

by the revised Building Standard Law coming into force. Housing investment was likely

to be sluggish for the time being, but was expected to regain its firmness in due course

against the background of the rise in household income.

Production had continued to be on an increasing trend and was expected to

continue to increase, reflecting the rise in domestic and external demand. Inventories had

been more or less in balance with shipments. Inventories of electronic parts and devices,

which were previously elevated relative to shipments, had moved more or less into balance

with them.

As for employment and income, in a situation where labor market conditions had

continued to tighten, household income had continued rising moderately, supported by the

increase in the number of employees. Nominal wages per worker, however, had recently

been somewhat weak. The gradual increase in household income was likely to continue

against the background that firms were increasingly feeling a shortage of labor and

5


-----

corporate profits were expected to remain high.

On the price front, international commodity prices showed the following

developments: crude oil prices had been high, mainly due to the tightening of supply and

demand conditions and to a heightening of concerns over geopolitical risks, while prices of

nonferrous metals had also been high on the whole, albeit with some fluctuations. The

three-month rate of change in the domestic corporate goods price index (CGPI) had been

positive, mainly due to the rise in international commodity prices, and the CGPI was likely

to continue increasing for the time being. The year-on-year rate of change in the CPI

(excluding fresh food) had been around 0 percent, and it was expected to continue to be

around 0 percent in the short run. From a longer-term perspective, however, it was

projected to continue to follow a positive trend, as the output gap continued to be positive.

2. Financial environment

The environment for corporate finance was accommodative. Credit demand in

the private sector had been more or less flat, since ample cash flow had slowed the increase

in corporate demand for external funds. The issuing environment for CP and corporate

bonds had been favorable, and the lending attitudes of private banks had continued to be

accommodative. Under these circumstances, the amount outstanding of lending by private

banks had been increasing moderately, and the amount outstanding of CP and corporate

bonds issued had been above the previous year's level. Funding costs for firms had risen

slightly. The year-on-year rate of growth in the money stock (M2+CDs) was around 2

percent.

**II. Summary of Discussions by the Policy Board on Economic and Financial**

**Developments**

**A. Economic Developments**

On the current state of Japan's economy, members concurred that it continued to

expand moderately, and was likely to continue its sustained expansion with a virtuous circle

of growth in production, income, and spending in place. They also agreed, however, that

developments in global financial markets and the global economy continued to warrant

attention, because global financial markets remained unstable and there was uncertainty

regarding global economic developments, for example, downside risks to the U.S. economy.

6


-----

Members agreed that overseas economies taken as a whole continued to expand

with momentum being gained across a wide range of economies.

Members shared the view that global financial markets continued to be unstable.

Most members were of the view that the sluggishness in markets for securitized products

and the fall in stock prices had become pronounced and a "flight to quality" had occurred,

due to the emergence of subprime mortgage-related losses at U.S. and European financial

institutions and further downgrading of securitized products. Many members said that

credit spreads, such as those on corporate bonds, had increased again. One of these

members added that corporate bond spreads and credit default swap (CDS) premiums had

been regaining stability, with the exception of those relating to the financial industry. With

regard to money market conditions in the United States and Europe, a few members said

that interbank rates remained high, although it had become easier for term instrument deals

to be made compared with some time ago. Many members expressed the view that it

would be some time before the overall picture of the losses incurred by financial institutions

became available, because the process of repricing in financial markets was still ongoing

and it was difficult to accurately assess prices of financial assets such as securitized

products. One member said that market participants' confidence in the pricing of

securitized products had been undermined and this had made financial markets nervous.

Based on the discussion, members agreed that close attention should continue to be paid to

developments in global financial markets, and also how they might affect economic activity.

Members concurred that despite the prolonged correction in the U.S. housing

market, the U.S. economy continued to expand moderately, led mainly by private

consumption and business fixed investment, although the pace of growth was decelerating.

Many members said that the number of employees had been increasing, and the GDP

statistics for the July-September quarter had shown no effects of the correction in the

housing sector on other sectors and had confirmed that private consumption and business

fixed investment had been on an uptrend. Some members said that net exports had

continued to improve. Many members noted that financial institutions had tightened their

stance with regard to providing loans, not only subprime mortgages but also other types of

loans, and attention should be paid to how this tightened lending stance would affect

developments in private consumption and business fixed investment. Some members said

that possible effects of recent rises in gasoline and food prices on private consumption also

7


-----

warranted attention. Based on the above discussion, some members expressed the view

that although the scenario that the U.S. economy was likely to realize a soft landing and

gradually move onto a sustainable growth path remained valid, downside risks to the

economy had increased somewhat. One member commented that a soft landing remained

likely, mainly in view of the firmness of the economy as a whole, which had been

confirmed by the fact that the prolonged correction in the housing sector had not affected

other sectors noticeably. As for prices, many members' assessment was that underlying

inflation pressures had not yet subsided as labor market conditions had continued to be tight

and crude oil prices had risen.

With regard to European economies, members shared the view that the economy

of the euro area continued to expand with domestic and external demand well in balance.

A few members said that, although the disruptions in global financial markets had not

affected economic activity thus far, developments continued to warrant attention.

On Asian economies, members concurred that in China both domestic and external

demand continued to expand strongly, and that the NIEs and ASEAN economies continued

to expand at a moderate pace on the whole.

Regarding Japan's economy, members concurred that exports had continued to

increase, reflecting the expansion of overseas economies, and were likely to continue to

increase.

As for domestic private demand, members shared the view that business fixed

investment had continued to trend upward, and was likely to keep increasing, albeit at a

slower pace in light of the capital stock cycle, since the growth in domestic and external

demand and high corporate profits were likely to be maintained. Many members

commented that the fact that business fixed investment in the GDP statistics and machinery

orders returned to growth in the July-September quarter was in line with this view. Some

members referred to the fact that construction starts in terms of floor area fell back sharply

after the revised Building Standard Law came into force, and said that it would be necessary

to monitor how they recovered when assessing future developments in business fixed

investment. Some members commented that developments in small firms, such as the

slightly weak growth in fixed investment planned by them and the deterioration in their

business sentiment, warranted attention.

Members concurred that private consumption had been firm and was likely to

8


-----

follow a gradual uptrend, reflecting the gradual increase in household income.

Members agreed that housing investment had dropped sharply, affected by the

revised Building Standard Law coming into force. A few members expressed the view

that the drop in housing investment had started to affect the business of firms, particularly

small ones, in construction-related industries, in the form of a rise in the inventory ratio of

construction goods and a fall in their prices. Some members noted that some in the real

estate industry were saying that housing demand was peaking out, and continued that

careful attention should be paid to developments in housing investment after the effects of

the revised law coming into force had dissipated. A few members added that attention

should also be paid to the possibility that the decline in housing investment, if it continued

for a prolonged period, might have adverse and wide-ranging effects, including on business

and consumer sentiment.

Members agreed that production, which was flat in the first half of the year, had

started to increase again and was likely to be on an upward trend reflecting the rise in

domestic and external demand. Members concurred that inventories had been more or less

in balance with shipments, and that adjustments in those of electronic parts and devices,

which were previously high, had almost been completed. A few members commented that

they would nevertheless monitor developments in prices of dynamic random access

memories (DRAMs) and flash memories, because these prices had been somewhat weak.

As for employment and income, members concurred that, in a situation where

labor market conditions had continued to tighten, household income had continued rising

moderately, supported by the increase in the number of employees. They also agreed that

the gradual increase in household income was likely to continue against the background that

firms were increasingly feeling a shortage of labor and corporate profits were expected to

remain high. One member said that the member would pay attention to developments in

winter bonus payments because some survey results had suggested a lower, or even

negative, year-on-year rate of growth in them.

With regard to the first preliminary estimates of GDP for the July-September

quarter, members said that, although housing investment had dropped sharply, net exports,

business fixed investment, and private consumption had increased, and concurred that

overall these developments were in line with the Bank's assessment of the current state of

Japan's economy that it continued to expand moderately.

9


-----

As for prices, members said that the three-month rate of change in the CGPI had

been positive, mainly due to the rise in international commodity prices, and the CGPI was

likely to continue increasing for the time being. A few members added that the rate of

increase in the CGPI was likely to be somewhat lower in the rebased series, which would be

introduced in December 2007, than in the current series.

Members concurred that the year-on-year rate of change in the CPI (excluding

fresh food) was likely to be around 0 percent in the short run, but from a longer-term

perspective it was likely to continue to follow a positive trend since resource utilization had

been rising. A few members noted that while it was still not easy to pass on production

costs to sales prices, firms' capacity to absorb higher costs had been approaching its limit,

and some firms had started to pass on higher materials prices to final goods prices. A

different member commented that consumers' perception of price developments seemed to

have been changing as price rises in daily necessities had been increasing.

As for future developments in the CPI, some members expressed the view that the

positive contribution of petroleum products' prices was likely to increase gradually starting

from the figure for October, and depending on changes in crude oil prices, the year-on-year

rate of change in the CPI might turn slightly positive before the end of the year.

Members discussed how to take the surge in international commodity prices,

particularly crude oil prices, into account when assessing price developments. Regarding

the cause of the rise in crude oil prices, one member expressed the view that the rise was

basically due to the expansion of the global economy, particularly emerging economies,

which was a demand-side factor. A different member added that it was a view widely

shared in Europe and the United States that developments in crude oil prices should be

taken into account in an assessment of price developments. Another member said that the

rise in crude oil prices could not be explained solely by demand-side factors; supply-side

factors, such as geopolitical risks, and most recently a short-term speculative inflow of

funds had also contributed to it. A few members said that as a downturn in crude oil prices

might cause a temporary change in the course of consumer prices, the Bank should take this

into account when assessing price trends and explaining them to the public. Members

agreed that the discussion could be summed up as follows: the rise in crude oil prices was

due to both supply-side and demand-side factors; although simply ignoring it in the

assessment of price trends was not appropriate, the swings in crude oil prices were large and

10


-----

were causing short-term price fluctuations; and it was important to consider these points to

understand actual price trends. Some members noted the importance of examining a wide

range of price indicators in assessing price trends.

In relation to this, one member pointed out that, given the fact that energy

consumed in Japan was mostly imported, a rise in general prices caused by the surge in

energy prices could be regarded as imported inflation, and that inflation pressures stemming

from domestic demand were not strong. Against this view, a different member said that

even price rises due to exogenous factors could increase inflation expectations among the

public in Japan. Another member commented that the two members might be approaching

the same issue from different angles because whether price rises due to exogenous factors

affected inflation expectations depended on the strength in domestic demand.

**B. Financial Developments**

On financial developments in Japan, members concurred that despite the

emergence of the U.S. subprime mortgage problem and the instability in the global financial

markets, the financial environment remained accommodative as seen in the fact that the

lending attitudes of private banks and the issuing conditions in capital markets were

favorable. One member said that the amount of loss related to securitized products had

also been increasing somewhat in Japan, but was not significant. Some members,

referring to large swings in stock prices in Japan and foreign exchange rates, said that

careful attention should be paid to their effects on corporate activity and consumer

sentiment.

**III. Summary of Discussions on Monetary Policy for the Immediate Future**

Members concurred that, given the economic and financial situation, their basic

thinking remained unchanged on the monetary policy stance for the immediate future: while

confirming that Japan's economy remained likely to follow a path of sustainable growth

under price stability in light of the "understanding of medium- to long-term price stability"

and assessing relevant risk factors, the Bank would adjust the level of interest rates

gradually in accordance with improvements in the economic and price situation.

On the guideline for money market operations for the intermeeting period ahead,

one member said that it would be appropriate to raise the uncollateralized overnight call rate

11


-----

target from around 0.5 percent to around 0.75 percent.

Against this view, most members said that it would be appropriate to maintain the

current guideline for money market operations that the Bank would encourage the

uncollateralized overnight call rate to remain at around 0.5 percent. They expressed the

following view: economic indicators suggested that Japan's economy was likely to continue

sustainable growth under price stability broadly in line with the projection presented in the

_Outlook for Economic Activity and Prices (hereafter the Outlook Report); however, global_

financial markets continued to be unstable, and there was uncertainty regarding global

economic developments, for example, downside risks to the U.S. economy; and therefore

the Bank should continue to examine economic indicators and other relevant information as

well as financial market conditions carefully to grasp the situation accurately.

With regard to the Outlook Report released at the end of October, some members

said that financial market conditions since its release had been stable, and this suggested

that market participants had understood that there had been no change in the Bank's basic

thinking concerning the conduct of monetary policy. One member, however, expressed the

view that, although the most likely projection remained almost the same in the October

Outlook Report, there were more references than before to uncertainty regarding future

developments, and thus the Bank's thinking might be seen as difficult to understand. Some

members noted that, in this situation, the timing of a policy change continued to attract

market participants' attention. They continued that, while there was a view in the market

that the Bank was eager to raise the policy interest rate based on an optimistic projection,

there was also a view that the Bank was unlikely to raise the rate for a while as it was

attentive to downside risks to the economy. In the end, members agreed that the Bank

should continue to take every opportunity to explain both the standard scenario and the

assessment of upside and downside risks, which were described in the October Outlook

Report covering a period of one and a half years ahead, and also its basic thinking

concerning the conduct of monetary policy.

**IV. Remarks by Government Representatives**

The representative from the Ministry of Finance made the following remarks.

(1) Although some weaknesses had been seen recently, Japan's economy as a whole

continued to experience a sustained recovery as evidenced by the fact that real GDP for

12


-----

the July-September quarter released earlier in the day increased by 2.6 percent on an

annualized basis. The CGPI had been increasing, while the CPI had been more or less

unchanged.

(2) Given the current developments in economic activity and prices, the government would

like the Bank to continue to support the economy from the financial side so as to ensure

the sustainability of the ongoing economic recovery.

(3) The subprime mortgage problem continued to require careful monitoring. The

government would like the Bank to carefully monitor developments in the Japanese and

the global economy, particularly the U.S. economy, and also in financial markets, and

continue to react appropriately to changes in trends. The Ministry of Finance would

also give due consideration to developments in the economy and financial markets, both

at home and abroad.

(4) Furthermore, the government would like the Bank to clearly explain to market

participants and the public its view regarding the current situation and future course of

Japan's economy and its thinking on the future conduct of monetary policy.

The representative from the Cabinet Office made the following remarks.

(1) Japan's economy was recovering, although some weaknesses had been seen recently.

Construction starts had recently been decreasing, affected by the revised Building

Standard Law coming into force. According to the first preliminary estimates of GDP

for the July-September quarter released earlier in the day, real GDP growth was 0.6

percent and nominal GDP growth was 0.3 percent on a quarter-on-quarter basis. The

GDP deflator continued to exhibit a year-on-year decrease. Private residential

investment decreased by 7.8 percent from the previous quarter. A comprehensive

review of developments in prices suggested that the economy had not yet overcome

deflation. The year-on-year rate of change in the CPI had recently been negative, and

inflation pressures stemming from domestic factors had still been weak. The rate of

change in the CPI was likely to eventually turn positive, and therefore price

developments should be monitored carefully, paying close attention to when the upturn

occurred.

(2) Due attention should be paid to downside risks to Japan's economy such as the

possibility that developments in overseas economies, particularly in the United States,

13


-----

in crude oil prices, and in global financial markets might negatively affect Japan's

economy. In order to ensure sustainable economic growth led by private demand and

achieve a stable inflation rate that would be compatible with that growth, it was

important for the government and the Bank to implement their policies based on the

shared basic perspective on macroeconomic management.

(3) The government would like to request the Bank to implement effective monetary policy

that was consistent with the government's policy efforts and outlook for the economy,

and to firmly support the economy from the financial side, paying due attention to

economic and price developments in view of downside risks to the outlook for

economic activity and prices.

**V. Votes**

Based on the above discussions, most members agreed that it was appropriate to

maintain the current guideline for money market operations, which encouraged the

uncollateralized overnight call rate to remain at around 0.5 percent.

One member, however, said that the member would like to propose that the Bank

should raise the uncollateralized overnight call rate target from around 0.5 percent to around

0.75 percent.

As a result, the following proposal was submitted and put to the vote.

Mr. A. Mizuno proposed the following guideline for money market operations for

the intermeeting period ahead:

The Bank of Japan will encourage the uncollateralized overnight call rate

to remain at around 0.75 percent.

The proposal was defeated by a majority vote.

Votes for the proposal: Mr. A. Mizuno.

Votes against the proposal: Mr. T. Fukui, Mr. T. Muto, Mr. K. Iwata, Ms. M. Suda,

Mr. K. G. Nishimura, Mr. T. Noda, Mr. S. Nakamura, and Mr. H. Kamezaki.

14


-----

To reflect the majority view, the chairman formulated the following proposal and

put it to the vote.

**The Chairman's Policy Proposal on the Guideline for Money Market Operations:**

The guideline for money market operations for the intermeeting period ahead will

be as follows, and will be made public by the attached statement (see Attachment).

The Bank of Japan will encourage the uncollateralized overnight call rate

to remain at around 0.5 percent.

Votes for the proposal: Mr. T. Fukui, Mr. T. Muto, Mr. K. Iwata, Ms. M. Suda, Mr.

K. G. Nishimura, Mr. T. Noda, Mr. S. Nakamura, and Mr. H. Kamezaki.

Votes against the proposal: Mr. A. Mizuno.

Mr. A. Mizuno dissented from the above proposal for the following reasons.

First, developments in Japan's economy had continued to be in line with the projection in

the Outlook Report, with a virtuous circle of growth in production, income, and spending in

place. Second, a change in the projection for Japan's economy was not necessary because

the U.S. subprime mortgage problem and the consequent swings in financial markets

continued to be only one of the risks to Japan's economy. And third, under these

circumstances, postponing the decision to raise the policy interest rate target might leave

interest rates at levels inconsistent with economic fundamentals even longer.

**VI. Discussion on the Bank's View of Recent Economic and Financial Developments**

Members discussed "The Bank's View" in the Monthly Report of Recent Economic

_and Financial Developments (consisting of "The Bank's View" and "The Background"), and_

put it to the vote.

The Policy Board decided, by a unanimous vote, the text of "The Bank's View."

It was confirmed that "The Bank's View" would be published on November 13, 2007 and

the whole report on November 14, 2007.[6]

6 The English version of the whole report was published on November 15, 2007.

15


-----

**VII. Approval of the Minutes of the Monetary Policy Meeting**

The Policy Board approved unanimously the minutes of the Monetary Policy

Meeting of October 10 and 11, 2007 for release on November 16, 2007.

16


-----

Attachment

November 13, 2007

Bank of Japan

At the Monetary Policy Meeting held today, the Bank of Japan decided, by an 8-1

majority vote,[[Note]] to set the following guideline for money market operations for the

intermeeting period:

The Bank of Japan will encourage the uncollateralized overnight call rate

to remain at around 0.5 percent.

[Note] Voting for the action: Mr. T. Fukui, Mr. T. Muto, Mr. K. Iwata, Ms. M. Suda, Mr. K. G.
Nishimura, Mr. T. Noda, Mr. S. Nakamura, and Mr. H. Kamezaki.
Voting against the action: Mr. A. Mizuno.

17


-----

