Not to be released until 8:50 a.m.
Japan Standard Time on Wednesday,
August 3, 2016.

August 3, 2016

Bank of Japan

# Minutes of the
 Monetary Policy Meeting

## on June 15 and 16, 2016

(English translation prepared by the Bank's staff based on the Japanese original)


-----

Please contact the Bank of Japan at the address below in advance to request permission

when reproducing or copying the content of this document for commercial purposes.

Secretariat of the Policy Board, Bank of Japan

P.O. Box 30, Nihonbashi, Tokyo 103-8660, Japan

Please credit the source when quoting, reproducing, or copying the content of this

document.


-----

A Monetary Policy Meeting of the Bank of Japan Policy Board was held in the

Head Office of the Bank of Japan in Tokyo on Wednesday, June 15, 2016, from 2:00 p.m. to

3:31 p.m., and on Thursday, June 16, from 9:00 a.m. to 11:38 a.m.[1]

**Policy Board Members Present**

**Mr. H. Kuroda, Chairman, Governor of the Bank of Japan**

**Mr. K. Iwata, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Japan**

**Mr. H. Nakaso, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Japan**

**Mr. K. Ishida**

**Mr. T. Sato**

**Mr. T. Kiuchi**

**Mr. Y. Harada**

**Mr. Y. Funo**

**Mr. M. Sakurai**

Government Representatives Present

Mr. M. Sakai, State Minister of Finance, Ministry of Finance[2]

Mr. M. Ota, Deputy Vice Minister for Policy Planning and Coordination, Ministry of

Finance[3]

Mr. M. Nishikawa, Vice Minister for Policy Coordination, Cabinet Office

Reporting Staff

Mr. M. Amamiya, Executive Director

Mr. S. Kuwabara, Executive Director

Mr. E. Maeda, Executive Director (Assistant Governor)

Mr. S. Uchida, Director-General, Monetary Affairs Department

Mr. K. Masaki, Head of Policy Planning Division, Monetary Affairs Department

1 The minutes of this meeting were approved by the Policy Board at the Monetary Policy Meeting
held on July 28 and 29, 2016 as "a document describing an outline of the discussion at the meeting"
stipulated in Article 20, paragraph 1 of the Bank of Japan Act of 1997. Those present are referred to
by their titles at the time of the meeting.
2 Mr. M. Sakai was present on June 16.
3 Mr. M. Ota was present on June 15.

1


-----

Mr. S. Shimizu, Director-General, Financial Markets Department

Mr. T. Sekine, Director-General, Research and Statistics Department

Mr. K. Nakamura, Head of Economic Research Division, Research and Statistics

Department

Mr. S. Nagai, Director-General, International Department

Secretariat of the Monetary Policy Meeting

Mr. R. Yanagihara, Director-General, Secretariat of the Policy Board

Mr. H. Nakamoto, Director, Deputy Head of Planning and Coordination Division,

Secretariat of the Policy Board

Mr. T. Ninomiya, Senior Economist, Monetary Affairs Department

Mr. I. Muto, Senior Economist, Monetary Affairs Department

2


-----

**I. Summary of Staff Reports on Economic and Financial Developments[4]**

**A. Money Market Operations in the Intermeeting Period**

The Bank, in accordance with the guideline decided at the previous meeting on

April 27 and 28, 2016, had been providing funds through purchases of Japanese government

bonds (JGBs) and other measures. [5] In this situation, the amount outstanding of the

monetary base had been in the range of 377-389 trillion yen.

**B. Recent Developments in Financial Markets**

In the money market, interest rates on both overnight and term instruments had

generally been in negative territory. The uncollateralized overnight call rate had been in the

range of around minus 0.05 to minus 0.06 percent. As for interest rates on term instruments,

yields on three-month treasury discount bills (T-Bills) had been in the range of around

minus 0.2 to minus 0.3 percent.

The Nikkei 225 Stock Average had fallen, mainly against the background of the

appreciation of the yen, and was moving in the range of 15,500-16,000 yen recently. In the

foreign exchange market, the yen had appreciated against the U.S. dollar, mainly reflecting

expectations that the pace of the policy interest rate hike by the Federal Reserve would be

moderate. The yen also had appreciated against the euro. Yields on 10-year JGBs had

moved further into negative territory under a tight supply-demand balance, due in part to

declines in U.S. and European interest rates.

**C. Overseas Economic and Financial Developments**

Overseas economies continued to grow at a moderate pace, but the pace of growth

had somewhat decelerated, mainly in emerging economies.

The U.S. economy had been on a recovery trend, assisted by firm household

spending, although the industrial sector had lacked momentum, mainly against the

background of the slowdown in emerging economies. As for prices, the year-on-year rate of

increase in the personal consumption expenditure (PCE) deflator for all items excluding

4 Reports were made based on information available at the time of the meeting.
5 The guideline was as follows:

The Bank of Japan will conduct money market operations so that the monetary base will

increase at an annual pace of about 80 trillion yen.

3


-----

food and energy had been in the range of 1.5-2.0 percent. That for all items had been in the

range of 1.0-1.5 percent, mainly due to the decline in energy prices.

The European economy maintained its moderate recovery as private consumption

continued to increase, although exports had shown some weakness. With regard to prices,

the year-on-year rate of change in the Harmonized Index of Consumer Prices (HICP) for all

items had been at around 0 percent, mainly due to the decline in energy prices, but that for

all items excluding energy and unprocessed food had been at around 1 percent. Meanwhile,

economic activity in the United Kingdom continued to recover, but the pace of recovery had

slowed somewhat.

With regard to emerging economies, the Chinese economy maintained its stable

growth on the whole, but the pace of growth had decelerated somewhat, mainly in exports

and production. In India, the economy had been growing steadily, particularly in domestic

demand, partly in reflection of expectations for structural reforms and of monetary easing

effects. On the other hand, economic activity in the NIEs and the ASEAN countries had

been decelerating somewhat as exports and production continued to be weak, although the

effects of economic stimulus measures had been observed in some of these countries and

regions. Economic activity in Brazil and Russia remained severe as exports had been

sluggish, mainly due to low commodity prices, and as domestic demand also had declined.

As for prices in emerging economies, inflation rates had been more or less flat at low levels

in many countries and regions. However, inflation rates remained at high levels in some

economies.

Regarding global financial markets, the U.S. dollar had depreciated and long-term

interest rates in the United States and Europe had declined, as expectations had increased

following the release of U.S. employment statistics for May that the pace of the policy

interest rate hike by the Federal Reserve would be moderate. Rises in stock prices in both

advanced and emerging economies had been contained, mainly due to uncertainty regarding

future developments in the global economy and geopolitical risks.

4


-----

**D. Economic and Financial Developments in Japan**

1. Economic developments

Japan's economy continued its moderate recovery trend, although exports and

production had been sluggish, due mainly to the effects of the slowdown in emerging

economies.

The pick-up in exports had paused, due mainly to the effects of the slowdown in

emerging economies. Recently, the supply-side constraints caused by the Kumamoto

Earthquake were exerting temporary downward pressure. Exports were projected to remain

more or less flat for the time being, but thereafter were expected to increase moderately on

the back of emerging economies moving out of their deceleration phase.

The pace of decline in public investment had been slowing. Public investment was

expected to gradually level off, albeit with some fluctuations.

Business fixed investment had been on a moderate increasing trend as corporate

profits had been at high levels. Looking at the _Financial Statements Statistics of_

_Corporations by Industry, Quarterly, the ratio of current profits to sales had still been at a_

high level, although it had declined recently, due mainly to the effects of the slowdown in

emerging economies and of the yen's appreciation. According to the Financial Statements

_Statistics of Corporations by Industry, Quarterly for the January-March quarter of 2016,_

business fixed investment for all industries had marked a quarter-on-quarter increase of 1.4

percent. Machinery orders continued to increase, albeit with some fluctuations. Business

fixed investment was projected to continue to see a moderate uptrend on the back of

corporate profits at high levels and highly accommodative financial conditions.

As for the employment and income situation, supply-demand conditions in the

labor market continued to improve steadily and employee income had increased moderately.

Private consumption had been resilient against the background of steady

improvement in the employment and income situation, although relatively weak

developments had been seen in some indicators. According to various sales statistics, retail

sales had been somewhat weak in January through March due to negative wealth effects

stemming from the decline in stock prices, in addition to the irregularly warm winter and

supply-side constraints in terms of automobiles caused by a steel plant accident. However,

such sales picked up somewhat in April, mainly due to the recovery in automobile sales.

Private consumption was expected to remain resilient with the employment and income

5


-----

situation continuing to improve steadily, albeit with relatively weak developments

remaining in some indicators.

As for housing investment, the pick-up had paused since the middle of 2015 but

resumed recently, underpinned by accommodative financial conditions.

Industrial production continued to be more or less flat, due mainly to the effects of

the slowdown in emerging economies and partly to those of the Kumamoto Earthquake. As

for the outlook, it was projected to remain more or less flat for the time being as a trend -
albeit with some fluctuations due to the effects of the earthquake -- in a situation where

effects of the slowdown in overseas economies would remain, mainly in emerging

economies.

As for prices, the rate of decline in the producer price index (PPI) relative to three

months earlier had been on a decelerating trend, reflecting movements in international

commodity prices and foreign exchange rates. The year-on-year rate of change in the

consumer price index (CPI) for all items less fresh food was about 0 percent. The rate of

increase for all items less fresh food and energy had registered a year-on-year rate of

increase of 1.1 percent for three consecutive months since January 2016, but saw a

deceleration in its pace of increase to 0.9 percent in April. With regard to the outlook, the

year-on-year rate of change in the CPI (all items less fresh food) was likely to be slightly

negative or about 0 percent for the time being, due to the effects of the decline in energy

prices.

2. Financial environment

Financial conditions were highly accommodative.

The monetary base had increased significantly as asset purchases by the Bank had

progressed, and the year-on-year rate of growth had been at around 25 percent.

Firms' funding costs had been hovering at extremely low levels. With regard to

credit supply, financial institutions' lending attitudes -- as perceived by firms -- were

significantly accommodative. Issuing conditions for CP and corporate bonds continued to

be favorable. Firms' credit demand had been increasing moderately, mainly for working

capital and funds related to mergers and acquisitions. Against this backdrop, the

year-on-year rate of increase in the amount outstanding of bank lending had been in the

range of 2.0-2.5 percent. Firms' financial positions had been favorable. The year-on-year

6


-----

rate of growth in the money stock had been at around 3.5 percent, mainly due to the

increase in bank lending. Meanwhile, inflation expectations had weakened recently,

although they appeared to be rising on the whole from a somewhat longer-term perspective.

3. Loan disbursement through the Loan Support Program

In early June 2016, the Bank carried out a new loan disbursement, amounting to

608.6 billion yen, under the main rules for the Fund-Provisioning Measure to Support

Strengthening the Foundations for Economic Growth. The outstanding balance of loans

disbursed by the Bank under these rules amounted to 5,835.9 billion yen after the new loan

disbursement. The outstanding balance of loans disbursed by the Bank under the special

rules for equity investments and asset-based lending (ABL) came to 77.1 billion yen, and

that under the special rules for small-lot investments and loans amounted to 11.879 billion

yen. As for the special rules for the U.S. dollar lending arrangement, the outstanding

balance of loans came to 11.99 billion dollars.

On June 20, the Bank was scheduled to carry out a new loan disbursement,

amounting to 6,202.8 billion yen, under the Fund-Provisioning Measure to Stimulate Bank

Lending. The outstanding balance of loans disbursed by the Bank would amount to

25,499.9 billion yen after the new loan disbursement.

**II. Summary of Discussions by the Policy Board on Economic and Financial**

**Developments**

**A. Economic Developments**

With regard to global financial markets, members shared the recognition that it

remained difficult for market participants to actively take risks, mainly reflecting concerns

about uncertainty regarding future developments in the global economy and the vote of the

United Kingdom to leave the European Union (EU). Many members pointed out that,

depending on the result of the referendum on the United Kingdom's membership of the EU,

there was a possibility that market volatility would increase sharply. One of these members

said that, if the United Kingdom's decision triggered concern about liquidity shortages in

foreign currencies, the Bank -- in cooperation with relevant central banks -- should take

necessary measures in terms of liquidity provision. Members agreed that close attention

should continue to be paid to the developments in global financial markets and their effects

7


-----

on Japan's economic activity and prices.

Members shared the recognition that overseas economies continued to grow at a

moderate pace, but the pace of growth had somewhat decelerated, mainly in emerging

economies. As for the outlook, they concurred that overseas economies were likely to

remain in a state of slight deceleration for the time being, but moderately increase their

growth rates as advanced economies would continue to see firm growth and emerging

economies would move out of their deceleration phase on the back of the developments in

advanced economies. However, one member, while noting that the pace at which the

recovery in advanced economies spread to emerging economies had been slow, expressed

the view that it was necessary to pay attention to the risk that the deceleration in emerging

economies would exert downward pressure on advanced economies.

With regard to developments in overseas economies by region, members

concurred that the U.S. economy had been on a recovery trend, assisted by firm household

spending, although the industrial sector had lacked momentum, mainly against the

background of the slowdown in emerging economies. One member expressed the view that

the fact that the increase in the number of employees in U.S. employment statistics for May

had been considerably smaller than market expectations might suggest weakness in the U.S.

economic recovery. Many members, however, expressed the recognition that it was

necessary to wait for data to accumulate for some time before making an assessment on

whether there was any change to the underlying trend of the employment situation. As for

the outlook, members shared the view that the economy was likely to continue to recover,

mainly in private demand, led by the firmness in household spending, reflecting

accommodative financial conditions, although the industrial sector was likely to lack

momentum for the time being.

Members shared the recognition that the European economy maintained its

moderate recovery as private consumption continued to increase, although exports had

shown some weakness, mainly due to the effects of the slowdown in emerging economies.

As for the outlook, they concurred that the economy would likely continue to see a

moderate recovery, mainly on the back of improvement in the employment and income

situation under accommodative financial conditions. A few members expressed the view

that attention was warranted on the impact that the vote of the United Kingdom to leave the

EU would have on the global economy, particularly on the European economy.

8


-----

Members agreed that the Chinese economy maintained its stable growth on the

whole, but the pace of growth had decelerated somewhat, mainly in exports and production,

due to downward pressure from an overhang of production capacities in the manufacturing

sector. A few members pointed out that measures taken by authorities had been supporting

the economy, as evidenced, for example, by the increase in fixed asset investment related to

public works. As for the outlook, members shared the view that the economy was likely to

broadly follow a stable growth path as authorities proactively carried out both fiscal and

financial measures to support economic activity, although the growth pace was likely to be

somewhat slower, mainly in exports and production.

Members shared the view that emerging economies had been decelerating, mainly

in exports and production. They continued that, in Asia, exports and production had been

relatively weak, due mainly to sluggish demand for IT-related goods, while economic

conditions in commodity-exporting countries such as Brazil and Russia continued to be

severe. As for the outlook, members shared the view that emerging economies would move

out of their deceleration phase, mainly due to the effects of the recovery in advanced

economies and economic stimulus measures both on the financial and fiscal fronts, after

remaining in a state of deceleration for the time being.

Based on the above deliberations on economic and financial conditions abroad,

members discussed the state of Japan's economy.

With regard to economic activity, members shared the recognition that the

economy continued its moderate recovery trend, although exports and production had been

sluggish, due mainly to the effects of the slowdown in emerging economies. They shared

the view that a virtuous cycle from income to spending had been operating in both the

household and corporate sectors, while pointing out that corporate profits had been at high

levels and labor market conditions remained tight. One member expressed the view that

Japan's economy was likely to be on a moderate expanding trend against the background of

an improvement in the employment and income situation, but that risks were skewed to the

downside considering the weakness seen recently in some indicators of private consumption,

as well as the negative effects of the yen's appreciation, which were likely to become

evident.

Members agreed that the pick-up in Japan's exports had paused, due mainly to the

effects of the slowdown in emerging economies. As for the outlook, they shared the view

9


-----

that exports as a whole were likely to remain more or less flat for the time being, mainly

due to the slowdown in overseas economies, the recent appreciation of the yen, and the

effects of the Kumamoto Earthquake. They continued that exports were likely to increase

moderately thereafter, however, on the back of emerging economies moving out of their

deceleration phase.

Members agreed that business fixed investment had been on a moderate increasing

trend as corporate profits had been at high levels. A few members pointed out that the

_Financial Statements Statistics of Corporations by Industry, Quarterly showed an increase_

in business fixed investment for the January-March quarter of 2016, and that various

surveys revealed that firms also planned to steadily increase fixed investment for fiscal

2016. These members then expressed the view that, despite headwinds such as a slowdown

in the global economy and turbulence in the financial markets, firms had maintained their

positive fixed investment stance, supported in part by the further decline in real interest

rates brought about by Quantitative and Qualitative Monetary Easing (QQE) with a

Negative Interest Rate. Members shared the view that business fixed investment was likely

to maintain a moderate uptrend on the back of corporate profits at high levels.

As for the employment and income situation, members concurred that employee

income had increased moderately with supply-demand conditions in the labor market

continuing to improve steadily, and that it was likely to continue to do so as labor market

conditions kept improving and corporate profits remained at high levels. One member said

that the base pay increase resulting from the wage negotiations between workers and

management this spring was somewhat weaker than that in 2015, but employee income as a

whole remained on an improving trend, given, for example, that wage increases seemed to

be spreading among small firms.

Members shared the recognition that, although relatively weak developments had

been seen in some indicators, private consumption had been resilient against the

background of steady improvement in the employment and income situation and was likely

to remain so. One member said that, although private consumption for the January-March

quarter of 2016 was affected by the turbulence in global financial markets at the beginning

of the year and the irregularly warm winter, the consumption activity index for April had

picked up. Meanwhile, as the background to the weakness in consumption relative to the

income situation, a few other members raised factors such as weak recovery in wages, the

10


-----

negative wealth effects stemming from the appreciation of the yen and the decline in stock

prices since the beginning of the year, and anxiety about future income stemming from

uncertainties about the fiscal condition and the social security system. In response to this,

one member noted that concerns over the social security system and the fiscal condition

might be a factor in explaining low propensity to consume in general, but not with respect

to its recent decrease. The member continued that, if the propensity to consume stopped

declining in due course, consumption would increase, reflecting the rise in employee

income.

As for housing investment, members shared the recognition that the pick-up had

paused since the middle of 2015 but resumed recently, underpinned by accommodative

financial conditions. Some members pointed to a decline in interest rates on housing loans

since the introduction of the negative interest rate policy as part of the background behind

the fact that the number of housing starts had resumed its pick-up.

Members shared the recognition that industrial production continued to be more or

less flat, due mainly to the effects of the slowdown in emerging economies and partly to

those of the Kumamoto Earthquake. One member said that, despite the effects of the

earthquake, industrial production had not deteriorated as had been anticipated as a result, for

example, of the accelerated production of automobiles to make up for the earlier disruption.

As for the outlook, members shared the view that industrial production was likely to remain

more or less flat for the time being as a trend -- albeit with some fluctuations due to the

effects of the earthquake -- in a situation where effects of the slowdown in overseas

economies would remain, mainly in emerging economies.

As for prices, members concurred that the year-on-year rate of change in the CPI

(all items less fresh food) was about 0 percent and was likely to be slightly negative or

about 0 percent for the time being due to the effects of the decline in energy prices.

**B. Financial Developments**

Members concurred that financial conditions in Japan were highly accommodative.

They shared the view that, under QQE with a Negative Interest Rate, firms' funding costs

had been hovering at very low levels. Some members pointed out that, since the Bank's

decision to introduce QQE with a Negative Interest Rate, not only JGB yields but also

lending rates, as well as issuing rates on CP and corporate bonds, had been declining

11


-----

considerably, and the amount of issuance of super-long-term corporate bonds at a low rate

had been increasing. These members then expressed the recognition that firms' funding

conditions had become even more accommodative. They also were of the view that, despite

remaining uncertainties over the global economy, business fixed investment continued to be

on an increasing trend and housing investment had resumed its pick-up, reflecting

accommodative financial conditions, and that this showed that the effects of the negative

interest rate policy had spread to the real economy gradually. One of these members said

that firms' funding had continued smoothly, as the practice of financial transactions had

been adjusted to reflect the adoption of a negative interest rate; for instance, the issuance of

corporate bonds that placed importance on absolute yield rather than spread over the

government bond yields had become a common practice and the provision of syndicated

loans with a fixed interest rate had been observed. A different member said that the private

sector was expected to proceed steadily with structural reforms by utilizing the current

accommodative financial conditions. Another member, on the other hand, expressed the

view that the effects of the negative interest rate policy had not become clearly evident thus

far, since the rate of increase in banks' lending as a whole had not accelerated.

**III. Summary of Discussions on Monetary Policy for the Immediate Future**

Based on the above assessment of economic and financial developments, members

discussed monetary policy for the immediate future.

With regard to the assessment of price developments for the Bank's conduct of

monetary policy, members shared the recognition that the underlying trend in inflation was

important. Some members raised the weakness seen in some indicators of private

consumption as the background to the fact that the year-on-year rate of increase in the CPI

(less fresh food and energy) had somewhat decelerated to 0.9 percent in April. One of these

members said that, against this backdrop, price-hiking behavior since the start of this fiscal

year had not spread as much as in the previous year. A few members commented that the

pace of increase in services prices had accelerated but had not been sufficient to offset the

deceleration in the pace of increase in goods prices. One member nevertheless expressed the

view that, looking at the CPI by item, the number of items for which prices had risen from

the previous year continued to largely exceed those for which prices had declined, and that

firms' price-setting stance did not seem to have changed significantly recently. Some

12


-----

members, including this member, expressed the recognition that, considering that a base pay

increase was taking place for a third consecutive year and wage increases had been

spreading even to small firms, the mechanism in which inflation rose moderately

accompanied by wage increases continued to operate. A different member expressed the

view that, as price hikes similar to last year could not be anticipated, reflecting relatively

weak developments in private consumption, a period of no visible rises in inflation would

continue for the time being. This member continued, however, that prices would likely see

an acceleration in their pace of increase from the latter half of the fiscal year, due mainly to

the fact that crude oil prices had turned to an increase and wages would likely rise on the

back of tight labor market conditions.

With regard to inflation expectations, members shared the recognition that these

had weakened recently, although they appeared to be rising on the whole from a somewhat

longer-term perspective. As background to this weakness, one member pointed to such

factors as the deterioration in consumer sentiment, due mainly to the turbulence in global

financial markets since the start of 2016, as well as the effects of an earlier fall in energy

prices and of the appreciation of the yen. On this basis, the member expressed the view that,

in a situation where economic fundamentals had been resilient, inflation expectations were

likely to gradually see an acceleration in their rate of increase as the improvement in the

output gap progressed on the back of tight labor market conditions and an uptrend in

business fixed investment.

Based on the above discussions, regarding the guideline for money market

operations for the intermeeting period, most members expressed the recognition that it was

appropriate to maintain the current guideline that the Bank would conduct money market

operations so that the monetary base would increase at an annual pace of about 80 trillion

yen.

With regard to the asset purchases, most members shared the recognition that it

was appropriate for the Bank to implement the following guideline for the intermeeting

period. First, it would purchase JGBs so that their amount outstanding would increase at an

annual pace of about 80 trillion yen. With a view to encouraging a decline in interest rates

across the entire yield curve, the Bank would conduct purchases in a flexible manner in

accordance with financial market conditions. The average remaining maturity of the Bank's

JGB purchases would be about 7-12 years. Second, it would purchase exchange-traded

13


-----

funds (ETFs) and Japan real estate investment trusts (J-REITs) so that their amounts

outstanding would increase at annual paces of about 3.3 trillion yen and about 90 billion

yen, respectively. And third, for CP and corporate bonds, the Bank would maintain their

amounts outstanding at about 2.2 trillion yen and about 3.2 trillion yen, respectively.

As for the policy rate, most members shared the recognition that it was appropriate

to continue applying a negative interest rate of minus 0.1 percent to the Policy-Rate

Balances in current accounts held by financial institutions at the Bank.

With respect to the Bank's thinking behind its future conduct of monetary policy,

most members shared the view that the Bank would (1) continue with QQE with a Negative

Interest Rate, aiming to achieve the price stability target of 2 percent, as long as it was

necessary for maintaining this target in a stable manner, and (2) examine risks to economic

activity and prices, and take additional easing measures in terms of three dimensions -
quantity, quality, and the interest rate -- if it was judged necessary for achieving the price

stability target. Some members agreed that, while effects of the negative interest rate policy

already had been seen -- for example, declines in lending rates and an increase in the

issuance of corporate bonds -- the Bank needed to examine the extent of the spread of

policy effects to the real economy, and thus it should continue with the current monetary

policy. Some members added that it was necessary to carefully monitor the result of the

referendum on the United Kingdom's membership of the EU and subsequent financial and

economic developments. One of these members commented that there were signs of a need

for caution with respect to achieving the price stability target, such as weaker developments

both in the year-on-year rate of increase in the CPI (less fresh food and energy) and in

inflation expectation indicators. This member continued that, if it became more likely that

the timing of annual CPI inflation reaching around 2 percent would be delayed, the Bank

would need to reiterate its commitment toward achieving 2 percent inflation to the public

and market by taking additional monetary easing measures.

In response, one member said that marginal effects of QQE had been diminishing,

and such effects had already been outweighed by the side effects. The member's argument

was as follows. First, the Bank should reduce the annual pace of increase in the amount

outstanding of its JGB holdings to a level below the initial pace, in view of further possible

phased reductions. Second, it should make changes to the time frame for achieving the price

stability target -- to the medium to long term -- and conduct monetary policy that gave due

14


-----

consideration to risks such as a buildup of financial imbalances. This member also pointed

out that the market considered the Bank's policy management in recent years as being

intended to surprise the market, and that such management was reducing the predictability

of monetary policy significantly and causing higher volatility in the market. On this basis,

the member said that the Bank should normalize communication with the market and

enhance two-way dialogues as soon as possible.

One member expressed the recognition that, under the Bank's continued conduct

of QQE for more than three years, Japan's economy had come to a situation where it was no

longer deflationary, in the sense that prices did not decline persistently. On this basis, this

member argued that, as the Bank proceeded with JGB purchases, these needed to be

modified to more sustainable ones before major problems occurred. A different member

expressed the view that the main aim of the Bank's policy already had shifted from the

quantitative to the interest rate aspect, and thus it was important for the Bank to conduct

asset purchases in a flexible manner. In response to these views, a different member pointed

out that, although the JGB market would be affected by QQE with a Negative Interest Rate,

the Bank had been pursuing market stability through (1) a careful examination of the degree

of liquidity and functioning of the JGB market using surveys and various indicators, and (2)

flexible conduct of JGB purchases, taking account of market conditions. On this basis, this

member noted that the quickest way for the economy to get out of the low interest rate

environment, thereby bringing about normalization of the market, was overcoming deflation

as soon as possible and returning Japan's economy to a sustainable growth path through

decisive monetary easing, while being very watchful of the effects of the massive JGB

purchases on the JGB market. Another member expressed the view that, with regard to an

argument by some that a bank's reluctance to purchase JGBs was an indication of QQE's

limits or its side effects, the fact that financial institutions that held JGBs were instead

shifting their investment to various asset classes other than JGBs, as seen in an increase in

domestic and overseas lending, should be regarded as an indication of the spread of policy

effects of portfolio rebalancing to the economy.

15


-----

**IV. Remarks by Government Representatives**

The representative from the Ministry of Finance made the following remarks.

(1) Given the agreement reached and shared awareness of risks at the Group of Seven (G-7)

meeting held in May 2016, the government decided to postpone the consumption tax

hike while using all policy tools, including accelerating structural reforms and

implementing fiscal policy. Meanwhile, the government would firmly maintain its goal

of generating a surplus in the primary balance for fiscal 2020 without lowering the flag

of attaining fiscal soundness. It also would steadily implement expenditure reform with

no exceptions -- based on the work schedule for the reform -- while promoting

economic revitalization under the framework of the Plan to Advance Economic and

Fiscal Revitalization.

(2) The government expected the Bank to continue to work toward achieving the price

stability target in light of economic activity and prices.

The representative from the Cabinet Office made the following remarks.

(1) The Japanese economy was on a moderate recovery, while weakness could be seen

recently. The second preliminary estimate of the real GDP growth rate for the

January-March quarter of 2016 was 1.9 percent on an annualized quarter-on-quarter

basis, mainly due to the fact that private consumption had turned positive on a

quarter-on-quarter basis against the background of improvement in the employment and

income situation. The real and nominal GDP growth rates and the GDP deflator for

fiscal 2015 were positive for the first time in 18 years. As for the outlook, the economy

was expected to head toward a moderate recovery, supported partly by the effects of the

government's policies, while the employment and income situation continued to

improve. However, attention should be given to the increased uncertainty in overseas

economies and the effects of fluctuations in the financial and capital markets. In

addition, full attention should be given to the economic impact of the Kumamoto

Earthquake. In assessing price developments, it was important to comprehensively

examine a wide range of price indicators, including the GDP deflator, which showed the

price of value added.

(2) The Cabinet decided the Basic Policy on Economic and Fiscal Management and

Reform 2016, which included postponing raising the consumption tax rate to 10 percent

16


-----

until October 2019 and compiling a set of comprehensive and bold economic measures

by this autumn. It also decided the Japan Revitalization Strategy 2016, the Regulatory

Reform Work Plan, the Basic Policies for Overcoming Population Decline and

Vitalizing Local Economy in Japan 2016, and Japan's Plan for Dynamic Engagement of

All Citizens. The Basic Policy on Economic and Fiscal Management and Reform 2016,

which was decided recently, presented a road map to achieving a 600 trillion yen

economy by establishing a positive cycle of growth and distribution. The basic policy

included that the government would advance reforms in both expenditure and revenue

and maintain its goal of fiscal soundness, which was to generate a surplus in the

primary balance for fiscal 2020, based on the basic principle that "without economic

revitalization, there can be no fiscal consolidation."

(3) The government expected the Bank to work steadily to achieve the price stability target

of 2 percent in light of economic activity and prices.

**V. Votes**

**A. Vote on the Chairman's Policy Proposal on the Guideline for Money Market**

**Operations**

Based on the above discussions, to reflect the majority view of the members, the

chairman formulated the following proposal and put it to a vote.

The Policy Board decided the proposal by a majority vote.

**The Chairman's Policy Proposal on the Guideline for Money Market Operations:**

The guideline for money market operations for the intermeeting period will be as follows.

The Bank of Japan will conduct money market operations so that the

monetary base will increase at an annual pace of about 80 trillion yen.

Votes for the proposal: Mr. H. Kuroda, Mr. K. Iwata, Mr. H. Nakaso, Mr. K. Ishida,

Mr. T. Sato, Mr. Y. Harada, Mr. Y. Funo, and Mr. M. Sakurai.

Votes against the proposal: Mr. T. Kiuchi.

17


-----

**B. Vote on the Chairman's Policy Proposal on the Guideline for Asset Purchases**

To reflect the majority view of the members, the chairman formulated the

following proposal to implement the guideline for asset purchases for the intermeeting

period, and put it to a vote: (1) to purchase JGBs so that their amount outstanding would

increase at an annual pace of about 80 trillion yen, to conduct purchases in a flexible

manner in accordance with financial market conditions -- with a view to encouraging a

decline in interest rates across the entire yield curve -- and to make the average remaining

maturity of the Bank's JGB purchases about 7-12 years; (2) to purchase ETFs and J-REITs

so that their amounts outstanding would increase at annual paces of about 3.3 trillion yen

and about 90 billion yen, respectively; and (3) to maintain the amounts outstanding of CP

and corporate bonds at about 2.2 trillion yen and about 3.2 trillion yen, respectively.

The Policy Board decided the proposal by a majority vote.

Votes for the proposal: Mr. H. Kuroda, Mr. K. Iwata, Mr. H. Nakaso, Mr. K. Ishida,

Mr. T. Sato, Mr. Y. Harada, Mr. Y. Funo, and Mr. M. Sakurai.

Votes against the proposal: Mr. T. Kiuchi.

**C. Vote on the Chairman's Policy Proposal on the Policy Rate**

To reflect the majority view of the members, the chairman formulated a proposal

to continue applying a negative interest rate of minus 0.1 percent to the Policy-Rate

Balances in current accounts held by financial institutions at the Bank, and put it to a vote.

The Policy Board decided the proposal by a majority vote.

Votes for the proposal: Mr. H. Kuroda, Mr. K. Iwata, Mr. H. Nakaso, Mr. K. Ishida,

Mr. Y. Harada, Mr. Y. Funo, and Mr. M. Sakurai.

Votes against the proposal: Mr. T. Sato and Mr. T. Kiuchi.

18


-----

Mr. T. Sato and Mr. T. Kiuchi dissented considering that an interest rate of 0.1

percent should be applied to current account balances excluding the amount outstanding of

the required reserves held by financial institutions at the Bank, because negative interest

rates would impair the functioning of financial markets and financial intermediation as well

as the stability of the JGB market.

**D. Vote on Mr. T. Kiuchi's Policy Proposal on the Guidelines for Money Market**

**Operations and Asset Purchases**

With regard to the guideline for money market operations for the intermeeting

period, Mr. T. Kiuchi proposed that the Bank conduct money market operations so that the

monetary base would increase at an annual pace of about 45 trillion yen. In addition, with

regard to the guideline for asset purchases, he proposed the following: (1) to purchase JGBs

so that their amount outstanding would increase at an annual pace of about 45 trillion yen,

to conduct purchases in a flexible manner in accordance with financial market conditions -
with a view to encouraging a decline in interest rates across the entire yield curve -- and to

make the average remaining maturity of the Bank's JGB purchases about seven years; (2) to

purchase ETFs and J-REITs so that their amounts outstanding would increase at annual

paces of about 1 trillion yen and about 30 billion yen, respectively; and (3) to maintain the

amounts outstanding of CP and corporate bonds at about 2.2 trillion yen and about 3.2

trillion yen, respectively. The proposal was then put to a vote.

The proposal was defeated by a majority vote.

Votes for the proposal: Mr. T. Kiuchi.

Votes against the proposal: Mr. H. Kuroda, Mr. K. Iwata, Mr. H. Nakaso, Mr. K.

Ishida, Mr. T. Sato, Mr. Y. Harada, Mr. Y. Funo, and Mr. M. Sakurai.

**VI. Discussion on the Statement on Monetary Policy**

On the basis of the above discussions, members discussed the Statement on

Monetary Policy, and formed a majority view. Mr. T. Kiuchi, however, formulated a

proposal, and thus two proposals were submitted.

19


-----

**A. Mr. T. Kiuchi's Policy Proposal**

With regard to the draft of the statement that formed a majority view, Mr. T.

Kiuchi formulated a proposal to make the following changes. First, with regard to the

outlook for prices, he proposed changing the current expression that "the year-on-year rate

of change in the CPI is likely to be slightly negative or about 0 percent for the time being,

due to the effects of the decline in energy prices, and, as the underlying trend in inflation

steadily rises, accelerate toward 2 percent" to a new expression that "the year-on-year rate

of change in the CPI is likely to be slightly negative or about 0 percent for the time being,

due to the effects of the decline in energy prices, and thereafter accelerate very moderately."

Second, with regard to the Bank's future monetary policy stance, Mr. Kiuchi proposed

changing the current expression that "the Bank will continue with 'QQE with a Negative

Interest Rate,' aiming to achieve the price stability target of 2 percent, as long as it is

necessary for maintaining that target in a stable manner. It will examine risks to economic

activity and prices, and take additional easing measures in terms of three dimensions -
quantity, quality, and the interest rate -- if it is judged necessary for achieving the price

stability target" to a new expression that "the Bank will, with the aim to achieve the price

stability target of 2 percent in the medium to long term, continue to provide consistent

support from the financial side. It will continue with asset purchases and a virtually zero

interest rate policy as long as each of these policy measures is deemed appropriate under

flexible policy conduct based on the examination from the two perspectives of the monetary

policy framework." The proposal was then put to a vote.

The proposal was defeated by a majority vote.

Votes for the proposal: Mr. T. Kiuchi.

Votes against the proposal: Mr. H. Kuroda, Mr. K. Iwata, Mr. H. Nakaso, Mr. K.

Ishida, Mr. T. Sato, Mr. Y. Harada, Mr. Y. Funo, and Mr. M. Sakurai.

**B. The Chairman's Policy Proposal**

The chairman formulated the Statement on Monetary Policy, and put it to a vote.

The Policy Board decided the text by a unanimous vote. It was confirmed that the statement

would be released immediately after the meeting (see Attachment).

20


-----

**VII. Approval of the Minutes of the Monetary Policy Meeting**

The Policy Board approved unanimously the minutes of the Monetary Policy

Meeting of April 27 and 28, 2016 for release on June 21.

21


-----

Attachment

June 16, 2016

Bank of Japan

**Statement on Monetary Policy**

1. At the Monetary Policy Meeting (MPM) held today, the Policy Board of the Bank of Japan

decided upon the following.

(1) Quantity Dimension: The guideline for money market operations

The Bank decided, by an 8-1 majority vote, to set the following guideline for money

market operations for the intermeeting period:[[Note 1]]

The Bank of Japan will conduct money market operations so that the monetary base will

increase at an annual pace of about 80 trillion yen.

(2) Quality Dimension: The guidelines for asset purchases

With regard to the asset purchases, the Bank decided, by an 8-1 majority vote, to set the

following guidelines:[[Note 1]]

a) The Bank will purchase Japanese government bonds (JGBs) so that their amount

outstanding will increase at an annual pace of about 80 trillion yen. With a view to

encouraging a decline in interest rates across the entire yield curve, the Bank will

conduct purchases in a flexible manner in accordance with financial market

conditions. The average remaining maturity of the Bank's JGB purchases will be

about 7-12 years.

b) The Bank will purchase exchange-traded funds (ETFs) and Japan real estate

investment trusts (J-REITs) so that their amounts outstanding will increase at annual

paces of about 3.3 trillion yen[6] and about 90 billion yen, respectively.

c) As for CP and corporate bonds, the Bank will maintain their amounts outstanding at

about 2.2 trillion yen and about 3.2 trillion yen, respectively.

6 Of about 3.3 trillion yen, 300 billion yen is used in line with the implementation of a program for
purchasing ETFs composed of stocks issued by firms that are proactively investing in physical and human
capital, as decided at the MPM held in December 2015.

22


-----

(3) Interest-Rate Dimension: The policy rate

The Bank decided, by a 7-2 majority vote, to continue applying a negative interest rate of

minus 0.1 percent to the Policy-Rate Balances in current accounts held by financial

institutions at the Bank.[[Note 2]]

2. Japan's economy has continued its moderate recovery trend, although exports and production

have been sluggish due mainly to the effects of the slowdown in emerging economies.

Overseas economies have continued to grow at a moderate pace, but the pace of growth has

somewhat decelerated mainly in emerging economies. In this situation, the pick-up in exports

has paused. On the domestic demand side, business fixed investment has been on a moderate

increasing trend as corporate profits have been at high levels. Against the background of

steady improvement in the employment and income situation, private consumption has been

resilient, although relatively weak developments have been seen in some indicators. Housing

investment has resumed its pick-up, and the pace of decline in public investment has been

slowing. Reflecting these developments in demand both at home and abroad and the effects

of the Kumamoto Earthquake, industrial production has continued to be more or less flat.

Financial conditions are highly accommodative. On the price front, the year-on-year rate of

change in the consumer price index (CPI, all items less fresh food) is about 0 percent.

Although inflation expectations appear to be rising on the whole from a somewhat

longer-term perspective, they have recently weakened.

3. With regard to the outlook, although sluggishness is expected to remain in exports and

production for the time being, domestic demand is likely to follow an uptrend, with a virtuous

cycle from income to spending being maintained in both the household and corporate sectors,

and exports are expected to increase moderately on the back of emerging economies moving

out of their deceleration phase. Thus, Japan's economy is likely to be on a moderate

expanding trend. The year-on-year rate of change in the CPI is likely to be slightly negative

or about 0 percent for the time being, due to the effects of the decline in energy prices, and, as

the underlying trend in inflation steadily rises, accelerate toward 2 percent.[ [Note 3]]

4. Risks to the outlook include uncertainties surrounding emerging and commodity-exporting

economies, particularly China, developments in the U.S. economy and the influences of its

monetary policy response to them on the global financial markets, prospects regarding the

European debt problem and the momentum of economic activity and prices in Europe, and

geopolitical risks. Against this backdrop, global financial markets have remained volatile.

Therefore, due attention still needs to be paid to the risk that an improvement in the business

23


-----

confidence of Japanese firms and conversion of the deflationary mindset might be delayed

and that the underlying trend in inflation might be negatively affected.

5. The Bank will continue with "Quantitative and Qualitative Monetary Easing (QQE) with a

Negative Interest Rate," aiming to achieve the price stability target of 2 percent, as long as it

is necessary for maintaining that target in a stable manner. It will examine risks to economic

activity and prices, and take additional easing measures in terms of three dimensions -
quantity, quality, and the interest rate -- if it is judged necessary for achieving the price

stability target.[[Note 4]]

[Note 1] Voting for the action: Mr. H. Kuroda, Mr. K. Iwata, Mr. H. Nakaso, Mr. K. Ishida, Mr. T. Sato,

Mr. Y. Harada, Mr. Y. Funo, and Mr. M. Sakurai. Voting against the action: Mr. T. Kiuchi.
Mr. T. Kiuchi proposed that the Bank conduct money market operations and asset purchases so that
the monetary base and the amount outstanding of its JGB holdings increase at an annual pace of
about 45 trillion yen, respectively. The proposal was defeated by a majority vote.

[Note 2] Voting for the action: Mr. H. Kuroda, Mr. K. Iwata, Mr. H. Nakaso, Mr. K. Ishida, Mr. Y. Harada,

Mr. Y. Funo, and Mr. M. Sakurai. Voting against the action: Mr. T. Sato and Mr. T. Kiuchi.
Mr. T. Sato and Mr. T. Kiuchi dissented considering that an interest rate of 0.1 percent should be
applied to current account balances excluding the amount outstanding of the required reserves held
by financial institutions at the Bank, because negative interest rates would impair the functioning of
financial markets and financial intermediation as well as the stability of the JGB market.

[Note 3] Mr. T. Kiuchi proposed, concerning the year-on-year rate of change in the CPI, that it was likely to be

slightly negative or about 0 percent for the time being, and would thereafter accelerate very
moderately. The proposal was defeated by an 8-1 majority vote. Voting for the proposal:
Mr. T. Kiuchi. Voting against the proposal: Mr. H. Kuroda, Mr. K. Iwata, Mr. H. Nakaso,
Mr. K. Ishida, Mr. T. Sato, Mr. Y. Harada, Mr. Y. Funo, and Mr. M. Sakurai.

[Note 4] Mr. T. Kiuchi proposed that the Bank, with the aim to achieve the price stability target of 2 percent in

the medium to long term, continue with asset purchases and a virtually zero interest rate policy as
long as each of these policy measures was deemed appropriate under flexible policy conduct based
on the examination from the two perspectives of the monetary policy framework. The proposal was
defeated by an 8-1 majority vote. Voting for the proposal: Mr. T. Kiuchi. Voting against the proposal:
Mr. H. Kuroda, Mr. K. Iwata, Mr. H. Nakaso, Mr. K. Ishida, Mr. T. Sato, Mr. Y. Harada, Mr. Y. Funo,
and Mr. M. Sakurai.

24


-----

