Not to be released until 8:50 a.m.
Japan Standard Time on Friday,
February 3, 2017.

February 3, 2017

Bank of Japan

# Minutes of the
 Monetary Policy Meeting

## on December 19 and 20, 2016

(English translation prepared by the Bank's staff based on the Japanese original)


-----

Please contact the Bank of Japan at the address below in advance to request permission

when reproducing or copying the content of this document for commercial purposes.

Secretariat of the Policy Board, Bank of Japan

P.O. Box 30, Nihonbashi, Tokyo 103-8660, Japan

Please credit the source when quoting, reproducing, or copying the content of this

document.


-----

A Monetary Policy Meeting of the Bank of Japan Policy Board was held in the

Head Office of the Bank of Japan in Tokyo on Monday, December 19, 2016, from 2:00 p.m.

to 3:31 p.m., and on Tuesday, December 20, from 9:00 a.m. to 11:44 a.m.[1]

**Policy Board Members Present**

**Mr. H. Kuroda, Chairman, Governor of the Bank of Japan**

**Mr. K. Iwata, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Japan**

**Mr. H. Nakaso, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Japan**

**Mr. T. Sato**

**Mr. T. Kiuchi**

**Mr. Y. Harada**

**Mr. Y. Funo**

**Mr. M. Sakurai**

**Ms. T. Masai**

Government Representatives Present

Mr. M. Kihara, State Minister of Finance, Ministry of Finance[2]

Mr. M. Ota, Deputy Vice Minister for Policy Planning and Coordination, Ministry of

Finance[3]

Mr. T. Ochi, State Minister of Cabinet Office, Cabinet Office[2]

Mr. S. Habuka, Vice Minister for Policy Coordination, Cabinet Office[3]

Reporting Staff

Mr. M. Amamiya, Executive Director

Mr. S. Kuwabara, Executive Director

Mr. E. Maeda, Executive Director (Assistant Governor)

Mr. S. Uchida, Director-General, Monetary Affairs Department

1 The minutes of this meeting were approved by the Policy Board at the Monetary Policy Meeting
held on January 30 and 31, 2017 as "a document describing an outline of the discussion at the
meeting" stipulated in Article 20, paragraph 1 of the Bank of Japan Act of 1997. Those present are
referred to by their titles at the time of the meeting.
2 Messrs. M. Kihara and T. Ochi were present on December 20.
3 Messrs. M. Ota and S. Habuka were present on December 19.

1


-----

Mr. K. Masaki, Head of Policy Planning Division, Monetary Affairs Department

Mr. S. Shimizu, Director-General, Financial Markets Department

Mr. T. Sekine, Director-General, Research and Statistics Department

Mr. K. Nakamura, Head of Economic Research Division, Research and Statistics

Department

Mr. S. Nagai, Director-General, International Department

Secretariat of the Monetary Policy Meeting

Mr. R. Yanagihara, Director-General, Secretariat of the Policy Board

Mr. H. Nakamoto, Director, Deputy Head of Planning and Coordination Division,

Secretariat of the Policy Board

Mr. T. Ninomiya, Senior Economist, Monetary Affairs Department

Mr. K. Yoshimura, Senior Economist, Monetary Affairs Department

2


-----

**I. Summary of Staff Reports on Economic and Financial Developments[4]**

**A. Money Market Operations in the Intermeeting Period**

The Bank, in accordance with the short-term policy interest rate of minus 0.1

percent and the target level of the long-term interest rate, both decided at the previous

meeting on October 31 and November 1, 2016, had been providing funds through purchases

of Japanese government bonds (JGBs) and other measures.[5] In this situation, 10-year JGB

yields had been at around 0 percent, and the shape of the JGB yield curve had been

consistent with the guideline for market operations. Meanwhile, with regard to JGB

purchases, the Bank, on November 17, had conducted outright purchases through the

fixed-rate method (fixed-rate purchase operations) for the first time since its introduction,

targeting medium-term JGBs.

**B. Recent Developments in Financial Markets**

In the money market, interest rates on both overnight and term instruments had

generally been in negative territory. The uncollateralized overnight call rate had been in the

range of around minus 0.03 to minus 0.06 percent. As for interest rates on term instruments,

yields on three-month treasury discount bills (T-Bills) had moved further into negative

territory and had been at around minus 0.4 percent recently.

The Nikkei 225 Stock Average had increased substantially, reflecting the effects of

the depreciation of the yen and the rise in U.S. stock prices, and was moving in the range of

19,000-19,500 yen recently. In the foreign exchange market, the yen had depreciated

against the U.S. dollar, mainly due to the rise in U.S. interest rates. The yen had depreciated

against the euro as well.

**C. Overseas Economic and Financial Developments**

Overseas economies continued to grow at a moderate pace, although emerging

economies remained sluggish in part.

The U.S. economy had been recovering, particularly in household spending, amid

improvement in the employment and income situation. Solid household spending had

4 Reports were made based on information available at the time of the meeting.
5 The target level of the long-term interest rate was as follows:

The Bank will purchase JGBs so that 10-year JGB yields will remain at around zero

percent.

3


-----

brought about improvement in domestic-oriented firms' sentiment and firm momentum in

their production activity. As for prices, the year-on-year rate of increase in the personal

consumption expenditure (PCE) deflator for all items excluding food and energy had been

in the range of 1.5-2.0 percent, and that for all items had been at around 1.5 percent.

The European economy maintained its moderate recovery as private consumption

continued to increase, although exports had shown some weakness. With regard to prices,

both the year-on-year rate of change in the Harmonized Index of Consumer Prices (HICP)

for all items and that for all items excluding energy and unprocessed food had been in the

range of around 0.5-1.0 percent. Meanwhile, economic activity in the United Kingdom had

shown a solid recovery, supported by household spending.

With regard to emerging economies, the Chinese economy continued to see stable

growth on the whole. In India, the economy had been growing steadily, particularly in

domestic demand, partly in reflection of expectations for structural reforms and of monetary

easing effects. Economic activity in the NIEs and the ASEAN countries had been somewhat

weak, but exports had picked up and domestic demand had been resilient due to the effects

of economic stimulus measures. Economic activity in Russia remained severe but had

generally bottomed out, mainly due to a halt in the decline in commodity prices. Economic

activity in Brazil had been weakening. As for prices in emerging economies, inflation rates

had been more or less flat at low levels in many countries and regions. Those in Brazil and

Russia remained at high levels but had been declining due to the earlier pause in the

depreciation of their currencies.

With respect to global financial markets, in the United States, long-term interest

rates and stock prices had risen and the U.S. dollar had appreciated, mainly due to the

spread of expectations for economic measures to be taken by the new administration. On the

other hand, in emerging economies, many countries experienced depreciations of their

currencies and declines in stock prices.

**D. Economic and Financial Developments in Japan**

1. Economic developments

Japan's economy continued its moderate recovery trend.

Exports had picked up with the effects of the slowdown in emerging economies

diminishing. Those to advanced economies, mainly automobile-related, continued to

4


-----

increase steadily, and those to emerging economies -- which had continued to show

relatively sluggish movements -- were heading toward a pick-up, especially for electronic

parts. Exports were projected to continue picking up as a trend as the growth rates of

overseas economies were likely to rise moderately, although a decline following an increase

in IT-related demand, particularly for parts for smartphones, was anticipated in the

immediate future.

Public investment had been more or less flat. Such investment was likely to rise

moderately, particularly in that related to the disaster relief construction and a variety of

infrastructure enhancements, underpinned by the implementation of the supplementary

budget.

Business fixed investment had been on a moderate increasing trend as corporate

profits had been at high levels and business sentiment had improved somewhat. According

to the December 2016 _Tankan (Short-Term Economic Survey of Enterprises in Japan),_

business sentiment had improved, albeit slightly, for the second straight term, mainly on the

back of the recent pick-up in exports and increase in public investment orders, in addition to

corporate profits remaining at high levels. Against this backdrop, firms had generally

maintained their solid investment plans in the December _Tankan, although the effects of_

labor shortages had been observed at some firms. Machinery orders and planned expenses

for construction starts -- both of which were leading indicators of business fixed investment

-- continued a moderate increasing trend, albeit with some fluctuations. Business fixed

investment as a whole was likely to continue to see a moderate uptrend, mainly on the back

of corporate profits at high levels, although the effects of the earlier slowdown in overseas

economies and yen appreciation were likely to continue to be seen in manufacturing firms.

As for the employment and income situation, supply-demand conditions in the

labor market continued to improve steadily and employee income had increased moderately.

Private consumption had been resilient against the background of steady

improvement in the employment and income situation. The consumption activity index had

been somewhat weak in the first half of 2016, but had registered an increase of 0.4 percent

on a quarter-on-quarter basis in the July-September quarter and 0.6 percent in October

relative to that quarter, clearly remaining in positive territory. Positive developments in

private consumption had started to be observed recently with the effects of the bad weather

coming to an end and of the rise in stock prices, as well as the continued improvement in

5


-----

the employment and income situation. Private consumption was expected to see an increase

in its resilience gradually, with the employment and income situation continuing to improve

steadily and the wealth effects stemming from the rise in stock prices exerting a positive

impact.

Housing investment continued picking up, underpinned partly by accommodative

financial conditions.

Industrial production had picked up, reflecting moderate increases in demand both

at home and abroad and the progress in inventory adjustments. The pace of increase in

production had been maintained, particularly in leading industries such as transport

equipment, electronic parts and devices, as well as general-purpose, production and

business oriented machinery. Inventory adjustments had progressed for capital goods and

producer goods, and an increase in shipments of these goods had tended to lead to a rise in

their production. As for the outlook, industrial production was likely to continue picking up

as a trend, reflecting increases in demand both at home and abroad, although a decline

following the increase in IT-related demand was anticipated in the immediate future.

As for prices, the rate of change in the producer price index (PPI) relative to three

months earlier had started to increase moderately, reflecting developments in international

commodity prices and foreign exchange rates. The year-on-year rate of change in the

consumer price index (CPI) for all items less fresh food had been slightly negative. The rate

of increase for all items less fresh food and energy had registered 0.3 percent year-on-year

for October. With regard to the outlook, the year-on-year rate of change in the CPI (all items

less fresh food) was likely to be slightly negative or about 0 percent for the time being, due

to the effects of the decline in energy prices.

2. Financial environment

Financial conditions were highly accommodative.

Inflation expectations remained in a weakening phase. Real long-term interest

rates -- calculated as long-term interest rates minus medium- to long-term inflation

expectations -- had been negative.

Firms' funding costs had been hovering at extremely low levels. With regard to

credit supply, financial institutions' lending attitudes -- as perceived by firms -- had been

highly accommodative. Issuing conditions for CP and corporate bonds had been favorable.

6


-----

Firms' credit demand had been increasing moderately, such as for funds related to mergers

and acquisitions, as well as for funds for business fixed investment. Against this backdrop,

the year-on-year rate of increase in the amount outstanding of bank lending had been at

around 2.5 percent. The year-on-year rate of increase in the amount outstanding of CP and

corporate bonds had accelerated. Firms' financial positions had been favorable.

The monetary base had been increasing at a high year-on-year growth rate in the

range of 20-25 percent. The year-on-year rate of growth in the money stock had been at

around 4 percent.

3. Loan disbursement through the Loan Support Program

In early December 2016, the Bank carried out a new loan disbursement, amounting

to 563.0 billion yen, under the main rules for the Fund-Provisioning Measure to Support

Strengthening the Foundations for Economic Growth. The outstanding balance of loans

disbursed by the Bank under these rules amounted to 6,039.7 billion yen after the new loan

disbursement. The outstanding balance of loans disbursed by the Bank under the special

rules for equity investments and asset-based lending (ABL) came to 69.3 billion yen, and

that under the special rules for small-lot investments and loans amounted to 12.505 billion

yen. As for the special rules for the U.S. dollar lending arrangement, the outstanding

balance of loans came to 17.72 billion dollars.

On December 15, the Bank carried out a new loan disbursement, amounting to

5,397.1 billion yen, under the Fund-Provisioning Measure to Stimulate Bank Lending. The

outstanding balance of loans disbursed by the Bank amounted to 32,682.0 billion yen after

the new loan disbursement.

**II. Summary of Discussions by the Policy Board on Economic and Financial**

**Developments**

**A. Economic Developments**

As for global financial markets, members shared the recognition that, after the U.S.

presidential election, stock prices and long-term interest rates in the United States had risen

significantly and the U.S. dollar had appreciated, and that the effects of such developments

had been spreading to other economies. Members concurred that these developments were

attributable to (1) growing expectations that proactive economic policy management to be

7


-----

taken by the new administration in the United States would result in an acceleration in the

economy's growth rate and inflation rate, and (2) renewed expectations of a rise in U.S.

interest rates following the decision made at the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC)

meeting held on December 13 and 14, 2016 to raise the policy rate. A few members pointed

out that improvements in economic fundamentals that had been seen since before the U.S.

presidential election, such as the firm growth in the global economy and stabilization of

crude oil prices, were at the root of these market reactions. Some members expressed the

view that these also were partly led by speculation. On this basis, many members expressed

the recognition that due attention should be paid to future developments in global financial

markets.

With respect to overseas economies, members agreed that, amid the recent global

pick-up in manufacturing, the recovery in advanced economies that had been led by the

household sector was spreading to the corporate sector and the slowdown in emerging

economies had eased. On this basis, they shared the recognition that overseas economies

continued to grow at a moderate pace, although emerging economies remained sluggish in

part. Some members pointed out that the global pick-up trend in manufacturing had been

clearly reflected in, for example, the improvement in the Purchasing Managers' Index (PMI).

As for the outlook, members concurred that overseas economies were likely to see moderate

increases in their growth rates, as it was likely that advanced economies would continue to

realize steady growth and the recovery in emerging economies gradually would become

firm on the back of the developments in advanced economies and emerging economies'

policy effects.

With regard to developments in overseas economies by region, members

concurred that the U.S. economy had been recovering, particularly in household spending,

amid improvement in the employment and income situation, and that the recovery had been

spreading to the corporate sector. One member pointed out that, in the United States, an

improving trend had been seen in exports and production since before the presidential

election. A different member expressed the view that expectations for economic measures to

be taken by the new administration had been reflected in, for example, the recent

improvement in firms' and households' sentiment. As for the outlook, members shared the

view that the economy was likely to continue to grow, mainly in private demand, led by the

firmness in household spending, under accommodative financial conditions.

8


-----

Members shared the recognition that the European economy maintained its

moderate recovery as private consumption continued to increase, although exports had

shown some weakness. As for the outlook, they concurred that the economy would likely

continue to see a moderate recovery, led by the household sector, under accommodative

financial conditions.

Members agreed that the Chinese economy continued to see stable growth on the

whole as private consumption maintained its high growth on the back of the favorable

employment and income situation, as well as of policy effects, and as exports -- particularly

of IT-related goods -- had picked up. As for the outlook, they shared the view that the

economy was likely to broadly follow a stable growth path as authorities proactively carried

out measures to support economic activity. One member said that the automobile-related tax

cut, which had been implemented as an economic stimulus measure, would continue from

2017, albeit with a smaller reduction rate, and that its effects warranted attention.

Members shared the recognition that emerging economies as a whole had shown a

pick-up, although economic activity in some countries had been subdued. A few members

noted that exports, mainly of emerging economies in Asia, of a wide range of items

including IT-related goods, as well as materials and related goods, had picked up and that

inventory adjustments had progressed. As for the outlook, members concurred that

emerging economies were likely to see gradual increases in their growth rates, due mainly

to the effects of the economic stimulus measures both on the monetary and fiscal fronts and

the spread of the effects of the recovery in advanced economies.

Members shared the recognition that it was necessary to pay close attention to the

possible effects on the global economy of the economic policy management to be taken by

the new administration in the United States, considering that a large part of the economic

measures was still unspecified. Some members pointed out that emerging economies had

experienced depreciations of their currencies and declines in stock prices recently amid the

rise in U.S. long-term interest rates and the appreciation of the U.S. dollar, and commented

that attention should be paid to the flow of funds related to emerging economies going

forward. Some members noted that such market developments could weigh on the recovery

of emerging economies that had a large amount of U.S. dollar-denominated debt; therefore,

their effects needed to be examined closely. Meanwhile, one member pointed out that views

were divided among economists in the United States on the "high-pressure economy," in

9


-----

which medium- to long-term productivity was expected to recover by raising short-term

growth rates through proactive measures to stimulate demand. On this basis, this member

expressed the view that it was necessary to keep in mind the possibility that the U.S.

economic growth rate would accelerate further from a somewhat long-term perspective.

Some members said that, in a situation where firms' supply chains were linked globally,

trade policy to be instituted by the new administration in the United States and its possible

effects on the global economy warranted attention.

Based on the above deliberations on economic and financial conditions abroad,

members discussed the state of Japan's economy.

With regard to economic activity, members shared the recognition that the

recovery had taken hold more firmly as exports and industrial production had picked up, in

a situation where overseas economies had been growing at a moderate pace, and as an

improvement in private consumption had started to become evident. On this basis, they

agreed that Japan's economy continued its moderate recovery trend. As for the outlook for

the economy, members shared the view that the economy was likely to turn to a moderate

expansion as (1) domestic demand was likely to follow an uptrend, with a virtuous cycle

from income to spending being maintained in both the corporate and household sectors, and

(2) exports were likely to follow a moderate increasing trend on the back of improvement in

overseas economies.

Members concurred that exports had picked up with the effects of the slowdown in

emerging economies diminishing. One member pointed out that exports to emerging

economies -- which had been sluggish -- were recovering, especially for IT-related goods. A

different member noted that the PMI for manufacturing activity had clearly improved

globally, and that the December 2016 Tankan showed that business sentiment had improved

at export industries, such as motor vehicles, general-purpose machinery, and production

machinery. Members shared the view that exports were likely to continue picking up as a

trend as the growth rates of overseas economies were likely to rise moderately, although a

decline following the increase in IT-related demand was anticipated in the immediate future.

Members concurred that business fixed investment had been on a moderate

increasing trend as corporate profits had been at high levels and business sentiment had

improved somewhat. They shared the view that such investment as a whole was likely to

continue to see a moderate uptrend, mainly on the back of corporate profits at high levels,

10


-----

although the effects of the earlier slowdown in overseas economies and the yen appreciation

were likely to continue to be seen in manufacturing firms. One member expressed the

recognition that the December 2016 Tankan (1) confirmed that corporate profits remained at

high levels and (2) showed that, reflecting this development, firms had generally maintained

their solid investment plans. A different member expressed the recognition that the revised

GDP statistics suggested that firms' willingness to invest in research and development with

the aim of producing new products had been firmly maintained at a high level. One member

expressed the view that the recent depreciation trend of the yen and uptrend in stock prices

would also support the positive momentum in business fixed investment.

As for the employment and income situation, members shared the recognition that

supply-demand conditions in the labor market continued to improve steadily and employee

income had increased moderately. One member, pointing to an increase in the year-on-year

rate of change in nominal wages of part-time employees, expressed the intent to pay close

attention to future developments. With regard to the outlook, members shared the view that

employee income was likely to continue to increase moderately as labor market conditions

kept improving and corporate profits generally remained at high levels. A few members

commented that they were paying attention to developments in the spring wage negotiations

between workers and management in 2017, and how their effects would spread to private

consumption and prices.

With regard to private consumption, members shared the recognition that positive

developments had started to be observed recently, and that it had been resilient against the

background of steady improvement in the employment and income situation. A few

members pointed out that the quarter-on-quarter rate of change in the consumption activity

index remained in positive territory and that the diffusion index for current economic

conditions in the November 2016 Economy Watchers Survey had risen to a level last seen in

March 2014, which was before the consumption tax hike. Some members said that the

weakness in private consumption observed after the turn of the year had been due to

temporary factors such as the negative wealth effects brought about by the decline in stock

prices and weather conditions. These members continued that resilience in consumption had

been reconfirmed recently as the effects of such factors had dissipated. In the outlook,

members shared the view that private consumption was likely to see an increase in its

11


-----

resilience gradually, with steady improvement in the employment and income situation and

the positive contribution from the wealth effects stemming from the rise in stock prices.

As for housing investment, members shared the recognition that it continued

picking up, underpinned partly by accommodative financial conditions.

Members shared the recognition that industrial production had picked up,

reflecting moderate increases in demand both at home and abroad and the progress in

inventory adjustments. A few members expressed the recognition that the increase in

production toward summer 2016 had been supported in part by temporary factors such as

the accelerated production of automobiles to make up for the earlier disruption and the

increase in production of electronic parts for smartphones. They continued that,

nevertheless, there was no notable decline following such increase and the pace of increase

in production had been maintained, particularly for automobiles to advanced economies and

IT-related goods to Asian economies. One member expressed the view that inventory

adjustments had progressed, and an increase in shipments had tended to lead to a rise in

production. As for the outlook, members agreed that industrial production was likely to

continue picking up as a trend, although a decline following the increase in IT-related

demand was anticipated in the immediate future.

As for prices, members concurred that the year-on-year rate of change in the CPI

(all items less fresh food) had been slightly negative, and that it was likely to remain so or

be about 0 percent for the time being. One member expressed the view that the effects of the

earlier decline in energy prices would dissipate gradually through the end of fiscal 2016.

Meanwhile, members shared the recognition that there were some indicators of inflation

expectations that had bottomed out or improved somewhat, but such expectations remained

in a weakening phase on the whole.

**B. Financial Developments**

Members concurred that financial conditions in Japan were highly accommodative.

They shared the view that, under Quantitative and Qualitative Monetary Easing (QQE) with

Yield Curve Control, firms' funding costs had been hovering at extremely low levels.

12


-----

**III. Summary of Discussions on Monetary Policy for the Immediate Future**

Based on the above assessment of economic and financial developments, members

discussed monetary policy for the immediate future.

With regard to conducting monetary policy, members confirmed that the important

criterion was whether the momentum toward achieving the 2 percent price stability target

was being maintained, taking account of developments in economic activity and prices as

well as financial conditions. On this basis, most members shared the view that such

momentum was being maintained, and that the year-on-year rate of change in the CPI was

likely to increase toward 2 percent as the output gap improved and medium- to long-term

inflation expectations rose. Some members expressed the recognition that factors that would

support the rise in prices going forward had been increasing, such as (1) the upward

pressure on wages accompanying the tightening of labor market conditions, (2) the

improvement in private consumption, (3) the rise in crude oil prices, and (4) the

depreciation of the yen. Some members noted that, if the observed inflation rate rose, this

could be expected to positively affect the formation of inflation expectations through the

adaptive formation mechanism. On this basis, one of these members added that, since firms

had not been sufficiently proactive in terms of setting higher prices, it was necessary to

continue to pay close attention to future developments in their price-setting stance.

Meanwhile, a different member expressed the view that the recent yen depreciation might

push up prices in the short run but would not raise the underlying trend in inflation.

With respect to QQE with Yield Curve Control, many members expressed the

recognition that, despite the global rise in long-term interest rates, particularly in the United

States, the JGB yield curve had been formed smoothly in a manner consistent with the

guideline for market operations, and that QQE with Yield Curve Control had been

functioning as intended at the time of its introduction. A few members pointed out that,

under the current policy, which controlled short- and long- term interest rates, improvement

in economic conditions amplified monetary easing effects, thereby further strengthening the

momentum toward achieving the 2 percent price stability target. One member expressed the

view that, compared with the previous policy framework, which specified the amount of

JGB purchases as the operating target, the effects of monetary easing were clearer to people

under the current framework, which directly specified the most appropriate level of interest

rates. A different member expressed the view that the effects of the inflation-overshooting

13


-----

commitment would strengthen gradually, given that people would clearly recognize such

effects as the inflation rate rose. On this basis, many members expressed the recognition

that, as there was still a long way to go to achieve the price stability target of 2 percent, it

was important for the Bank to firmly maintain the current policy framework and guideline

for market operations and pursue powerful monetary easing, in order to achieve the target at

the earliest possible time.

Based on the above discussions, regarding the guideline for market operations for

the intermeeting period, many members expressed the view that it was appropriate for the

Bank to maintain the following guideline. First, as for the short-term policy interest rate, it

would apply a negative interest rate of minus 0.1 percent to the Policy-Rate Balances in

current accounts held by financial institutions at the Bank. Second, as for the long-term

interest rate, the Bank would purchase JGBs so that 10-year JGB yields would remain at

around 0 percent. With regard to the amount of JGBs to be purchased, it would conduct

purchases at more or less the current pace -- an annual pace of increase in the amount

outstanding of its JGB holdings of about 80 trillion yen -- aiming to achieve the target level

of the long-term interest rate specified by the guideline.

As for the conduct of outright purchases of JGBs, many members shared the

recognition that it was important to conduct them so that the entire yield curve would be

formed in a manner consistent with the guideline for market operations, taking into account

not only the level of interest rates but also the speed and momentum of their changes, as

well as factors behind them. A few members pointed out that, in financial markets, it was

believed that the upper and lower limits of the target level of the long-term interest rate,

which was set at around 0 percent, were 0.1 percent and minus 0.1 percent, respectively.

These members then expressed the recognition that it was inappropriate to set such uniform

standards. A different member expressed the recognition that, under the current policy

framework, in order for the Policy Board to decide an appropriate guideline for market

operations and for the Bank's Market Operations Desk to conduct market operations

flexibly in accordance with the guideline while taking into account developments in

financial markets, close communication between them was becoming more important than

ever.

With regard to asset purchases except for JGB purchases, many members shared

the recognition that it was appropriate for the Bank to implement the following guideline

14


-----

for the intermeeting period. First, it would purchase exchange-traded funds (ETFs) and

Japan real estate investment trusts (J-REITs) so that their amounts outstanding would

increase at annual paces of about 6 trillion yen and about 90 billion yen, respectively.

Second, as for CP and corporate bonds, it would maintain their amounts outstanding at

about 2.2 trillion yen and about 3.2 trillion yen, respectively.

With respect to the Bank's thinking behind its future conduct of monetary policy,

many members shared the view that the Bank would (1) continue with QQE with Yield

Curve Control, aiming to achieve the price stability target of 2 percent, as long as it was

necessary for maintaining that target in a stable manner, (2) continue expanding the

monetary base until the year-on-year rate of increase in the observed CPI (all items less

fresh food) exceeded 2 percent and stayed above the target in a stable manner, and (3) make

policy adjustments as appropriate, taking account of developments in economic activity and

prices as well as financial conditions, with a view to maintaining the momentum toward

achieving the price stability target.

On this point, a few members expressed different views. One member noted that it

was uncertain whether the amount of JGB purchases would decrease going forward under

yield curve control. The member then argued that, in conducting monetary policy, the Bank

should set the amount of its JGB purchases as the operating target and make sure to reduce

it incrementally, as this would make its asset purchases more sustainable and enhance the

stability of the market, thereby securing the monetary easing effects seen so far.

A different member expressed the view that the current guideline for market

operations was not appropriate. This member said that the shape of the JGB yield curve that

would achieve desirable economic and price conditions should be a little steeper. The

member continued that, if it was the case that a rise in market interest rates reflected the

prospects for improvement in Japan's economic and price conditions, it was appropriate for

the Bank to accommodate such a rise in deciding the guideline for market operations. This

member then added that, as the Bank could not fine-tune long-term interest rates, they

should be allowed to fluctuate in a larger range, and to the upside in particular.

**IV. Remarks by Government Representatives**

The representative from the Ministry of Finance made the following remarks.

15


-----

(1) The budget for fiscal 2017 was planned to be decided at the Cabinet meeting to be held

on December 22, 2016. Therefore, the government was in the process of finalizing a

budget draft, taking into account the Plan to Advance Economic and Fiscal

Revitalization, with a view to achieving both economic revitalization and fiscal

consolidation. In addition, it planned to formulate the third supplementary budget for

fiscal 2016, which would satisfy additional fiscal demands, such as expenses related to

disaster relief. The government was working toward a Cabinet decision regarding the

third supplementary budget for fiscal 2016 at the same time as one regarding the budget

for fiscal 2017.

(2) The ruling parties had compiled an outline on December 8 for the tax reform in fiscal

2017, which incorporated revisions to the following, in view of boosting economic

growth in Japan: (1) the tax exemption system for spouses; (2) the research and

development tax system to strengthen the competitiveness of the Japanese economy;

and (3) the tax system for promoting expansion of income to encourage wage increases.

The government would prepare draft tax codes reflecting this outline.

(3) The government expected the Bank to continue to work toward achieving the price

stability target under QQE with Yield Curve Control, in light of developments in

economic activity and prices, as well as financial conditions.

The representative from the Cabinet Office made the following remarks.

(1) The Japanese economy was on a moderate recovery, while weakness could be seen

recently. According to the second preliminary GDP estimates for the July-September

quarter of 2016, both nominal and real GDP had registered positive growth for the third

consecutive quarter on a quarter-on-quarter basis. In the government's economic outlook

for fiscal 2017, the real and nominal GDP growth rates were projected to be about 1.5

percent and about 2.5 percent, respectively, and the year-on-year rate of increase in the

CPI was expected to be around 1.1 percent. In assessing price developments, it was

important to comprehensively examine a wide range of indicators, including the GDP

deflator.

(2) At the Council for the Realization of Work Style Reform, the prime minister had asked

the industrial sector to (1) conduct wage increases of at least the same extent as those

for 2016, (2) implement base pay increases for a fourth consecutive year, (3) discuss

16


-----

wage increases that took inflation expectations into consideration, and (4) improve

transaction terms for subcontractors and other small and medium-sized enterprises

(SMEs). Moreover, the government planned to release a draft guideline for providing

equal pay for equal work on December 20, 2016. Under the basic principles of fiscal

2017 budget formulation, the government deemed it more necessary than ever to

combine fiscal policy that was oriented toward growth not only with structural reforms

but also monetary policy in a balanced manner. It also would proceed with steady

initiatives to achieve fiscal soundness while aiming to create a more focused budget by,

for example, taking the necessary budgetary measures for important policy issues, such

as childrearing and caregiving, that would be needed to realize a society in which all

citizens were dynamically engaged, as well as research and development that would be

key for Japan's growth strategy.

(3) The government expected the Bank to steadily work toward achieving the price stability

target of 2 percent, in light of developments in economic activity and prices, as well as

financial conditions.

**V. Votes**

**A. Vote on the Chairman's Policy Proposal on the Guideline for Market Operations**

Based on the above discussions, to reflect the majority view of the members, the

chairman formulated the following proposal and put it to a vote.

The Policy Board decided the proposal by a majority vote.

**The Chairman's Policy Proposal on the Guideline for Market Operations:**

The guideline for market operations for the intermeeting period will be as follows.

1. The Bank will apply a negative interest rate of minus 0.1 percent to the

Policy-Rate Balances in current accounts held by financial institutions at the

Bank.

2. The Bank will purchase JGBs so that 10-year JGB yields will remain at

around 0 percent. With regard to the amount of JGBs to be purchased, the

Bank will conduct purchases at more or less the current pace -- an annual pace

17


-----

of increase in the amount outstanding of its JGB holdings of about 80 trillion

yen -- aiming to achieve the target level of the long-term interest rate specified

by the guideline.

Votes for the proposal: Mr. H. Kuroda, Mr. K. Iwata, Mr. H. Nakaso, Mr. Y.

Harada, Mr. Y. Funo, Mr. M. Sakurai, and Ms. T. Masai.

Votes against the proposal: Mr. T. Sato and Mr. T. Kiuchi.

Mr. T. Sato dissented considering that setting the short-term policy interest rate at

minus 0.1 percent and the target level of 10-year JGB yields at around 0 percent could lead

to holding JGB yields in negative territory up to a maturity of ten years and thus could have

an adverse impact on the functioning of financial intermediation. Mr. T. Kiuchi dissented

considering that, with a view to maintaining the stability of the JGB market and the

functioning of financial intermediation, (1) the short-term policy interest rate should be set

at 0.1 percent and (2) the adoption of a target level of a long-term interest rate was not

appropriate because it would entail a risk that the Bank might need to further increase the

pace of its JGB purchases.

**B. Vote on the Chairman's Policy Proposal on the Guideline for Asset Purchases**

To reflect the majority view of the members, the chairman formulated the

following proposal to implement the guideline for asset purchases for the intermeeting

period and put it to a vote: (1) to purchase ETFs and J-REITs so that their amounts

outstanding would increase at annual paces of about 6 trillion yen and about 90 billion yen,

respectively, and (2) to maintain the amounts outstanding of CP and corporate bonds at

about 2.2 trillion yen and about 3.2 trillion yen, respectively.

The Policy Board decided the proposal by a majority vote.

Votes for the proposal: Mr. H. Kuroda, Mr. K. Iwata, Mr. H. Nakaso, Mr. Y.

Harada, Mr. Y. Funo, Mr. M. Sakurai, and Ms. T. Masai.

Votes against the proposal: Mr. T. Sato and Mr. T. Kiuchi.

18


-----

Mr. T. Sato dissented considering that ETF purchases of about 6 trillion yen

annually would be excessive in light of their adverse impact on the pricing mechanism in

the stock market and the Bank's financial soundness.

**C. Vote on Mr. T. Kiuchi's Policy Proposal on the Guideline for Asset Purchases**

Mr. T. Kiuchi proposed that the Bank continue to use amounts of asset purchases

as its operating targets and that the guidelines for asset purchases for the intermeeting

period be set as follows: (1) to purchase JGBs so that their amount outstanding would

increase at an annual pace of about 45 trillion yen, and to make the average remaining

maturity of the Bank's JGB purchases about seven years; (2) to purchase ETFs and J-REITs

so that their amounts outstanding would increase at annual paces of about 1 trillion yen and

about 30 billion yen, respectively; and (3) to maintain the amounts outstanding of CP and

corporate bonds at about 2.2 trillion yen and about 3.2 trillion yen, respectively. The

proposal was then put to a vote.

The proposal was defeated by a majority vote.

Votes for the proposal: Mr. T. Kiuchi.

Votes against the proposal: Mr. H. Kuroda, Mr. K. Iwata, Mr. H. Nakaso, Mr. T.

Sato, Mr. Y. Harada, Mr. Y. Funo, Mr. M. Sakurai, and Ms. T. Masai.

**VI. Discussion on the Statement on Monetary Policy**

On the basis of the above discussions, members discussed the Statement on

Monetary Policy, and formed a majority view. Mr. T. Kiuchi, however, formulated a

proposal, and thus two proposals were submitted. Meanwhile, Mr. T. Sato expressed dissent

from the inflation-overshooting commitment regarding an expansion of the monetary base

considering that this was neither realistic nor effective.

**A. Mr. T. Kiuchi's Policy Proposal**

Mr. T. Kiuchi formulated a proposal to make the following changes. First, with

regard to the outlook for prices, he proposed a new expression that the year-on-year rate of

change in the CPI "is likely to be slightly negative or about 0 percent for the time being, and

19


-----

thereafter increase very moderately." Second, with regard to the future conduct of monetary

policy, he proposed a new expression that "the Bank will, with the aim to achieve the price

stability target of 2 percent in the medium to long term, continue to provide consistent

support from the financial side. It will continue with asset purchases and a virtually zero

short-term interest rate policy as long as each of these policy measures is deemed

appropriate under flexible policy conduct based on the examination from the two

perspectives of the monetary policy framework -- that is, (1) the outlook deemed most

likely by the Bank and (2) risks considered most relevant to the conduct of monetary policy

from a medium- to long-term perspective." The proposal was then put to a vote.

The proposal was defeated by a majority vote.

Votes for the proposal: Mr. T. Kiuchi.

Votes against the proposal: Mr. H. Kuroda, Mr. K. Iwata, Mr. H. Nakaso, Mr. T.

Sato, Mr. Y. Harada, Mr. Y. Funo, Mr. M. Sakurai, and Ms. T. Masai.

**B. The Chairman's Policy Proposal**

The chairman formulated the Statement on Monetary Policy and put it to a vote.

The Policy Board decided the text by a unanimous vote. It was confirmed that the statement

would be released immediately after the meeting (see Attachment).

**VII. Approval of the Minutes of the Monetary Policy Meeting**

The Policy Board approved unanimously the minutes of the Monetary Policy

Meeting of October 31 and November 1, 2016 for release on December 26.

20


-----

Attachment

December 20, 2016

Bank of Japan

**Statement on Monetary Policy**

1. At the Monetary Policy Meeting held today, the Policy Board of the Bank of Japan decided

upon the following.

(1) Yield curve control

The Bank decided, by a 7-2 majority vote, to set the following guideline for market

operations for the intermeeting period.[ [Note 1]]

The short-term policy interest rate:

The Bank will apply a negative interest rate of minus 0.1 percent to the Policy-Rate

Balances in current accounts held by financial institutions at the Bank.

The long-term interest rate:

The Bank will purchase Japanese government bonds (JGBs) so that 10-year JGB

yields will remain at around zero percent. With regard to the amount of JGBs to be

purchased, the Bank will conduct purchases at more or less the current pace -- an annual

pace of increase in the amount outstanding of its JGB holdings of about 80 trillion yen -
aiming to achieve the target level of the long-term interest rate specified by the guideline.

(2) Guidelines for asset purchases

With regard to asset purchases other than JGB purchases, the Bank decided, by a 7-2

majority vote, to set the following guidelines.[ [Note 2]]

a) The Bank will purchase exchange-traded funds (ETFs) and Japan real estate

investment trusts (J-REITs) so that their amounts outstanding will increase at annual

paces of about 6 trillion yen and about 90 billion yen, respectively.

b) As for CP and corporate bonds, the Bank will maintain their amounts outstanding at

about 2.2 trillion yen and about 3.2 trillion yen, respectively.

2. Japan's economy has continued its moderate recovery trend. Overseas economies have

continued to grow at a moderate pace, although emerging economies remain sluggish in part.

21


-----

In this situation, exports have picked up. On the domestic demand side, business fixed

investment has been on a moderate increasing trend as corporate profits have been at high

levels and business sentiment has improved somewhat. Against the background of steady

improvement in the employment and income situation, private consumption has been resilient,

and housing investment has continued its pick-up. In the meantime, public investment has

been more or less flat. Reflecting these moderate increases in demand both at home and

abroad and the progress in inventory adjustments, industrial production has picked up.

Financial conditions are highly accommodative. On the price front, the year-on-year rate of

change in the consumer price index (CPI, all items less fresh food) has been slightly negative.

Inflation expectations have remained in a weakening phase.

3. With regard to the outlook, Japan's economy is likely to turn to a moderate expansion.

Domestic demand is likely to follow an uptrend, with a virtuous cycle from income to

spending being maintained in both the corporate and household sectors, on the back of highly

accommodative financial conditions and fiscal spending through the government's large-scale

stimulus measures. Exports are expected to follow a moderate increasing trend on the back of

an improvement in overseas economies. The year-on-year rate of change in the CPI is likely

to be slightly negative or about 0 percent for the time being, due to the effects of the decline

in energy prices, and as the output gap improves and medium- to long-term inflation

expectations rise, it is expected to increase toward 2 percent.[ [Note 3]]

4. Risks to the outlook include the following: developments in emerging and

commodity-exporting economies, particularly China; developments in the U.S. economy and

the impact of its monetary policy on global financial markets; the consequences stemming

from the United Kingdom's vote to leave the European Union (EU) and their effects;

prospects regarding the European debt problem, including the financial sector; and

geopolitical risks.

5. The Bank will continue with "Quantitative and Qualitative Monetary Easing (QQE) with

Yield Curve Control," aiming to achieve the price stability target of 2 percent, as long as it is

necessary for maintaining that target in a stable manner. It will continue expanding the

monetary base until the year-on-year rate of increase in the observed CPI (all items less fresh

food) exceeds 2 percent and stays above the target in a stable manner. The Bank will make

policy adjustments as appropriate, taking account of developments in economic activity and

prices as well as financial conditions, with a view to maintaining the momentum toward

achieving the price stability target.[ [Note 4]]

22


-----

[Note 1] Voting for the action: Mr. H. Kuroda, Mr. K. Iwata, Mr. H. Nakaso, Mr. Y. Harada, Mr. Y. Funo,

Mr. M. Sakurai, and Ms. T. Masai. Voting against the action: Mr. T. Sato and Mr. T. Kiuchi.
Mr. T. Sato dissented considering that setting the short-term policy interest rate at minus 0.1 percent
and the target level of 10-year JGB yields at around 0 percent could lead to holding JGB yields in
negative territory up to a maturity of 10 years and thus could have an adverse impact on the
functioning of financial intermediation. Mr. T. Kiuchi dissented considering that, with a view to
maintaining the stability of the JGB market and the functioning of financial intermediation, (1) the
short-term policy interest rate should be set at 0.1 percent and (2) the adoption of a target level for a
long-term interest rate was not appropriate because it would entail a risk that the Bank might need to
further increase the pace of its JGB purchases.

[Note 2] Voting for the action: Mr. H. Kuroda, Mr. K. Iwata, Mr. H. Nakaso, Mr. Y. Harada, Mr. Y. Funo,

Mr. M. Sakurai, and Ms. T. Masai. Voting against the action: Mr. T. Sato and Mr. T. Kiuchi.
Mr. T. Sato dissented considering that ETF purchases of about 6 trillion yen annually would be
excessive in light of their adverse impact on the pricing mechanism in the stock market and the
Bank's financial soundness. Mr. T. Kiuchi proposed that the Bank continue to use amounts of asset
purchases as its operating targets and set the guidelines for asset purchases as follows: the Bank
would purchase JGBs so that their amount outstanding would increase at an annual pace of about 45
trillion yen, purchase ETFs so that their amount outstanding would increase at an annual pace of
about 1 trillion yen, and so on. The proposal was defeated by a majority vote.

[Note 3] Mr. T. Kiuchi proposed, concerning the year-on-year rate of change in the CPI, that it was likely to be

slightly negative or about 0 percent for the time being, and would thereafter increase very
moderately. The proposal was defeated by an 8-1 majority vote. Voting for the proposal:
Mr. T. Kiuchi. Voting against the proposal: Mr. H. Kuroda, Mr. K. Iwata, Mr. H. Nakaso, Mr. T. Sato,
Mr. Y. Harada, Mr. Y. Funo, Mr. M. Sakurai, and Ms. T. Masai.

[Note 4] Mr. T. Sato opposed the commitment to expanding the monetary base, considering that this was

neither realistic nor effective. Mr. T. Kiuchi proposed that the Bank, with the aim to achieve the price
stability target of 2 percent in the medium to long term, continue with asset purchases and a virtually
zero short-term interest rate policy as long as each of these policy measures was deemed appropriate.
The proposal was defeated by an 8-1 majority vote. Voting for the proposal: Mr. T. Kiuchi. Voting
against the proposal: Mr. H. Kuroda, Mr. K. Iwata, Mr. H. Nakaso, Mr. T. Sato, Mr. Y. Harada,
Mr. Y. Funo, Mr. M. Sakurai, and Ms. T. Masai.

23


-----

