# Monetary Policy Summary and minutes of the Monetary

 Policy Committee meeting ending on 15 June 2016

## Publication date: 16 June 2016

These are the minutes of the Monetary Policy Committee meeting ending on 15 June 2016.

They are available at http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/news/2016/006.aspx

The Bank of England Act 1998 gives the Bank of England operational responsibility for setting monetary policy

to meet the Government’s inflation target. Operational decisions are taken by the Bank’s Monetary Policy

Committee. The minutes of the Committee meeting ending on 13 July will be published on 14 July 2016.


-----

### Monetary Policy Summary, June 2016

The Bank of England’s Monetary Policy Committee (MPC) sets monetary policy to meet the 2% inflation target

and in a way that helps to sustain growth and employment. At its meeting ending on 15 June 2016 the MPC

voted unanimously to maintain Bank Rate at 0.5%. The Committee also voted unanimously to maintain the

stock of purchased assets financed by the issuance of central bank reserves at £375 billion.

Twelve-month CPI inflation was 0.3% in May and remains well below the 2% inflation target. This shortfall is

due predominantly to unusually large drags from energy and food prices, which are expected to attenuate over

the next year. Core inflation also remains subdued.

The MPC set out its most recent detailed assessment of the economic outlook in the May Inflation Report.

Relative to those projections, there has been limited news on the outlook for the global economy. Growth in the

United Kingdom’s major trading partners is expected to continue at a modest pace over the next three years. In

China and other emerging markets, the prospects for activity are little changed and medium-term risks remain to

the downside. Commodity prices have risen since the Committee’s May Report, however, with sterling oil prices

in particular having increased by around 10%.

In the weeks since the May Report, an increasing range of financial asset prices has become more sensitive to

market perceptions of the likely outcome of the forthcoming EU referendum. On the evidence of the recent

behaviour of the foreign exchange market, it appears increasingly likely that, were the UK to vote to leave the

EU, sterling’s exchange rate would fall further, perhaps sharply. This would be consistent with changes to the

fundamentals underpinning the exchange rate, including worsening terms of trade, lower productivity, and

higher risk premia. In addition, UK short-term interest rates and measures of UK bank funding costs appear to

have been materially influenced by opinion polls about the referendum. These effects have also become

evident in non-sterling assets: market contacts attribute much of the deterioration in global risk sentiment to

increasing uncertainty ahead of the referendum. The outcome of the referendum continues to be the largest

immediate risk facing UK financial markets, and possibly also global financial markets.

While consumer spending has been solid, there is growing evidence that uncertainty about the referendum is

leading to delays to major economic decisions that are costly to reverse, including commercial and residential

real estate transactions, car purchases, and business investment. As the Committee has previously noted,

potential referendum effects are making economic data releases more difficult to interpret, and the Committee is

being more cautious in drawing inferences from them than would normally be the case.

The MPC’s projections in the May Inflation Report were conditioned on continued UK membership of the EU.

On that assumption, returning inflation to the 2% target requires balancing the drag on inflation from external

factors and the support from gradual increases in domestic cost growth. Fully offsetting that drag over the short

run would, in the MPC’s judgement, involve too rapid an acceleration in domestic costs which would risk being

excessive and lead to undesirable volatility in output and employment. Given these considerations, the MPC

intends to set monetary policy to ensure that growth is sufficient to return inflation to the target in around two

years and keep it there in the absence of further shocks.


-----

Consistent with the projections and conditioning assumptions set out in the May Report, including a gentle rise

in interest rates over the forecast period, the MPC judges that it is more likely than not that Bank Rate will need

to be higher by the end of the forecast period than at present to ensure inflation returns to the target in a

sustainable manner. All members agree that, given the likely persistence of the headwinds weighing on the

economy, when Bank Rate does begin to rise, it is expected to do so more gradually and to a lower level than in

recent cycles. This guidance is an expectation, not a promise. The actual path Bank Rate will follow over the

next few years will depend on economic circumstances.

As the Committee set out last month, the most significant risks to the MPC’s forecast concern the referendum.

A vote to leave the EU could materially alter the outlook for output and inflation, and therefore the appropriate

setting of monetary policy. Households could defer consumption and firms delay investment, lowering labour

demand and causing unemployment to rise. Through financial market and confidence channels, there are also

risks of adverse spill-overs to the global economy. At the same time, supply growth is likely to be lower over the

forecast period, reflecting slower capital accumulation and the need to reallocate resources. Sterling is also

likely to depreciate further, perhaps sharply. This combination of influences on demand, supply and the

exchange rate could lead to a materially lower path for growth and a notably higher path for inflation than in the

central projections set out in the May Inflation Report. In such circumstances, the MPC would face a trade-off

between stabilising inflation on the one hand and output and employment on the other. The implications for the

direction of monetary policy will depend on the relative magnitudes of the demand, supply and exchange rate

effects. The MPC will take whatever action is needed, following the outcome of the referendum, to ensure that

inflation expectations remain well anchored and inflation returns to the target over the appropriate horizon.

Against that backdrop, at its meeting on 15 June, the MPC voted unanimously to maintain Bank Rate at 0.5%

and to maintain the stock of purchased assets, financed by the issuance of central bank reserves, at

£375 billion.


-----

### Minutes of the Monetary Policy Committee meeting ending on 15 June 2016

1 Before turning to its immediate policy decision, the Committee discussed financial market developments;

the international economy; money, credit, demand and output; and supply, costs and prices.

**Financial markets**

2 Market participants’ assessments of the likelihood of a vote for the United Kingdom to leave the European

Union in the forthcoming referendum had continued to be one of the main influences on financial markets.

Since the Committee’s previous meeting, this had become more apparent in a wider range of sterling assets

and there had also been increasing evidence that uncertainty about the result was having an influence on some

non-sterling asset prices.

3 The strongest effects had continued to be on sterling exchange rates. While the effective exchange rate

had fallen over the period as a whole since the Committee’s previous meeting, this had masked two distinct

periods. Sterling had appreciated by 3% between 13 and 27 May, as market participants had responded to a

number of opinion polls pointing to a ‘remain’ vote. Following the subsequent release of opinion polls

suggesting a lead for a ‘leave’ vote, sterling had depreciated, in some instances sharply. Implied volatilities in

sterling foreign exchange options had risen further over the month, with one-month measures reaching their

highest levels since October 2008. Options prices indicated that the price of protection against the risk of

sterling depreciation compared with the price of protection against an appreciation had risen to its highest level

for over a decade. Taken together with the increasingly strong correlation between the odds of a vote to leave

the EU implied by betting markets and movements in the exchange rate, this evidence reinforced the

Committee’s May Inflation Report judgement that a substantial proportion of sterling’s recent depreciation could

be attributed to the risks around the referendum.

4 The referendum had also affected other sterling asset markets. Recent movements in UK short rates had

been closely correlated with changes in market perceptions of the likelihood of a ‘leave’ vote, a relationship

corroborated by market intelligence. This co-movement was also evident in changes in UK banks’ credit default

swap premia, relative to equivalent measures for banks in the euro area and the United States. The

underperformance – relative to the FTSE All-Share index – of the equities of companies earning their revenues

predominantly in the United Kingdom had persisted. Spreads on sterling investment grade corporate bonds had

not fallen by as much as comparable dollar bonds in recent months.

5 There had also been some evidence of an influence of the EU referendum beyond sterling markets. For

instance, the term structures of implied volatility in some euro bilateral exchange rates and the Euro Stoxx

equity index were elevated at maturities around the referendum. Market contacts had attributed much of the

deterioration in global risk sentiment to increasing uncertainty ahead of the referendum. Long-term interest

rates across the advanced economies had fallen and remained low, with ten-year nominal yields close to or at

historical lows in Germany and the United Kingdom. The Minutes of the April meeting of the Federal Open

**Bank of England Minutes of the Monetary Policy Committee Meeting ending on 15 June 2016** 1


-----

Market Committee (FOMC) had referred to the possible impact on global financial markets of the EU

referendum, as had a number of FOMC members in speeches and other public comments.

6 Overall, the outcome of the referendum on EU membership continued to be the largest immediate risk

facing UK financial markets, and possibly also global financial markets. According to the Bank of America

Merrill Lynch Global Fund Manager Survey, the referendum was considered the biggest tail risk. This was

consistent with the Bank’s own market intelligence.

7 In terms of other influences on financial markets, US non-farm payrolls data released in early June, which

were weaker than expected, had been associated with a fall in short-term interest rates and a rise in equity

markets in both the United States and the United Kingdom. The European Central Bank had begun to purchase

corporate bonds; its earlier announcement of this had appeared to reduce corporate bond spreads. Looking

ahead to the remainder of the year, there were a number of significant events that represented potential sources

of financial market volatility, including the Greek bailout negotiations and elections in Japan, Spain and the

United States.

8 Measures of inflation compensation from financial markets had changed little on the month. But, since

mid-March, five year inflation swap rates five years forward had fallen by around 30 basis points in the United

Kingdom, more than in the euro area or the United States. According to market contacts, it was possible that

the fall in the UK measure reflected diminished inflation hedging by institutional investors in that market, which

could be related in part to low liquidity and concerns about market volatility.

**The international economy**

9 Global growth in UK-weighted terms was now estimated to have been stronger around the turn of the year

than it had been a month ago, although the improvement was small and there appeared to have been little news

on the pattern and strength of underlying momentum. The dollar oil price had risen by around 8% from its level

at the time of the May Inflation Report, with some temporary supply disruptions having been at play in addition

to resilient demand.

10 In the euro area, the most recent estimate of GDP growth in Q1 had affirmed the strong preliminary flash

estimate of 0.6%. This had been boosted by a sharp rise in industrial production in January that had since

unwound, implying a somewhat weaker outlook for growth in Q2. Bank staff had consequently revised down

their Q2 GDP growth nowcast by 0.1 percentage points to 0.3%. Twelve-month HICP inflation had edged up to

-0.1% in May according to the flash estimate, from -0.2% in April, and was broadly in line with expectations. It

was still too early to gauge the impact of the ECB’s stimulatory measures.

11 In the United States, the second estimate of GDP growth in Q1 had been revised up by 0.1 percentage

points to 0.2%. Indicators for Q2, most notably solid growth in real consumption in April, suggested that this

weakness was likely to prove temporary. However, the employment data for May had been weak, with the

**Bank of England Minutes of the Monetary Policy Committee Meeting ending on 15 June 2016** 2


-----

38,000 rise in non-farm payrolls considerably below the consensus expectation of 160,000. Increases in March

and April had been revised down by 59,000. Although the May figure had been depressed by 35,000 as a result

of a strike by workers at Verizon and seasonal factors may have weighed on the estimate, implying a somewhat

less weak underlying picture, financial market investors had pushed back their expectations of the timing of

further policy tightening by the Fed. The labour market participation rate had fallen by 0.2 percentage points,

further unwinding the strengthening in the earlier part of the year and adding to concerns that it might have

weakened structurally. The unemployment rate of 4.7% implied that there was likely to be little slack remaining

in the labour market. Unit labour cost growth had remained above historical average rates.

12 The Japanese government had chosen to postpone its planned rise in the consumption tax, underlining

the authorities’ concerns about the robustness of demand and inflation. Further support from fiscal and/or

monetary policy remained a possibility. In China, growth in total social financing and house price inflation had

both moderated a touch, but remained elevated. Bank staff’s nowcast for Q2 GDP growth in China remained

fairly robust at 1.7%. But the financial risks that were likely to emanate from the expansion in credit supply

associated with the pursuit of the GDP growth target remained a concern.

13 The official data suggested that Chinese rebalancing had continued in 2015, with a sharp acceleration in

services output offsetting a sharp deceleration in manufacturing output. The MPC discussed how the ongoing

rebalancing might affect other economies. It was possible that the rebalancing seen to date would be modest

relative to what was still to come. In particular, there was scope for the share of consumption in GDP to rise

significantly further from the 53% estimated in 2015, a rise of 4 percentage points since 2010. This was likely to

entail falls in both the household saving rate and in the share of investment in GDP. Weaker investment

spending relative to consumption would reduce Chinese import demand, and this was likely to have material

implications for a number of other emerging markets. Slower growth in Chinese import demand might also

directly affect some European countries, such as Germany. Slower, more consumption focused, GDP growth

would also have a material impact on some energy and commodity markets, relative to the demand and supply

patterns of recent years. More broadly, if Chinese savings were to decline by more than domestic investment,

this would reduce the supply of funds to the rest of the world. This could provide some support for global real

interest rates, especially when combined with decreased savings in oil exporters. Thus, even setting aside the

potential volatility that might arise during the rebalancing process, the implications of Chinese economic

developments for the rest of the world were likely to be substantial.

**Money, credit, demand and output**

14 On balance, the news during the month on UK activity earlier in the year had been to the upside,

counterbalanced by evidence on the effects of the forthcoming referendum. Some key business survey

indicators had risen, and April had seen strong retail sales growth and a sizable jump in both industrial

production and construction output.

**Bank of England Minutes of the Monetary Policy Committee Meeting ending on 15 June 2016** 3


-----

15 The Committee discussed the extent to which uncertainty surrounding the United Kingdom’s future

membership of the European Union might be weighing on aggregate demand. Bank staff’s summary measure

of economic uncertainty had risen further, largely driven by increased media references to the referendum. An

international comparison of uncertainty measures showed the United Kingdom to be an outlier. Past evidence

suggested that a general increase in uncertainty led to households deferring consumption and businesses

delaying investment, lowering labour demand and increasing unemployment.

16 Some recent business surveys had contained questions specifically on the effects of the referendum on

recent activity, and a sizable minority of firms had reported discernible impacts. In the latest Markit/CIPS

survey, 35% of firms had reported detrimental effects on business, while a previous survey by the BCC had

found that 20% of firms had seen a negative effect on orders and sales. The size of the effects was unclear,

however. In both of these surveys, less than 10% of firms reported “strongly” negative effects. More generally,

the headline activity readings from the most recent business surveys had been encouraging, and an

international comparison of composite activity indices did not show the United Kingdom as having been

especially weak.

17 Heightened uncertainty was likely to be most detrimental for spending decisions that would be costly to

reverse and therefore contained a high option value of waiting. The Bank’s Agents had reported increased

delays in corporate decision making, a factor that had also been noted in the most recent Deloitte survey of

chief financial officers. The value of corporate real estate transactions in May had been 15% lower than in April

and 29% lower than the monthly average for the first quarter, itself down 50% on the same period in 2015. The

value of IPO and M&A activity had also weakened in the first half of this year compared with the same period in

2015. Although the weakness in M&A activity in Q1 might have been part of a global phenomenon, the more

recent weakness appeared to have been more UK-specific. On the official data, business investment had been

surprisingly weak for two consecutive quarters around the turn of the year, although these declines had largely

pre-dated the announcement of the referendum date in February, and more recent surveys of investment

intentions had, if anything, appeared to have stabilised.

18 Housing transactions had dropped sharply in April, although this had largely been expected as the surge

in activity ahead of the changes to the stamp duty regime unwound. The recent RICS surveys had been very

weak, however, with reports of significant declines in both new buyer enquiries and new instructions to sell

being more consistent with an underlying softening in the housing market. It was likely that the uncertainty

associated with the referendum had had some impact, although a range of factors, including some other recent

policy changes, were also likely to have contributed.

19 Other indicators of consumer demand had been mixed. Vehicle registrations had fallen in May, both on

the month and in the three months to May relative to the previous three months, which could be evidence of an

uncertainty effect. However, consumer confidence had been little changed in May. The balance relating to

major purchases had risen, remaining above its historical average, while perceptions of the general economic

situation had deteriorated. Retail sales had grown by a surprisingly strong 1.3% in April. Overall, it appeared

**Bank of England Minutes of the Monetary Policy Committee Meeting ending on 15 June 2016** 4


-----

that, although referendum-related uncertainty was having a clear detrimental impact in certain areas of activity,

its quantitative importance for GDP remained difficult to gauge.

**Supply, costs and prices**

20 Twelve-month CPI inflation had been unchanged at 0.3% in May. Sterling oil prices had increased by

10% since the time of the May Inflation Report, which in the near term implied a greater contribution to CPI

inflation from petrol prices. Offsetting that, however, intelligence from the Bank’s Agents suggested that the

prices of food and used vehicles were likely to grow somewhat less quickly than previously assumed. The net

result of these factors was to leave the most likely path of CPI inflation over the next six months broadly

unchanged from that described in the May Inflation Report – increasing to a little below 1% by the autumn as

the drags from past declines in energy, food and some other goods’ prices began to fade from the twelve-month

calculation.

21 By contrast, measures of core inflation were expected to increase much more gradually over the rest of

the year. The inflation rate of CPI excluding energy, food and tobacco had been 1.2% in the twelve months to

May, and Bank staff estimated that it would probably increase by only a tenth of a percentage point or so by the

end of the summer. A composite estimate of core inflation derived from a range of measures had been 1.0% in

May, having been at or around that level for most of the previous year.

22 During the month, the Labour Force Survey dataset had been revised to incorporate the latest official

population estimates. These revisions had been anticipated and already incorporated into the May Inflation

_Report projections and so contained little additional news. The latest figures – for March and April – had also_

contained few surprises. In the three months to April, unemployment had fallen slightly faster than expected to

5.0%, but employment growth, of 55,000, was materially slower than in the last quarter of 2015. Average hours

worked had been a little stronger than expected, although these data were relatively volatile at the monthly

frequency, with changes typically dominated by short-term movement in working patterns. The figures that LFS

respondents reported as their usual working hours had been roughly stable for six months.

23 As anticipated, bonus payments had bounced back in March, following a weak February – especially in

the financial sector. The recovery in bonus payments in March and April had nevertheless been greater than

expected so that the annual growth of total average weekly earnings – at 2.0% in the three months to April –

had been stronger than expected. Excluding bonus payments, pay growth had been only a touch stronger than

assumed, at 2.3% in the three months to April by comparison with a year earlier. In the private sector, annual

regular pay growth had been 2.4% in the three months to April, consistent with the May Inflation Report

projections.

24 Taken as a whole, survey indicators of capacity pressures within firms had remained above their historical

averages, but the spread of those indicators remained unusually wide, making it difficult to take a clear signal.

Information from the Bank’s Agents had suggested that recruitment difficulties remained greater than usual, but

**Bank of England Minutes of the Monetary Policy Committee Meeting ending on 15 June 2016** 5


-----

that the proportion of firms reporting severe recruitment difficulties had roughly halved since the third quarter of

2015. Primarily, this was reported to reflect firms’ less aggressive recruitment intentions. But there had also

been reports from the Agents’ contacts that recent staff training and process redesign within firms had reduced

skills shortages somewhat.

25 The Bank/TNS survey measures of inflation expectations one and two years ahead had increased a little

in May by comparison with the previous survey in February. In contrast to measures of longer-term inflation

expectations derived from financial market prices, the Bank/TNS measure of expectations five years ahead had

increased sharply, by 0.5 percentage points, to a little above its historical average. The Citigroup measure of

expectations five-to-ten years ahead, however, had remained subdued.

**The immediate policy decision**

26 The Committee set monetary policy to meet the 2% inflation target, and in a way that helped sustain

growth and employment. Twelve-month CPI inflation had remained well below the target in May, at 0.3%. The

shortfall relative to the target continued predominantly to reflect unusually large drags from energy and food

prices. Core inflation had also remained subdued as a consequence of weak global price pressures, past

movements in sterling and restrained domestic cost growth. Looking ahead, the anticipated pickup in inflation

depended on both a lessening drag from external factors and an increase in domestic cost growth.

27 On balance, the news since the May Inflation Report had done little to change the MPC’s assessment of

the economic outlook at home and abroad or the main risks to that outlook. Domestically, productivity growth

had remained weak. Inflation had remained below the target. There were good reasons to expect that the

growth of domestic costs, and wages in particular, would continue to recover; but they had not yet done so to

rates that would be consistent with meeting the inflation target in the medium term. Internationally, a modest

pace of growth in the United Kingdom’s main trading partners remained the most likely prospect.

28 Although these underlying factors remained central to the outlook, the main focus of the Committee’s

policy discussion this month concerned the difficulty in identifying the underlying momentum in the domestic

economy, amidst the influence on activity of uncertainty related to the EU referendum. Measures of uncertainty

had increased further over the past month, with the UK a clear outlier internationally. And there had been

growing evidence that uncertainty about the outcome of the referendum was leading to delays to major

economic decisions that were costly or difficult to reverse. In the corporate sector, this included a sharp decline

in the value of commercial real estate transactions and M&A, and reports of delayed business investment.

Evidence from the Bank’s Agents had suggested increased delays in corporate decision making, which was

corroborated by a Deloitte survey of chief financial officers. Survey information from Markit/CIPS and the BCC

showed that for a material proportion of responding firms the referendum was having a detrimental effect on

business activity, sometimes significantly so. Regarding households, both car purchases and residential

**Bank of England Minutes of the Monetary Policy Committee Meeting ending on 15 June 2016** 6


-----

housing activity had declined, although it was difficult to isolate the extent to which these effects related to the

referendum or a more general underlying slowing.

29 By contrast, some UK activity data had remained resilient, particularly regarding other consumer

spending. Retail sales growth had been stronger than expected in April. And consumer confidence indicators

had, as a whole, remained healthy. Industrial production had surprised to the upside in April, although some of

that movement was likely to prove erratic. A number of business activity surveys had ticked up in May.

30 As the Committee had previously noted, potential referendum effects were making economic data

releases more difficult to interpret, and the Committee was being more cautious in drawing inferences from

them than would normally be the case.

31 It was clear that the EU referendum was having an influence on financial markets, with evidence that

changes in the likelihood of a ‘leave’ vote was having an increasingly widespread impact on asset prices.

Uncertainty about the result of the referendum had continued to have a strong effect on sterling exchange rates,

with some sharp movements in sterling during the month following the release of opinion polls. In addition, UK

short-term interest rates and measures of UK bank funding costs appeared to have been materially influenced

by opinion polls about the referendum. These effects had also become evident in non-sterling assets: market

contacts had attributed much of the deterioration in global risk sentiment to increasing uncertainty ahead of the

referendum. The outcome of the referendum continued to be the largest immediate risk facing UK financial

markets, and possibly also global financial markets.

32 A vote to leave the European Union could materially affect the outlook for output and inflation. In the face

of greater uncertainty about the UK’s trading arrangements, sterling was likely to depreciate further, perhaps

sharply. The behaviour of sterling in response to opinion polls over the past month made this seem increasingly

probable. Past evidence suggested that a general increase in uncertainty led to households deferring

consumption and businesses delaying investment, lowering labour demand and increasing unemployment.

Asset prices might fall, leading to tighter financial conditions with further deleterious effects on consumption and

investment. Through financial market and confidence channels, there were also risks of adverse spill-overs to

the global economy. Slower capital accumulation and the need to reallocate resources across the economy in

response to changing trading and investment patterns would be likely to reduce potential supply over the

forecast period.

33 Taken together, the combination of movements in demand, supply and the exchange rate could lead to a

materially lower path for growth and a notably higher path for inflation than in the projections set out in the May

_Inflation Report. In those circumstances, the MPC would face a trade-off between stabilising inflation on the_

one hand and output and employment on the other. The implications for the direction of monetary policy would

depend on the relative magnitudes of the demand, supply and exchange rate effects. The MPC would take

whatever action was needed, following the outcome of the referendum, to ensure that inflation expectations

remained well anchored and inflation returned to the target over the appropriate horizon.

**Bank of England Minutes of the Monetary Policy Committee Meeting ending on 15 June 2016** 7


-----

34 Taking into consideration all of the recent developments, all Committee members judged it appropriate to

maintain the current stance of policy at this meeting.

35 The MPC’s projections in the May Inflation Report were conditioned on continued UK membership of the

EU. On that assumption, the MPC judged it more likely than not that Bank Rate would need to be higher at the

end of that period than at present in order to return inflation to the target in a sustainable manner. All members

agreed that, given the likely persistence of the headwinds weighing on the economy, when Bank Rate did begin

to rise, it was expected to do so more gradually and to a lower level than in recent cycles. Such guidance,

however, was an expectation and not a promise: the path that Bank Rate would actually follow over the next few

years would depend on economic circumstances.

36 The Governor invited the Committee to vote on the propositions that:

Bank Rate should be maintained at 0.5%;

The Bank of England should maintain the stock of purchased assets financed by the issuance of central bank

reserves at £375 billion.

Regarding Bank Rate, the Committee voted unanimously in favour of the proposition.

Regarding the stock of purchased assets, the Committee voted unanimously in favour of the proposition.

37 During the course of its meeting, the MPC was briefed on the Bank’s contingency planning for the

referendum. The issues discussed included:

- the more intensive supervision by the Prudential Regulation Authority of major financial institutions to

ensure they had sufficient liquidity, including in foreign currencies;

- the Bank’s sterling liquidity facilities, including the additional Indexed Long-Term Repo (ILTR) operations,

announced by the Bank on 7 March for the weeks around the EU referendum. These and other facilities

meant the Bank was well placed to address liquidity needs and support the functioning of financial markets;

- the access of many banks with foreign operations to liquidity facilities of foreign central banks;

- the Bank’s continuing weekly dollar repo operations and its maintenance of swap lines with other central

banks; and

- a number of financial stability measures available to the Financial Policy Committee.

**Bank of England Minutes of the Monetary Policy Committee Meeting ending on 15 June 2016** 8


-----

38 The following members of the Committee were present:

Mark Carney, Governor
Ben Broadbent, Deputy Governor responsible for monetary policy
Jon Cunliffe, Deputy Governor responsible for financial stability
Nemat Shafik, Deputy Governor responsible for markets and banking
Kristin Forbes
Andrew Haldane
Ian McCafferty
Gertjan Vlieghe
Martin Weale

Dave Ramsden was present as the Treasury representative.

As permitted under the Bank of England Act 1998, as amended by the Financial Services Act 2012, Don Robert

was also present on 13 June as an observer in his role as a member of the Oversight Committee of Court.

**Bank of England Minutes of the Monetary Policy Committee Meeting ending on 15 June 2016** 9


-----

