HIGHLIGHTS OF THE MEETING OF THE MONETARY BOARD ON THE

MONETARY POLICY STANCE HELD ON 24 MARCH 2022 [1]


I. Monetary Policy Decision

The Monetary Board decided to:

a) Keep the overnight RRP (borrowing) rate unchanged at 2.00
percent; and

b) Maintain the accommodative levels of overnight deposit and
overnight lending rates at 1.50 percent and 2.50 percent,
respectively.

II. Key Considerations in the Formulation of the Monetary Policy Stance

  - The decision of the Monetary Board was based on its assessment that
inflation could settle above the government’s target range in 2022,
reflecting the impact of higher global commodity prices. At the same time,
the latest baseline forecasts show inflation returning to within the target
range of 2-4 percent over the policy horizon as supply-side influences
subside. Meanwhile, inflation expectations continue to be anchored within
the inflation target band.

  - In assessing the monetary policy stance, the Monetary Board also noted
that while upside risks to inflation have increased for 2022, the balance of
risks to the outlook remain broadly balanced for 2023. Upside risks over the
near term continue to emanate from the shortage in domestic pork and
fish supply as well as from the potential impact of higher oil prices on
transport fares. Meanwhile, downside risks are linked mainly to the
lingering threat of COVID-19 infections, as the emergence of new variants
could temper the global economic recovery and prompt the reimposition
of domestic containment measures.

  - Meanwhile, the Monetary Board further observed that domestic economic
activity has gained stronger traction with the easing of remaining mobility

1 The discussions herein reflect the assessment made by the Monetary Board based on a
comprehensive set of macroeconomic and financial information available at the time of the
policy meeting. The next meeting of the Monetary Board on the monetary policy stance is
scheduled on 19 May 2022


-----

restrictions. However, heightened geopolitical tensions and a resurgence
in COVID-19 infections in some countries have also clouded the outlook for
global economic growth. Supply-chain disruptions could also contribute
to inflationary pressures, and thus warrant closer monitoring to enable
timely intervention in order to arrest potential second-round effects.

  - On balance, the Monetary Board sees scope to maintain the BSP’s
monetary policy settings in order to safeguard the momentum of
economic recovery amid increased uncertainty, even as it continues to
develop its plans for the gradual normalization of its extraordinary liquidity
measures. Given the potential broadening of price pressures over the near
term, the BSP stands ready to respond to the buildup in inflation pressures
that can disanchor inflation expectations, in keeping with its price and
financial stability objectives.

III. Recent Developments and Inflation Outlook

The Monetary Board considered the recent macroeconomic and financial
developments listed below in deciding the appropriate monetary policy
stance:

A. Domestic price conditions

  - Headline inflation in February 2022 was steady at 3.0 percent as

improvements in domestic supply conditions tempered significant
price gains from higher petroleum prices. Food inflation decelerated due
to lower inflation for meat as well as fish and seafood. Meanwhile, non-food
inflation continued to rise given the surge in global oil prices from the
Russia-Ukraine conflict. This is shown in the higher inflation for energyrelated CPI items such as, transport and utilities. The upward adjustment
in gasoline and diesel prices boosted transport inflation while higher LPG
and kerosene prices along with increase in electricity rates also led to
double-digit inflation for electricity, gas, and other fuels.

B.  Inflation expectations

  - Inflation expectations are higher but remained anchored to the target over
the policy horizon. Private sector economists expect inflation to average at
3.8 percent for 2022 from 3.5 percent in the previous month’s survey round.
Meanwhile, the mean inflation forecasts stood at 3.3 percent (from
3.1 percent) for 2023 and 3.2 percent (from 2.9 percent) for 2024.

C.  Inflation outlook


-----

  - The latest baseline forecasts indicate that inflation could settle above

the government’s target range of 3.0 percent ± 1.0 ppt at 4.3 percent for
2022 to fall within the target range at 3.6 percent for 2023. The
projections are higher compared to the previous forecast run due to the
higher assumptions for global crude oil and non-oil prices as well as the
depreciation of the peso. These reflect the impact of the Russia-Ukraine
conflict on commodities and financial markets. The higher contribution of
supply-side factors to the inflation outlook was partly offset by the slower
GDP growth outlook for 2022.

Baseline Inflation Forecasts

14 February 2022 24 March 2022

MB Meeting MB Meeting
(2018-based) (2018-based)

2022 3.7 4.3

2023 3.3 3.6

  - The risks to the inflation outlook appear to continue to be tilted to the
upside for 2022 but are seen as broadly balanced for 2023. The potential
impact of higher global non-oil prices, the continued shortage in domestic
pork supply, higher fish prices and possible jeepney fare hikes due to
higher oil prices are the major upside risks over the near term. Meanwhile,
the prospects of a weaker-than-expected global recovery as well as the
possible reimposition of quarantine measures domestically due to spread
of new COVID-19 variants are the main sources of downside risks.

D. Demand conditions

  - Over the near term, economic recovery appears likely to continue to gain

traction. The latest nowcast estimate for Q1 2022 is higher compared to the
previous round due mainly to the earlier shift to Alert Level 1 in NCR and
other surrounding provinces. The easing of restrictions is expected to
support manufacturing activities as well as raise demand for tourismrelated activities as well as other contact-intensive services, which suffered
greatly during the pandemic. The negative impact of the Russian-Ukraine
conflict on economic activity is not yet fully realized during the quarter but
could become more apparent in subsequent periods.

On a full year basis, latest output growth forecast for 2022 is lower
compared to the previous forecast. The downward adjustment in 2022
growth forecast is due largely to the impact of slower global growth amid
the tightening of global monetary policy in advance economies, the

|Baseline Inflation Forecasts|Col2|Col3|
|---|---|---|
||14 February 2022 MB Meeting (2018-based)|24 March 2022 MB Meeting (2018-based)|
|2022|3.7|4.3|
|2023|3.3|3.6|


-----

resurgence of COVID-19 cases in several Asian economies, and the indirect
economic impact of Russia’s invasion of Ukraine.

  - Mobility indicators have trended upward in February and early March 2022
with the shift to less stringent alert levels as new COVID-19 infections fell
after the surge in January 2022. Using the 7-day moving average, visits
across location categories increased following the shift to Alert Level 2
nationwide on 27 February 2022 and further to Alert Level 1 on 1 March 2022
for select areas in the Philippines. The relaxation of protocols involved the
lifting of restriction on indoor and outdoor capacity for businesses as well
as interzonal and intrazonal travel without regard to age or comorbidity.
Consequently, mobility index in households declined with the rise in
mobility for other location categories.

Changes in mobility coincided with the signs of improvement in
purchasing manager’s index (PMI) in February 2022 amid the
implementation of Alert Level 2 nationwide. Most sectors registered above
50-point expansion threshold for the month due to strengthening of
domestic demand along with increase in new orders and output.

  - Labor market conditions in January 2022 indicate better-than-expected
outcomes despite the more restrictive shift to Alert Level 3 in Metro Manila
and nearby regions following the rapid increase of the more transmissible
Omicron variant infections. Employment rate rose to 93.6 percent while
unemployment rate edged down to 6.4 percent. While the January 2022
unemployment rate is still above the pre-pandemic records, the outturns
during the survey under review is an improvement vis-à-vis the previous
survey rounds in December 2021 and January 2021.

E.  Supply-side indicators

Developments in Agriculture

  - Nationwide average rice prices increased in February 2022. Nonetheless,
domestic retail rice prices remained generally steady, supported by
sustained import arrivals, and improved local harvest amid the ongoing
planting season.

  - Meanwhile, the National Government has also rolled-out targeted
measures to help stabilize domestic supply of agricultural commodities
amid disruptions brought about by the pandemic, natural calamities, and
animal diseases. The interventions implemented also aim to mitigate the
potential impact of the recent crisis between commodity exporters


-----

Ukraine-Russia, which will likely cause disruption in the global commodity
supply chain and therefore may affect prices of agricultural commodities.

  - On weather conditions, prevailing La Niña conditions will likely persist

through the Northern Hemisphere summer (June-July-August 2022), with
a 40 to 50 percent chance of La Niña to continue or transition to
ENSO-neutral thereafter.

Oil Price Developments

  - Oil prices surged in early March 2022 as geopolitical conflict in Eastern
Europe intensified with imposition of Western sanctions on Russia. After
reaching over US$130 per barrel on 8 March, oil prices retreated following
reports of ceasefire talks and COVID-related lockdown in China. The
futures price curve remained in backwardation, broadly reflecting
forecasts that supply would exceed demand for most of 2022 and 2023.
Nevertheless, the significant jump in global oil prices has spilled over to
domestic fuel prices, with diesel being the most affected due to the
products’ exposure to Russia.

Developments in the Utilities Sector

  - The overall electricity rate increased slightly due mainly to higher
generation charge. The upward adjustment in the generation cost was on
the back of higher costs from Wholesale Electricity Spot Market (WESM)
along with the increases of charges from the Independent Power
Producers (IPPs) and Power Supply Agreements (PSAs). IPP charges also
rose mainly due to the lower dispatch of Quezon Power and First Gas-San
Lorenzo plants as well as the depreciation of the peso against the US dollar.
Similarly, charges from PSAs increased as the dispatch of First NatGas-San
Gabriel plant continued to be affected by Malampaya facility’s inability to
supply sufficient natural gas. Lower excess energy deliveries also
contributed to the increase in PSA costs.

F. Financial market developments

  - The peso depreciated against the US dollar for the period 1-15 March 2022,

on negative market sentiment amid (i) rising oil prices following the
worsening Russia-Ukraine conflict; (ii) hawkish signals from the US Federal
Reserve regarding its planned rate hike this month; and (iii) reports of
record-high outstanding national debt of P12.0 trillion as of end-January
2022.


-----

  - The Philippine banking system (PBS) sustained its asset expansion,
particularly its lending and investment portfolios as of end-January 2022.
Loan quality improved following steady growth in lending. And doubledigit growth in net profit was sustained by hefty increase in income from
fees and commission, foreign exchange, and profit from
sale/derecognition of non-financial assets. Moreover, risk-based capital
adequacy ratio (CAR) and Basel III leverage ratio of Philippine banks as well
as liquidity coverage ratio (LCR) and net stable funding ratio (NSFR)
remained well-above the BSP’s thresholds.

Meanwhile, the BSP extended the effectivity of some prudential relief
measures until end of 2022 [2]. The extension of prudential reliefs intends to
sustain the momentum of bank lending as well as minimize long term
economic scarring brought about by the COVID-19 pandemic.

G. Domestic liquidity and credit conditions

  - Liquidity in the financial system continues to be ample. Preliminary data
show that domestic liquidity (M3) grew by 9.8 percent year-on-year to
about ₱15.3 trillion in January 2022 following a 7.3-percent (revised)
expansion in December 2021.

  - Credit activity continued to exhibit signs of recovery in recent months,
reflecting the improvement in business activity amid easing quarantine
restrictions and further progress in terms of vaccination. Preliminary data
show that outstanding loans of universal and commercial banks (U/KBs),
net of reverse repurchase (RRP) placements with the BSP, expanded anew
for the sixth consecutive month at a quicker pace of 8.5 percent year-onyear in January from 4.8 percent (revised) in December 2021.

H.  Fiscal developments

  - The National Government (NG) full year budget deficit for 2021 reached
P1,670.1 billion which is twenty-two percent higher than recorded in 2021.
Netting out the interest payments in NG expenditures, the primary deficit
amounted to P1,240.7 billion, twenty-five percent higher than the amount
recorded in 2021.

I.  External developments

2 Memorandum No. M-2022-004 dated 17 January 2022 on extension of BSP prudential and operational relief
measures


-----

- Global economic activity expands faster in February 2022 due to eased
quarantine restrictions amid declining COVID-19 cases and improving
vaccination rates. However, inflationary pressures stemming from
protracted supply disruptions weigh on overall economic growth and
consumer confidence. The JP Morgan All-Industry Output Index rose to
53.4 in February 2022 from 51.1 in the previous month as output, new
business, and employment improved. The imposition of more relaxed
quarantine measures supported broad-based demand recovery, with
economic output in the UK, Ireland, euro area, and the US growing faster
despite persistent inflationary pressures and prolonged supply chain
disruptions. Meanwhile, economic activity in Japan contracted as rising
input prices and stagnating demand weighed on business activities in the
manufacturing and service sectors.

- Several major central banks such as Bank of Canada, the US Federal
Reserve, and Bank of England (BOE) have recently raised their policy rates
in response to rising inflationary pressures amid strong economic activity.
Meanwhile, the European Central Bank (ECB) as well as the Reserve Bank
of Australia, Bank Negara Malaysia, Central Bank of the Republic of China
(Taiwan), and Bank Indonesia maintained their key policy rates during their
most recent policy meetings as monetary authorities deemed it necessary
to continue supporting the ongoing economic recovery despite rising
inflationary pressures.


-----

