a) Raise the BSP’s current policy interest rate by 25 basis points to


**_HIGHLIGHTS OF THE MEETING OF THE MONETARY BOARD ON THE_**

**_MONETARY POLICY STANCE HELD ON 19 MAY 2022 [1]_**

**I.** **Monetary Policy Decision**

The Monetary Board decided to:

a) Raise the BSP’s current policy interest rate by 25 basis points to

2.25 percent for the overnight RRP rate;

b) Increase the current interest rates on the overnight deposit facility

(ODF) to 1.75 percent and overnight lending facility (OLF) to 2.75
percent; and

c) Announce the winding down of the provisional advances to the

National Government and the reconfiguration of the BSP’s
government securities purchasing window from a crisis intervention
measure into a regular liquidity facility under the interest rate
corridor framework.

**II.** **Key Considerations in the Formulation of the Monetary Policy Stance**

       - The decision of the Monetary Board was based on its assessment that the

latest baseline forecasts have further shifted higher since the previous
monetary policy meeting in March, indicating that elevated inflation
pressures could persist over the policy horizon. Average inflation is likely to
breach the upper end of the 2-4 percent target range in 2022 at 4.6
percent, while the forecast for 2023 has edged closer to the upper end of
the target band at 3.9 percent.

       - In assessing the monetary policy stance, the Monetary Board also noted

that the balance of risks to the inflation outlook now leans toward the
upside for both 2022 and 2023. The upside risks over the near term may be
attributed to the potential impact of higher global non-oil prices, transport
fare hikes, as well as the continued shortage in domestic pork and fish
supply. Meanwhile, the downside risks continue to emanate mainly from
the potential impact of a weaker-than-expected global economic recovery
and reimposition of local quarantine measures due to the possible
resurgence of COVID-19 cases.

1 The discussions herein reflect the assessment made by the Monetary Board based on a

comprehensive set of macroeconomic and financial information available at the time of the
policy meeting. The next meeting of the Monetary Board on the monetary policy stance is


-----

  - Furthermore, the Monetary Board recognized the emergence of second
round effects, particularly higher inflation expectations for 2022-2024 and
the recent wage hike developments in some regions.

  - On balance, the Monetary Board was of the view that persistent

inflationary pressures point to the need for prompt monetary action to
anchor inflation expectations. The Monetary Board believed that a timely
increase in the BSP’s policy interest rate will help arrest further secondround effects and temper the buildup in inflation expectations. The
Monetary Board likewise reiterated its support for the sustained
implementation of non-monetary interventions to mitigate the impact of
persistent supply-side factors on inflation, particularly food supply and
prices.

  - As the economic recovery continues to gain traction, the BSP shall proceed

with the gradual withdrawal of its extraordinary liquidity interventions and
the normalization of its monetary policy settings. Alongside the
adjustment in the policy rate, the Monetary Board also decided to
announce the gradual withdrawal of the extraordinary measures
implemented since the height of the COVID-19 pandemic, consistent with
the BSP’s exit strategy from monetary accommodation. These include the
reconfiguration of the BSP’s government securities (GS) purchasing
window to a regular liquidity facility under the Interest Rate Corridor
framework and the winding down of the BSP’s provisional advances to the
National Government (NG) as the NG fully pays the advances ahead of the
maturity schedule on 11 June 2022.

  - Looking ahead, the Monetary Board emphasized that the pace and timing

of further monetary policy actions by the BSP shall be guided by data
outcomes, in keeping with the BSP’s price and financial stability objectives.

**III.** **Recent Developments and Inflation Outlook**

The Monetary Board considered the recent macroeconomic and financial

developments listed below in deciding the appropriate monetary policy
stance:

**A. Domestic price conditions**

  - Headline inflation rose sharply to 4.9 percent year-on-year in April 2022

from 4.0 percent in March 2022 and 4.1 percent in April 2021. Inflation
pressures continued to be driven by higher price increases of food and
energy-related CPI items. Inflation for food and non-alcoholic beverages
rose to 3.8 percent in April 2022 from 2.6 percent in the previous month.
Under food items, heavily weighted CPI items namely, vegetables, meat,
and fish were the main drivers of higher food inflation in April. Meat
inflation was driven mostly by poultry products amid supply bottlenecks
from transport restrictions implemented by local governments with the
Avian flu discovery. Meanwhile, transport inflation remained at double

-----

digit rates amid higher international crude oil prices. Consequently,
inflation for utilities particularly, electricity and gas also went up.

**B.  Inflation expectations**

  - Inflation expectations are higher but remained anchored to the target over

the policy horizon. Private sector economists expect inflation to average at
4.6 percent for 2022 from 4.1 percent in the previous month’s survey round.
Similarly, the mean inflation forecasts for 2023 increased to 3.6 percent
(from 3.4 percent) and to 3.4 percent (from 3.3 percent) for 2024.

**C.  Inflation outlook**

  - The latest baseline forecasts indicate that inflation could settle above the

government’s target range of 3.0 percent ± 1.0 ppt at 4.6 percent for 2022
and decelerate to within the target range at 3.9 percent for 2023. The
projections are higher compared to the previous forecast run due to the
higher-than-expected inflation outturns in March and April 2022, the
higher assumption for global non-oil prices, faster GDP growth outlook,
and the depreciation of the peso. The actual NCR wage adjustment of 6.1
percent (₱33 per day), which was higher than the originally assumed wage
adjustment, was also incorporated in the baseline inflation forecasts.

**Baseline Inflation Forecasts**

**24 March 2022** **19 May 2022**

**MB Meeting** **MB Meeting**

2022 4.3 4.6

2023 3.6 3.9

  - The risks to the inflation outlook are tilted to the upside for 2022 and

2023. The potential impact of higher global non-oil prices, the continued
shortage in domestic pork supply, higher fish prices and possible jeepney
fare hikes due to higher oil prices are the major upside risks over the near
term. Meanwhile, the potential impact of a weaker-than-expected global
recovery as well as the reimposition of local quarantine measures due to
the resurgence of COVID-19 cases are the main sources of downside risks.

**D. Demand conditions**

  - Over the near term, economic recovery is seen to continue to gain traction,

with the latest GDP growth forecast showing a return to pre-pandemic
level earlier than previously projected. Domestic growth is seen to remain
robust in the succeeding quarters in view of the implementation of the
Corporate Recovery and Tax Incentives for Enterprises (CREATE) Law and
Financial Institutions Strategic Transfer (FIST) Act, and looser mobility
restrictions amid continued widespread deployment of COVID-19 vaccines
and booster shots. The eventual re-opening of the global economy as
restrictions ease, vaccination rates increase, and labor market conditions
improve is seen to bolster domestic recovery through increased exports
and remittances.

|Baseline Inflation Forecasts|Col2|Col3|
|---|---|---|
||24 March 2022 MB Meeting|19 May 2022 MB Meeting|
|2022|4.3|4.6|
|2023|3.6|3.9|


-----

  - The latest output growth forecast for 2022 is higher compared to the

previous estimates due mainly to the higher-than-expected GDP outturn
in Q1 2022, and the impact of looser community quarantine restrictions
across the country and election-related spending on domestic demand.

  - Output gap is now expected to have closed in Q1 2022 and remain broadly

neutral during the year as economic recovery continues to gain traction.
Potential output is expected to increase with the country’s productive
capacity growing at pace with actual output amid the continued
resumption of economic activities, gradual improvements in employment
conditions and external demand, as well as negative interest rates.

  - Mobility indicators continued to pick up in April 2022 with the shift to the

least stringent alert level as new COVID-19 infections fell after the surge in
early 2022. Using the 7-day moving average, visits across most location
categories increased and has now reverted to pre-pandemic levels.

Changes in mobility coincided with the signs of improvement in the
purchasing manager’s index (PMI) in March 2022 amid the

implementation of more relaxed quarantine measures nationwide. All
sectors registered above 50-point expansion threshold supported mainly
by the relaxation of mobility restrictions and renewed demand.

  - Employment conditions in March 2022 suggest sustained improvement

which may be attributed to easing mobility restrictions and rebound of
economic activity. Employment rate rose to 94.2 percent while
unemployment rate declined to 5.8 percent. The employment outcome in
March 2022 is also greater than the level posted during the pre-pandemic
period by 10.4 percent or about 4.43 million employment gains.

  - The Department of Labor and Employment (DOLE) announced on 14 May

2022 that the Regional Tripartite Wage and Productivity Boards (RTWPBs)
raised the daily minimum wage of non-agricultural workers in NCR by
₱33.00 to ₱570.00. The minimum wage for NCR remained unchanged since
November 2018.

Likewise, the RTWPB for Region VI (Western Visayas) has approved a ₱55
and ₱110 increase in basic pay for the region’s non-agriculture, industrial,
and commercial establishments employing more than 10 workers and
those employing 10 or less workers, respectively. This will bring the new
minimum wages in the region to ₱450 for establishments with more than
10 workers and ₱420 for establishments with 10 or less workers. Meanwhile,
agriculture workers have been granted a ₱95 increase in basic pay which
brings the new minimum wage to ₱410 for the sector.

**E.  Supply-side indicators**

Developments in Agriculture


-----

  - Nationwide average rice prices increased in April 2022. Despite the

ongoing summer harvest, rice prices have increased slightly, along with
other key food items such as meat, fish, and vegetables, partly due to
higher global commodity prices, as a consequence of the conflict in
Eastern Europe and persistent global supply chain disruptions.

  - To address the potential impact of supply-side pressures on domestic food

prices, the NG has rolled-out targeted measures to help stabilize domestic
supply of agricultural commodities amid disruptions brought about by the
pandemic, natural calamities, and animal diseases. The interventions
implemented also aim to mitigate the potential impact of the recent crisis
between commodity exporters Ukraine-Russia, which will likely cause
disruption in the global commodity supply chain and therefore may affect
prices of agricultural commodities.

Oil Price Developments

  - Dubai crude oil prices eased in April 2022 relative to the month-ago level,

albeit still over US$100 per barrel given continuing geopolitical conflict in
Eastern Europe, declaration of force majeure on oilfields in Libya, and
weather-related disruptions in Kazakhstan. The uptrend was

counterbalanced by concerns over weaker demand prospects amid
China’s stringent lockdown measures to stem the surge of COVID-19 cases.
Moreover, the significant oil stock release announced by the International
Energy Agency (IEA) and the US has also exerted downward pressure on
oil prices. However, oil prices started rising anew in early May 2022 due to
worries over potentially tighter supply as the European Union considered
imposing sanctions on Russian crude oil.

  - Reflecting the uptrend in international oil prices, domestic fuel prices also

increased, which prompted transport groups to file petitions for a fare hike.
According to the Land Transportation Franchising and Regulatory Board
(LTFRB), several transport groups (from public utility bus (PUB) to jeepneys
(PUJs)) across the country have submitted petitions requesting to raise the
base fare by a range of 20-67 percent. Aside from LTFRB, BSP regional
offices also indicated that regional transport groups were requesting for
an increase in PUJ fare.

**F. Financial market developments**

  - The peso appreciated against the US dollar in April 2022 from month-ago

level amid positive domestic developments, including (i) the reversal of the
country’s balance of payments position to a surplus in March 2022; (ii) the
affirmation of the Philippines’ investment grade credit rating by the Rating
and Investment Information, Inc. (R&I) and stable outlook for the Philippine
banking system by Moody’s; (iii) the upward revision on the country’s GDP
forecast for 2022 by the International Monetary Fund (IMF); (iv) the
statement from the BSP that it is prepared to take pre-emptive action as
needed if inflation expectations become at risk or de-anchored; and (v) the
narrowing of the government’s fiscal gap in March 2022 Adding support


-----

to the peso was the expectation of weaker fuel demand due to the
lockdown in Shanghai, China caused by a surge in coronavirus cases.

For the week ending 17 May 2022, the peso was relatively steady against
the US dollar. The peso was partly buoyed up by positive sentiment
following the release of strong domestic data on foreign direct
investments for February 2022, overseas Filipino remittances for March
2022, and GDP growth for Q1 2022. However, this was tempered by investor
concerns that the US Fed will maintain its aggressive path of interest rate
increases to address elevated inflation.

**G. Domestic liquidity and credit conditions**

  - Liquidity in the financial system continued to be ample. Preliminary data

show that domestic liquidity (M3) grew by 7.6 percent year-on-year to
about ₱15.2 trillion in March 2022, albeit slower than the 8.5-percent
(revised) expansion in February 2022. The expansion was driven mostly by
higher domestic claims in March. Domestic claims rose by 7.3 percent
year-on-year in March from 8.8 percent in the previous month due to the
improvement in bank lending to the private sector and expansion in net
claims on the central government.

  - Credit activity continued to show signs of recovery, reflecting the

improvement in business activity amid more relaxed quarantine
restrictions. Preliminary data show that outstanding loans of universal and
commercial banks (U/KBs), net of reverse repurchase (RRP) placements
with the BSP, expanded anew for the eighth consecutive month at a
quicker pace of 8.9 percent year-on-year in March 2022 from 8.8 percent
(revised) in February 2022.

**H.  Fiscal developments**

  - The Q1 2022 budget deficit of the NG reached ₱316.8 billion which is 1.4

percent higher than the level recorded in 2021. Netting out the interest
payments in NG expenditures, the primary deficit amounted to ₱167.5
billion, higher by about 14 percent relative to the amount recorded in 2021.

  - The baseline inflation forecasts are consistent with the NG’s fiscal deficit

assumption of 7.7 percent for 2022 and 6.1 percent for 2023, based on the
medium-term macroeconomic assumptions of the Development Budget
Coordination Committee (DBCC) as of 14 December 2021.

**I.  External developments**

  - The IMF downgraded its full-year global economic growth forecasts for

2022 and 2023, based on the April 2022 World Economic Outlook report.
The ongoing war in Ukraine and the sanctions imposed on Russia are
expected to dampen global economic activity in 2022 through direct
impacts on both Russia and Ukraine and via global spillovers. The war and


-----

related sanctions have contributed to tighter global financial conditions,
lower risk appetite, and flight-to-quality flows.

- Several central banks raised their key policy rates in April and early-May

2022 to rein in inflation amid strong economic recovery. This includes Bank
of Canada, the Reserve Bank of New Zealand, Bank of Korea, Reserve Bank
of Australia, the Reserve Bank of India, and Bank Negara Malaysia.

On 4 May 2022, the US Federal Reserve (US Fed) decided to raise the target
range for the federal funds rate by 50 bps to 0.75 percent to 1.0 percent in
line with expectations that with the appropriate tightening in the stance
of monetary policy, inflation will return to the Fed’s 2-percent objective and
labor market conditions will improve. The Russia-Ukraine conflict and
supply chain disruptions from China’s COVID-related lockdowns are
viewed by the Fed as sources of additional upward pressures on inflation
that could weigh down US economic activity.

Based on the latest futures path, an additional 50-bp hike is seen for the
US Fed’s June and July policy meetings and a 25-bp hike for its September,
November, and December meetings, for a cumulative policy rate increase
of 250-bp in 2022, already including the 25-bp hike last March and the
50-bp hike in May. The US Fed is seen to further raise its policy rate by 50
bps in 2023.


-----

