-----

-----

**FOREWARNING**
This document is provided for the reader’s convenience
only. The translation from the official Spanish version
was made by Banco de México’s staff. Discrepancies
may arise between the original document in Spanish
and its English translation. For this reason, the original
Spanish version is the only official document.


**1. PLACE, DATE AND PARTICIPANTS**

**1.1. Place: Meeting held by virtual means.**

**1.2. Date of Governing Board meeting:** May 17,
2023.

**1.3. Participants:**

- Victoria Rodríguez, Governor.

- Galia Borja, Deputy Governor.

- Irene Espinosa, Deputy Governor.

- Jonathan Heath, Deputy Governor.

- Omar Mejía, Deputy Governor.

- Rogelio Eduardo Ramírez, Secretary of Finance

and Public Credit.

- Gabriel Yorio, Undersecretary of Finance and

Public Credit.

- Elías Villanueva, Secretary of the Governing

Board.

Prior to this meeting, preliminary work by Banco de
México’s staff analyzing the economic and financial
environment as well as the developments in inflation
and the determinants and outlook for inflation, was
conducted and presented to the Governing Board
(see Annex).

**2. ANALYSIS AND RATIONALE BEHIND THE**
**GOVERNING BOARD’S VOTING**

**_International environment_**

**Most members highlighted that during the first**
**quarter of 2023, global economic activity**
**recovered compared to the fourth quarter of**
**2022. Some members pointed out that this was due**
to the better functioning of supply chains, to lower
pressures on energy prices, and to the reopening of
China’s economy. Most members noted that labor
**markets** **in** **several** **economies** **continued**

**showing signs of tightening. However,** **some**
members expressed that in the United States there
are signs of lesser pressures. One member stated


that in the major economies, there was a moderation
in nominal wage growth.

**Most members pointed out that world growth**
**prospects for 2023 continue pointing to a**
**deceleration compared to 2022. One member**
stated that lower growth is expected in advanced
economies, while emerging economies are

anticipated to face difficulties associated with a
moderation in their external demand, a higher debt
service, a lower fiscal margin, and high inflation.
He/she added that indicators related to world trade
volume have already shown certain signs of
weakness, while timely indicators of manufacturing
and services show a differentiated behavior, with the
latter displaying greater dynamism. **Another**
member stated that, in some systemically important
economies, a recession cannot be ruled out.
However, he/she noted that a slight recovery in
global economic activity is still expected for 2024.
Among global risks, **some members mentioned**
tighter monetary and financial conditions. **Some**
members added the worsening of geopolitical
tensions and challenges to financial stability.

**Most members stated that headline inflation**
**continued decreasing in a large number of**
**economies, although they warned that it still**
**remains at high levels. They attributed this**
**decline to lower reference prices for food and**
**energy. One member added that the mitigation of**
shocks and global monetary tightening have also
contributed to the fall in inflation. **However, most**
**members highlighted that the core component**
**continues showing resistance to decline. In this**
regard, **one member considered this behavior a**
matter of concern. He/she noted that tight labor
markets are one of the factors keeping inflation at
historically high levels. **Another member pointed**
out that in some countries it still does not show an
inflection point. **One member highlighted that in**
some economies it showed certain moderation.
Finally, **some members indicated that, in several**
economies, inflation is expected to converge to its
target until the end of 2024 or in early 2025.

**Most members considered that central banks**
**are in the final phase of their hiking cycles. They**
**highlighted that several monetary authorities**
**have already stopped increasing their reference**
**rates.** In this regard, **one member stated that the**
main emerging economies that have already
paused their hiking cycle accumulated on average
660 basis points of increases. **Some members**
underlined that several central banks have

communicated that high rates for an extended

1


-----

period will be necessary to achieve the convergence
of inflation to its target. One member added that the
fact that the authorities had used specific tools to
deal with the risks to the stability of the financial
system which resulted from the events in the
banking sector, has allowed central banks to focus
on fighting inflation.

**All members mentioned that, at its May meeting,**
**the US Federal Reserve raised the target range**
**for the federal funds rate by 25 basis points.**
**Most members stated that for the next meeting,**
**analysts and market participants foresee a**
**pause. Most members considered that the**
**tightening of credit conditions due to problems**
**in the banking sector contributed to this**
**projection. Most members noted that market**
**instruments are pricing in interest rate cuts**
**during the second half of 2023. They highlighted**
**that, in contrast, the chairman of the Federal**
**Reserve stated that, given the current inflation**
**projections, they do not foresee cuts in 2023 and**
**that they will maintain a data-dependent stance.**
**One member added that surveys conducted among**
analysts indicate that interest rate cuts would occur
until next year.

**Most members mentioned that, after the**
**financial turbulence generated by the banking**
**sector events in previous months, international**
**financial** **markets** **have** **stabilized.** **They**

**highlighted that this was due to the timely**
**intervention of authorities in the affected**
**economies. Some members noted that the**
environment of lower risk aversion was reflected in
gains in the main stock market indexes, in a
depreciation of the US dollar, and in moderate
increases in medium- and long-term interest rates.
However, one member stated that, in view of the US
debt ceiling negotiations, the fixed-income market in
that country exhibited volatility. **Most members**
**considered that risks to global financial markets**
**persist. Some members pointed out that tighter**
global financial and credit conditions could prevail.

**_Economic Activity in Mexico_**

**Most members stated that, in the context of a**
**complex external environment, the Mexican**
**economy** **has** **remained** **resilient.** **They**

**highlighted that, according to the GDP flash**
**estimate for the first quarter, economic activity**
**increased its rate of expansion and growth was**
**higher than expected. One member stated that this**
means that the national economy would have
registered six consecutive quarters of positive
growth, something unseen since 2016. However,


**another member reckoned that the balance of risks**
to growth is biased to the downside. One member
pointed out that the latest information suggests a
slowdown starting in the second quarter of the year.

**Most members noted that the performance of the**
**Mexican economy during the first quarter was**
**supported by both the services and industrial**
**sectors.** **One** member highlighted that the

expansion of services was generalized during the
first two months of 2023, being observed in eight out
of its nine subsectors. Regarding the components of
the services sector, **another member highlighted**
the greater dynamism of those related to retail;
transportation and mass media information; finance
and real estate; and accommodation and food
preparation services. **However, most members**
**noted that industrial activity has lost momentum**
**in recent months. In particular, they highlighted**
**the moderation in manufacturing production.**
**One member pointed out that this could be reflecting**
an incipient weakening of external demand. **Some**
members also mentioned the slowdown in mining.
**One member stated that construction registered a**
marginal improvement in March.

**Most members highlighted that in the first two**
**months of the year private consumption**
**continued showing dynamism, driven mainly by**
**the consumption of services. One member**
mentioned that its level is historically high. However,
**another member pointed out that consumption of**
goods showed a slight reversion in February. One
member noted that there has been a greater
dynamism in the consumption of imported goods
compared to that of domestic goods, possibly due to
the appreciation of the real exchange rate since the
start of the hiking cycle in 2021. Most members
**warned that, looking ahead, some timely**
**indicators suggest a moderation of private**
**consumption. Regarding investment, they noted**
**that it continued increasing, supported by the**
**machinery and equipment component, although**
**one member considered that it still shows a**
significant lag. Another member pointed out that,
overall, investment in construction is sluggish. One
member noted that residential construction

remained at low levels, while **another member**
highlighted the growth of non-residential

construction. In the context of lackluster investment,
**one member considered necessary to establish**
conditions for the country to take advantage of the
nearshoring phenomenon. He/she argued that this
would help counteract the foreseen cyclical
weakness of external demand. He/she added that,

2


-----

from a longer-term perspective, it would allow the
country's productive capacity to increase.

Regarding the external sector, **some members**
pointed out that manufacturing exports showed
moderate growth during the first quarter of the year.
**One** member highlighted that imports of

intermediate goods have continued contracting,
while non-automotive exports have weakened.
However, **another member considered that the**
latter have been recovering after the decline
observed at the end of 2022. He/she added that
automotive exports have remained stable and at
relatively high levels.

**All members agreed that the labor market shows**
**strength. Most members pointed out that the**
**labor participation rate continued increasing,**
**while the unemployment rate reached historic**
**lows. They pointed out that, in line with the**
**above, the working population has grown at a**
**faster** **rate** **than** **the** **economically** **active**

**population.** **Some members highlighted the growth**
in the number of IMSS-insured workers. **Some**
members pointed out the high employment rate
among the working-age population. **Meanwhile,**
**most members highlighted the relatively high**
**magnitude of wage revisions. One member noted**
that the nominal annual variation of the daily wage
of IMSS-insured workers has remained at levels
above 11%, while contractual wage revisions have
accelerated, with those of private sector companies
standing out, at levels of 8.9%. **Another member**
warned that minimum wage increases are foreseen
to have a greater effect on the average wage, given
that, according to the latest figure reported as of
March, 35% of the employed population already
receives up to one minimum wage.

**Most members noted that the output gap**
**continues narrowing. They highlighted that it is**
**not statistically different from zero. One member**
commented that he/she expected the point
estimate, which is slightly below zero, to remain
negative this year and the next. **Another member**
mentioned that, considering measurement issues,
there may be greater demand-related pressures
than what would initially seem to be the case.

**_Inflation in Mexico_**

**All members highlighted that since the last**
**monetary policy meeting, annual headline**
**inflation continued decreasing. Most members**
**argued that various inflationary pressures are**
**easing. However, most members emphasized**
**that it still remains high, registering 6.25% in**


**April. They considered that its decline was**
**mainly due to the evolution of non-core inflation.**
**Some members pointed out that, more recently, the**
core component has also contributed. One member
noted that, since February, biweekly inflation data
has been below the analysts’ consensus. He/she
mentioned that in April the monthly variation of
headline inflation was negative, something unseen
in the previous two years, while the annual variation
of practically all of its components and subcomponents fell. **Another member added that,**
when analyzing the seasonally adjusted and
annualized monthly variations of headline inflation
and its two components, these have trended
downwards. He/she mentioned that the fraction of
the consumption basket showing variations greater
than 10% has decreased. He/she stated that
indicators, such as the trimmed mean, suggest that
the performance of most inflation components,
except for the services sub-index, has improved.
**One member argued that the downward trajectory**
of inflation seems to be starting to consolidate,
although its decline has been slow and marginal so
far.

**Most members highlighted that the latest**
**readings of annual core inflation showed a more**
**marked reduction than in previous months,**
**although it still remains at high levels,**
**registering** **7.67%** **in** **April.** **One** member

mentioned that it was below 8% for the first time in
eight months. **Another member added that it has**
been declining for three consecutive months. Most
**members stated that its monthly variation has**
**declined. Some members noted that in April it was**
closer to its 10-year average. One member added
that some indicators related to its monthly variations
confirm a deceleration beyond base effects and a
less generalized growth. He/she indicated that close
to 50% of the consumption basket of goods and
services within the core component already
registers an annualized monthly inflation below 5%.
**However,** **most members considered that core**
**inflation shows persistence. Some members**
stated that, although inflation has declined, it is
mainly due to favorable external factors. They
warned that, in their opinion, there are domestic
inflationary pressures that could hinder the
convergence of inflation. One member pointed out
that the transition to domestic pressures is a pattern
observed in most countries. **Another member**
stated that this could be attributed to the fact that: i)
housing is facing supply-related pressures

accumulated over several years; ii) the rest of
services may be affected by the normalization of
consumption patterns and the pass-through of cost
3


-----

related pressures; and iii) the labor market shows
tighter conditions and relevant wage dynamics in an
environment of high inflation.

**Most members pointed out that merchandise**
**inflation has been decreasing. One member**
noted that it is currently below the double-digit levels
that were observed for nine months. **Another**
member noted that this decline is due to the better
functioning of global supply chains and to the
moderation of price pressures on various inputs.
**Some members mentioned that both the food and**
non-food merchandise subindices have decreased.
**One member pointed out that both components**
accumulated four and five months of declines,
respectively, although they remain at high levels. In
this regard, **another member warned that food**
merchandise inflation remains at double-digit levels.

**Most members pointed out that, in its latest**
**reading, services inflation decreased. One**
member stated that said decrease was mainly due
to the behavior of tourism-services inflation, which
reflected seasonal factors. **Some members also**
mentioned that services inflation continues showing
persistence. Some members also underlined that it
remains high. **Regarding its components,** **most**
**members noted that the annual price variations**
**of housing and education services still do not**
**show a downward inflection. One member shared**
a reflection on the behavior of services inflation.
First, he/she stated that its increase partly reflects
the recovery of this sector given the reversal of
changes in consumption patterns generated by the
pandemic. Second, he/she noted that inflation in
education services has already stopped increasing
and considered that the increase in this component
at the beginning of the year was likely a one-off
event, although it will continue having an impact on
the annual inflation of services due to base effects.
Third, he/she pointed out that housing inflation
continues being affected by last year's high inflation
figures, as this component is highly sensitive to the
observed inflation readings and tends to reflect them
with a lag. Fourth, he/she pointed out that some of
the services components have been affected by the
global shocks that have exerted pressure on
inflation, as is the case with food services, although
these have recently shown a downward trajectory in
their seasonally adjusted and annualized monthly
variations. However, another member warned that
the prices of some services, indeed, such as food
services, are still increasing at double-digit rates.

**Most members mentioned that annual non-core**
**inflation continued decreasing and reached**


**2.12% in April. They added that this decrease is**
**explained by reductions in the annual variation**
**of both energy and fruit and vegetable prices.**
**One member noted that, since January, inflation of**
these components accumulated a significant fall of
674 and 644 basis points, respectively. **Another**
member indicated that non-core inflation has
reflected more immediately the mitigation of external
pressures on food and energy prices. **Some**
members pointed out that non-core inflation is
registering unusually reduced variations that,
looking ahead, cannot be deemed permanent. One
member stated that the April figure was one of the
lowest in historical terms and was the lowest reading
since December 2020.

**Most members pointed out that longer-term**
**inflation expectations remained relatively stable.**
**However, they stated that these are at levels**
**above the target. Some members considered that**
they still do not show a downward trend. Regarding
short-term expectations, some members mentioned
that inflation expectations for the next 12 months
and for 2023 declined. One member pointed out that
the survey conducted among analysts indicates that
the probability that headline inflation ends the year
above 5.5% has decreased. **Another member**
noted that the median of expectations for the next
12 months accumulates a reduction of 68 basis
points from its highest reading during the current
inflationary episode. **Most members mentioned**
**that breakeven inflation has declined. One**
member said that it remains at levels incompatible
with the inflation target. **Another member pointed**
out that, in light of the reductions exhibited by this
indicator since March, the inflation risk premium has
fallen to levels close to its historical average.

**Most members mentioned that forecasts for**
**headline inflation were revised marginally**
**downwards for some quarters, while those for**
**core inflation remained practically unchanged.**
**They noted that inflation is still projected to**
**converge to the target in the fourth quarter of**
**2024. One member noted that the marginal**
revisions were made because observed inflation
has remained slightly below Banco de México's
forecasts at the March meeting. However, he/she
warned that inflation forecasts drawn from surveys
and market instruments are above the central bank's
projections for practically all of 2024. **Another**
member expressed that the moderation of

pressures on international food and energy prices
will eventually be transmitted to the prices of goods
and services of the core component. He/she
mentioned that a more significant decline in inflation

4


-----

continues to be anticipated, due to both the
mitigation of global shocks and to the monetary
policy actions implemented. One member noted that
inflation in the United States has shown signs of
easing, which favors the disinflation process in
Mexico.

**All members considered that the balance of**
**risks for the trajectory of inflation within the**
**forecast horizon remains biased to the upside.**
**One** member added that said balance has not
deteriorated. He/she stated that, nevertheless, there
is still uncertainty associated with the foreseen
trajectory of inflation. **Another member indicated**
that the projected trajectory should continue to be
validated with observed data. He/she considered
that the road to inflation convergence remains
fragile, lengthy, and difficult. Among upward risks to
inflation, **some members noted the persistence of**
core inflation at high levels. **One member added**
that, although a rapid fall in headline and core
inflation is projected as of the third quarter of this
year, it may not occur, even after the monetary
tightening attained, due to the persistence of
inflation that has been observed. In this regard,
**another member pointed out that this could**
compromise the anchoring of inflation expectations.
He/she expressed concern about the persistence of
merchandise inflation and the significant increase of
services inflation, which may imply that various
shocks have still not been fully assimilated. **One**
member mentioned that the configuration of
inflationary pressures continues to pose challenges
for the future, given that the decline in inflation is
mainly supported by the non-core component. In
this regard, some members pointed out the risk of
pressures on energy prices and on agricultural
products’ prices. One member added that the noncore component could be affected by climaterelated shocks, given the possible arrival of the _El_
_Niño phenomenon. Another member indicated that,_
following its low readings, non-core inflation could
observe a reversion to its mean, hence exerting
pressure on headline inflation. In addition, **some**
members pointed out the risk of greater cost-related
pressures. Specifically, some members mentioned
the increase in wages in the context of a strong labor
market. However, **one member underlined that**
recent estimates of the Phillips curve for Mexico
suggest that it exhibits a relatively mild slope.
He/she argued that the above implies that labor
market dynamics are not the main inflation
determinant at this time. Instead, he/she considered
that those determinants associated with supply and
with inflation expectations represent the main
channels through which pressures have


accumulated, and thus, in his/her opinion, these
would also be the means to achieve convergence,
and for that reason, inflation expectations must
remain anchored. As an additional upward risk,
**another member mentioned possible episodes of**
foreign exchange depreciation. Among risks to the
downside, one member highlighted the possibility of
a greater-than-anticipated deceleration of the world
economy.

**_Macrofinancial environment_**

**Most members highlighted that, since the**
**previous monetary policy meeting, domestic**
**financial markets, in line with international ones,**
**performed better. They emphasized the timely**
**intervention of the authorities to address the**
**problems that occurred in the US and European**
**banking sectors. In this regard,** **one member**
indicated that the risk of contagion appears to have
subsided. In addition, he/she pointed out that the
Mexican banking system has a limited exposure to
the institutions that registered problems, has solid
levels of capitalization, and exceeds regulatory
liquidity requirements. He/she added that a high
degree of leverage is not observed in the domestic
financial system and, therefore, no fundamental
reasons for a shortage of liquidity are foreseen in
Mexico.

**All members highlighted that the Mexican peso**
**appreciated. Most members pointed out that the**
**national currency is at levels unseen in several**
**years.** Meanwhile, one member added that the
bilateral real exchange rate with the U.S. has
appreciated around 10%, while the multilateral one
has done so by about 17% since the beginning of
the hiking cycle. **Some members attributed the**
currency´s recent performance to the ample interest
rate spread between Mexico and the United States
as well as to Mexico’s sound macroeconomic
fundamentals. **One member noted that, after the**
episodes of financial turmoil in the international
banking sector, the increase in volatility that had
been observed in the foreign exchange market has
reversed. **Another** member highlighted the

improvement in trading conditions in said market.

**Most members pointed out that, since the last**
**monetary policy decision, short-term interest**
**rates increased and medium- and long-term**
**ones decreased, deepening the inversion of the**
**yield curve. One member noted that domestic**
financial conditions have reached tighter levels, in
line with the domestic and global monetary cycles.
**Most members underlined the gains of the**
**Mexican stock market. One member stated that**

5


-----

the behavior of this market has been in line with that
observed across other emerging economies. Some
members pointed out that Mexico’s default risk
premium decreased.

**Some members indicated that commercial banks’**
performing credit to firms and households has
continued to expand, especially credit for

consumption. **One** member highlighted that

mortgage lending has also increased. **Another**
member pointed out that delinquency rates are at
low and stable levels. One member noted that part
of the credit dynamism is attributed to the fact that
the economy continues to recover from the impact
associated with the pandemic. He/she mentioned
that, in real terms, outstanding credit is slightly
below the level observed in February 2020. He/she
added that, although businesses continue to obtain
financing from domestic sources through the
issuance of financial instruments, they have faced
more adverse conditions issuing debt abroad, in line
with the tightening of global credit conditions.

**_Monetary policy_**

**The Governing Board evaluated the magnitude**
**and diversity of the inflationary shocks and their**
**determinants, along with the evolution of**
**medium- and long-term inflation expectations**
**and the price formation process. It considered**
**that the economy has started to undergo a**
**disinflationary** **process** **given** **that** **many**

**pressures have eased. Nevertheless, it deemed**
**that these pressures continue having an**
**incidence on inflation, as it remains high, and**
**the inflationary outlook is still very complex.**
**Based on the above, and considering the**
**monetary policy stance already attained in this**
**hiking cycle, with the presence of all its**
**members, the Board decided unanimously to**
**leave the target for the overnight interbank**
**interest rate unchanged at 11.25%. With this**
**decision, the monetary policy stance remains in**
**the trajectory required for inflation to converge**
**to its 3% target within the forecast horizon.**

**The Board will thoroughly monitor inflationary**
**pressures as well as all factors that have an**
**incidence on the foreseen path for inflation and**
**its expectations. It estimates that the inflationary**
**outlook will be complicated and uncertain**
**throughout the entire forecast horizon, with**
**upward risks. Thus, in order to achieve an**
**orderly and sustained convergence of headline**
**inflation to the 3% target, it considers that it will**
**be necessary to maintain the reference rate at its**
**current level for an extended period. The central**


**bank reaffirms its commitment with its primary**
**mandate and the need to continue its efforts to**
**consolidate an environment of low and stable**
**inflation.**

**One** **member recalled that, since 2021, the**
inflationary environment has been complex, with
inflation levels unseen in recent decades. He/she
pointed out that this central bank began the
monetary restriction cycle in a timely manner and
that, in light of the intensification of inflationary
pressures, forceful actions were taken. He/she
noted that, after attaining a restrictive policy stance
and in view of the signs of easing of various shocks,
since the end of last year a reduction in the pace of
interest rate increases was started. He/she added
that the current outlook, despite remaining complex
and uncertain, and despite inflation still being far
from target, is less adverse than that registered
throughout last year. He/she argued that, given the
described inflation outlook and considering the
monetary policy stance attained after the

accumulated 725-basis point increase in the
reference rate, it is appropriate to leave said
reference rate unchanged. He/she pointed out that,
due to the accumulated increases and considering
the clearly restrictive levels of the ex-ante real
interest rate, the attained monetary policy is solid
and consistent with the disinflationary process.
He/she mentioned that a cautious approach should
be maintained and the attained restrictive monetary
stance should be allowed to continue operating.
He/she considered that, with this stance, a signal is
sent to the public that Banco de México is still not
satisfied with the inflationary environment. He/she
highlighted that the monetary restriction contributes
to the anchoring of long-term inflation expectations,
hence preventing inflation from persisting at high
levels even after the shocks dissipate. He/she
pointed out that a restrictive policy stance also
contributes to an orderly performance of financial
markets, including the foreign exchange market,
considering the inflationary environment and the
global monetary tightening. He/she indicated that
the volatility-adjusted spread of domestic and
external interest rates, derived from the monetary
policy actions, as well as the country’s solid
macroeconomic fundamentals, have favored the
resilient performance of the Mexican peso, which
contributes to ease inflationary pressures. He/she
also mentioned that a restrictive policy stance leads
to an intertemporal reallocation of economic agents'
expenditure by incentivizing savings, which further
favors the disinflationary process. He/she argued
that, during the current cycle, a significant slowdown
has been observed in households’ demand for liquid

6


-----

assets, while demand for long-term instruments has
increased. He/she underlined that, looking forward,
the outlook will remain complex, with upward risks
and uncertainty over the pace at which the shocks
will fade. In this context, he/she considered it difficult
to anticipate the time during which the reference rate
would remain at its current level. He/she argued that
it is too early to begin discussing possible interest
rate cuts. He/she sustained that it is crucial to
strongly endorse the central bank’s commitment to
the attainment of its primary mandate and,
consequently, the need to continue its efforts to
consolidate an environment of price stability.

**Another** **member pointed out that the recent**
evolution of the main inflation indicators along with
the level of monetary restriction attained after 15
consecutive increases in the reference rate allow to
consider a pause, for this occasion, in the monetary
restriction cycle. He/she emphasized that the tone
of the monetary policy statement would be of utmost
importance for the formation of market expectations
regarding future policy decisions. He/she

highlighted that the statement should communicate
that, although the main inflation indicators have
behaved favorably, they have responded primarily
to the evolution of external factors, while domestic
inflationary pressures persist which can hinder the
convergence of inflation to its target within the
planning horizon. He/she underlined the following
factors that may prevent inflation from decreasing at
the anticipated pace: i) the dynamism of domestic
demand, mainly driven by consumption; ii) the
strong labor market; iii) increases in labor costs and
their pass-through to consumer prices; and iv)
medium- and long-term inflation expectations above
3%. Regarding guidance about future monetary
policy decisions, he/she indicated that the

environment of high uncertainty about the

inflationary process calls for a cautious approach
and favors a flexible policy stance. He/she added
that it cannot be ruled out that a greater or lesser
tightening may be required. He/she argued that it
should be stated that a pause does not imply that
Banco de México’s work has concluded, nor that it
will necessarily be followed by a monetary easing.
He/she added that it should be clearly

communicated that Banco de México will respond
according to the economic circumstances as they
unfold. In particular, he/she mentioned that the
upcoming decisions will depend on headline and
core inflation consolidating their downward trend.
He/she highlighted that, in any case, the central
bank must be clear in that the monetary policy
stance should remain in restrictive territory within
the entire planning horizon. He/she mentioned that


the above would contribute to align analysts'
inflation expectations, which are currently above
forecasts for the entire 2024, with those of Banco de
México, which would improve the effectiveness of
monetary policy.

**One** **member argued that, considering the interest**
rate increases accumulated during this hiking cycle,
a sufficiently restrictive policy stance was attained to
address a still complex inflationary outlook. He/she
stated that the ex-ante real interest rate has been in
restrictive territory for several months, reaching
maximum levels since the overnight interbank rate
was adopted as the monetary policy instrument.
He/she underlined that, although Mexico's monetary
policy stance relative to that of the U.S. has
decreased at the margin, the broad interest rate
spread and the observed resilience of the Mexican
peso provide room for this reduction. He/she added
that, in the absence of unexpected shocks, the
attained stance is consistent with a downward
trajectory of inflation over the forecast horizon.
He/she expressed that the terminal rate has been
attained, without implying that there will not be a
further adjustment or that this is the end of the
monetary restriction, since the monetary policy is
now shifting from an active policy management,
involving nominal rate increases, to a new phase of
passive policy management, determined by the
decline in inflationary expectations. He/she

indicated that the restrictive monetary policy will
continue to operate through its transmission
mechanisms. He/she considered that a restrictive
policy stance should continue for as long as
necessary to break the persistence of core inflation.
He/she noted that an additional interest rate
increase could be required if inflation does not
subside. Similarly, he/she pointed out that, if
inflation were to decline, an overly restrictive policy
stance should be avoided, and, therefore, an
interest rate cut would be eventually considered.
He/she pointed out that this would not be a monetary
easing, but rather an adjustment to maintain the exante real interest rate in a range between 6 and 7%,
which, by his/her estimation, is consistent with
convergence of inflation to the target. He/she added
that future intentions should be made known by
means of a forward guidance, specifying these are
subject to incoming data and, thus, do not represent
a fixed commitment. He/she mentioned that,
although it is venturesome to announce that the
restrictive stance will be maintained throughout the
horizon in which monetary policy operates, it is
crucial to communicate that such stance needs to be
maintained for an extended period. He/she
considered that progress in the communication

7


-----

strategy has been fundamental for the public to get
to know the central bank’s reaction function and to
strengthen the formation of expectations. He/she
added that such progress has not responded to
circumstantial issues, but instead has been the
result of intense discussions and an analysis of the
academic literature and of international best
practices. He/she highlighted that it is key to
continue working so that, through a clear, direct and
transparent communication, which is fundamental
for the efficient management of inflation

expectations, the primary mandate is fulfilled.

**Another** **member pointed out that the attained**
interest rate level is historically restrictive, both in
nominal and real terms, which he/she deemed
consistent with the unprecedented inflationary
pressures that have been observed. He/she
mentioned that, given this stance, the analysis
should focus on the evolution of the monetary policy
transmission mechanism. He/she stated that: i)
starting 9 months ago, a rebalancing in the asset
portfolio of the private sector has been observed,
with a substitution of liquid assets for longer-term
instruments, especially among households, which
implies that the interest rate channel is operating
and gaining traction; ii) in the current cycle, financing
interest rates have increased more than in other
episodes, and bank lending conditions have also
tightened considerably, which suggests that credit
conditions are stringent; iii) in contrast to other
monetary cycles in which the real exchange rate
depreciated abruptly, this channel is acting in a
highly restrictive manner; iv) the asset price
channel, which in Mexico tends to be weak, has
operated through the increase in the nodes of the
yield curve since the beginning of the tightening
cycle, affecting the prices of debt instruments, which
have decreased significantly; and v) inflation
expectations remain anchored and, at the margin,
have gradually reversed their negative impacts, a
trend which will allow further strengthening of the
monetary stance. For this reason, he/she

considered that all channels are working in the right
direction to bring inflation back to its target over the
forecast horizon. He/she underlined that the
configuration of inflationary pressures is still fragile,
and that the high levels of uncertainty increase the
importance of maintaining a flexible and datadependent approach. He/she indicated that

communication must be clear to enable an adequate
formation of expectations and an orderly behavior of
markets, which continue discounting cuts in the
reference rate in the near future, an expectation that
he/she considered is not compatible with the
convergence of inflation to its target in the planning


horizon. He/she forewarned that it should be
communicated that the restrictive policy stance will
last for a period necessary and sufficient to confirm:
i) a clear and downward trend of headline and core
inflation towards 3%; ii) a neutral balance of risks
around the forecast; and iii) inflation expectations
returning to their historical averages. He/she
explained that the above is key to ensure the
fulfillment of the constitutional mandate.

**One** **member added that the hiking cycle began in**
a timely manner and Banco de México responded
forcefully to the significant deterioration of the
inflation outlook. He/she pointed out that, following
a significant accumulated increase of 725 basis
points in the reference rate, it is reasonable to make
a pause in the hiking cycle and evaluate the degree
of absorption of this monetary tightening in the
economy. The above, considering that, although
inflation still remains elevated, signs of easing of
price-related pressures can be observed, and such
restriction will continue to have an effect during the
following quarters. He/she added that the short-term
ex-ante real interest rate is at a clearly restrictive
level. He/she mentioned that this rate would
increase insofar as inflation expectations continue
decreasing. He/she reflected on the lag with which
monetary policy operates. He/she pointed out that,
in this horizon, two stages can be distinguished. In
the first stage, which is already taking place, the
monetary policy rate affects the channels through
which it operates. In the second stage, which will
start to become more evident, the impact of the
channels is reflected on inflation and its

determinants. He/she highlighted that one of the
most relevant transmission channels is that of
inflation expectations. He/she underlined that
shorter-term ones have already stabilized, while
longer-term ones, which affect the price formation
process to a greater degree, have remained
anchored. He/she pointed out that the monetary
adjustment has been transmitted along the entire
real yield curve and in market interest rates for the
different segments. It has also enabled a change in
households’ asset holdings towards longer-term
instruments, which affects consumption decisions.
He/she highlighted the functioning of the exchange
rate transmission channel. In this regard, he/she
emphasized that the Mexican peso has appreciated
significantly in real terms since the beginning of the
restrictive cycle. He/she observed that the tightness
of monetary conditions is at one of the highest levels
since the inflation-targeting regime was adopted.
He/she underlined that, although, in his/her opinion,
there is no conclusive evidence of domestic
inflationary pressures, if they were present, they

8


-----

would be already addressed with the restrictive level
that has been attained. He/she added that, given the
persistence of the core component and the
environment of high uncertainty, it is crucial to
remain vigilant to take the necessary actions if
additional shocks were to occur. He/she stated that,
after having paused the hiking cycle, Banco de
México can resort to its communication as a tool to
continue supporting the strength of the monetary
policy stance. He/she added that, to this end, it is
reasonable to communicate that a restrictive policy
stance will be maintained for as long as necessary
to guarantee the convergence of inflation to the
target.

**3. MONETARY POLICY DECISION**

The Governing Board evaluated the magnitude and
diversity of the inflationary shocks and their
determinants, along with the evolution of mediumand long-term inflation expectations and the price
formation process. It considered that the economy
has started to undergo a disinflationary process
given that many pressures have eased.

Nevertheless, it deemed that these pressures
continue having an incidence on inflation, as it
remains high and the inflationary outlook is still very
complex. Based on the above, and considering the
monetary policy stance already attained in this


hiking cycle, with the presence of all its members,
the Board decided unanimously to leave the target
for the overnight interbank interest rate unchanged
at 11.25%. With this decision, the monetary policy
stance remains in the trajectory required for inflation
to converge to its 3% target within the forecast
horizon.

The Board will thoroughly monitor inflationary
pressures as well as all factors that have an
incidence on the foreseen path for inflation and its
expectations. It estimates that the inflationary
outlook will be complicated and uncertain

throughout the entire forecast horizon, with upward
risks. Thus, in order to achieve an orderly and
sustained convergence of headline inflation to the
3% target, it considers that it will be necessary to
maintain the reference rate at its current level for an
extended period. The central bank reaffirms its
commitment with its primary mandate and the need
to continue its efforts to consolidate an environment
of low and stable inflation.

**4. VOTING**

Victoria Rodríguez, Galia Borja, Irene Espinosa,
Jonathan Heath and Omar Mejía voted in favor of
leaving the target for the overnight interbank interest
rate unchanged at 11.25%.

9


-----

**ANNEX**

The information in this Annex was prepared for this
meeting by the staff of Banco de México’s
Directorate General of Economic Research and
Directorate General of Central Bank Operations. It
does not necessarily reflect the considerations of the
members of the Governing Board as to the monetary
policy decision.

**A.1. External conditions**

**A.1.1. World economic activity**

During the first quarter of 2023, global economic
activity exhibited a faster pace of growth with respect
to the previous quarter, boosted by the gradual
fading of disruptions in supply chains, the lifting of
mobility restrictions in China, and lower pressures on
energy prices, despite tight financial and monetary
conditions. Purchasing Managers' Indices point to a
global recovery in services and to a certain lack of
dynamism in the manufacturing sector (Chart 1).
Among global risks, the following stand out: the
persistence of inflationary pressures, the

intensification of geopolitical tensions, tighter

financial conditions, and challenges to financial
stability. The risk of a tightening of credit conditions
in some advanced economies associated with the
recent problems in their banking sectors, or with the
possible emergence of new tensions in this sector
prevails.

In the United States, Gross Domestic Product (GDP)
grew at a seasonally adjusted quarterly rate of 0.3%
during the first quarter of 2023, below the 0.6%
registered in the fourth quarter of 2022 (Chart 2).[1]
The quarterly increase of GDP was supported by
private consumption and government spending. Net
exports and nonresidential investment also

contributed to GDP growth, although the latter
component has been losing dynamism, partly as a
result of higher interest rates. The performance of
GDP was tempered by the significant negative
contribution of the change in inventories.

1 Expressed as a seasonally adjusted annualized quarterly rate,
the change in US GDP was 1.1% in the first quarter of 2023 and
2.6% in the fourth quarter of 2022.


**Chart 1**

**Global: Purchasing Managers’ Index:**

**Production Component**

Diffusion index, s. a.[1/]

60

58

56

54

52

50

Manufacturing

48 Manufacturing (excl. China)

46 Services

Services (excl. China)

44 32.5 39.2

24.8 33.0 April

42 23.7 35.1

20.7 32.2

40

J J J J J J J J J J J J J

2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023

s.a./ Seasonally adjusted figures.
1/ The index varies between 0 and 100 points. A reading above 50 points
is considered an overall increase compared to the previous month and
below 50 points an overall decrease.
Note: The figures in the chart correspond to the minimum level of the
indicator.
Source: IHS Markit.

**Chart 2**

**US Real GDP and Components**

Quarterly percentage rate and contribution in

percentage points, s. a.

3.0 Private consumption expenditures

Residential investment

2.5 Nonresidential investment

Change in private inventories

2.0 Net exportsGovernment consumption expenditures

Total

1.5

1.0

0.5

0.0

-0.5

-1.0

-1.5

-2.0

I II III IV I II III IV I

2021 2022 2023

s.a./ Seasonally adjusted figures.
Source: BEA.

US industrial production grew at a monthly rate of
0.5% in April, after having stagnated in February and
March. The improvement in industrial activity in April
reflected a rebound in mining and, particularly, in
manufacturing production. The expansion in the
manufacturing sector was largely due to an increase
in the production of vehicles and auto parts. This was
partially mitigated by a decline in electricity and gas

10


-----

generation as the warmer-than-usual temperatures
decreased the demand for heating. Purchasing
Managers’ Indices suggest a moderate expansion of
the manufacturing sector during the second quarter.

The US labor market continued showing signs of
strength, although some indicators exhibited a lesser
tightening. These include job vacancies and some
indicators of wage growth, although the latter
remained at high levels. The non-farm payroll
increased by 253,000 new jobs in April 2023.The
main increases were in professional, health care,
social assistance, leisure and accommodation
services. Unemployment decreased from 3.5% in
March to 3.4% in April. Initial claims for

unemployment insurance remained relatively stable
during most of the period.

In the euro area, during the first quarter of 2023,
GDP registered a variation of 0.1% at a seasonally
adjusted quarterly rate, after having slightly
contracted during the fourth quarter of 2022.[2]
Economic activity continued being affected by the
uncertainty surrounding the military conflict in
Ukraine and tight financial conditions. However,
some factors that were affecting this economy have
improved. These factors include the functioning of
supply chains, consumer and business confidence,
as well as the effect of lower energy prices on the
purchasing power of households. The

unemployment rate decreased to 6.5% in March, its
lowest level on record. Purchasing Managers’
Indices point to a contraction of the manufacturing
sector and suggest that services continued to
expand.

Economic activity in major emerging economies is
foreseen to have registered a heterogeneous
behavior during the first quarter of 2023. In Emerging
Asia, the recovery of most economies has reflected
the decline in disruptions in the region's supply
chains. In the case of China, economic activity
rebounded during the first quarter as a result of the
lifting of mobility restrictions in that country. In
Emerging Europe, several of the major economies
registered a contraction during the first quarter of the
year. In Latin America, a mixed behavior is
anticipated across countries, with some of them
recovering and others contracting.

Since Mexico’s previous monetary policy decision,
international commodity prices, in general, trended
downwards. During the first half of April, oil prices

2 Expressed as a seasonally adjusted annualized quarterly rate,
the change in euro area GDP was 0.3% in the first quarter of 2023
and -0.2% in the fourth quarter of 2022.


tended to increase due largely to production cuts by
the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting
Countries and allied countries (OPEC+), as well as
by some other economies. This trend subsequently
reversed due to persistent concerns about the
possibility of a world economic slowdown and weak
manufacturing activity data from China. Natural gas
reference prices in Europe trended downwards in
response to high inventory levels due to the revision
of forecasts towards warmer temperatures,

increased production, and uncertainty about a
possible weakening of demand. In the United States,
natural gas prices registered narrow movements.
Grain prices in general decreased due to talks
regarding the two-month extension of the Black Sea
security corridor agreement, which was finally
reached in mid-May for a period of two months. The
decline in these prices was also due to improved
expectations of summer harvests in the United
States and a higher-than-expected supply from
countries such as Brazil. The prices of most
industrial metals registered volatility during the
period, with upward tendencies due to supply
shortages and a recovery in demand from China in
mid-April. Subsequently, prices decreased due to
new data pointing to a lag in China’s industrial
activity and to persisting concerns about a global
economic recession.

**A.1.2. Monetary policy and international financial**
**markets**

In most advanced and emerging economies,
headline inflation declined, although it remains at
high levels. The reduction in inflation was largely
associated with lower pressures on energy and food
prices. Core inflation, on the other hand, has shown
a resistance to decline.

In most advanced economies, headline inflation
decreased except for the Euro area and Canada,
where the most recent data show a marginal
increase (Chart 3). However, it remained at high
levels and above their respective central banks'
targets. Core inflation showed a heterogeneous
behavior. In the United States, annual headline
inflation as measured by the consumer price index
decreased from 5.0% in March to 4.9% in April, as a
result of a fall in food prices and a marginal decrease
in core inflation. The annual variation of the latter
went from 5.6 to 5.5% during the same period. This
decrease was mainly due to a lower inflation in
services prices, which was partially offset by a rise in

11


-----

merchandise inflation. Annual headline inflation as
measured by the personal consumption

expenditures index (PCE) decreased from 5.1% in
February to 4.2% in March.

**Chart 3**

**Selected Advanced Economies:**

**Headline Inflation**

Annual percentage change

12

United States PCE 1/

10 United States CPI

Japan

8 Euro area

United Kingdom

6

Canada

4


2

March

April

0 April

April

-2

J J J J J J J J J

2019 2020 2021 2022 2023

1/ The personal consumption expenditure deflator is used.
Source: Bureau of Economic Analysis, Bureau of Labor Statistics, Eurostat,
Bank of Japan, The UK Office for National Statistics and Statistics Canada.

Analysts' short-term inflation forecasts for most of
the main advanced economies suggest a

moderation in headline inflation in 2023 relative to
the levels registered in 2022. However, it would
remain above their central banks' inflation targets.
Longer-term inflation expectations drawn from
financial instruments for these economies remained
relatively stable at levels above their inflation targets
in most cases.

According to most recent readings, in a large number
of major emerging economies, annual headline
inflation also decreased. However, it remained
above most central banks’ targets, except for a few
countries, such as China, Russia, Thailand, India
and Brazil, where inflation recently lay within its
variability range or below its point target. In several
emerging economies, core inflation stabilized or
slightly decreased.

In this environment, since Mexico’s previous
monetary policy decision, the central banks of most
of the main advanced economies continued
tightening their monetary policy stances. Some
moderated their pace of interest rate increases while
others, such as those of Canada and South Korea,
paused their hikes in recent decisions. The former
stated that it is prepared to raise the interest rate if

3 It also announced that it will conduct a review of its monetary
policy over a period of around 12 to 18 months.


necessary and the latter indicated that it will have to
judge whether the rate should be increased further.
The Bank of Japan left its interest rates unchanged.
However, it eliminated the statement regarding its
expectation that short- and long-term policy rates will
remain at their current or lower levels.[3] Regarding
their asset purchase programs, most central banks
in this group of economies continued to gradually
reduce their securities’ holdings.

Monetary policy expectations drawn from financial
instruments exhibited volatility during the period for
most advanced economies. This was largely
associated with the evolution of concerns regarding
the banking sector in some of these countries. Based
on the latest available information, interest rates
implicit in the interest rate swap curves (OIS) of
some advanced economies, such as the United
States, suggest a first reduction of 25 basis points
(bps) in the third quarter of 2023 (Chart 4).

**Chart 4**

**Reference Rates and Trajectories**

**Implied in OIS Curves[1/]**

Percent

|5 4 3 2|― European Ce ― OIS implicit t --- OIS implicit t OIS implicit t|ntral Bank depo rajectory Mar 17 rajectory Mar 30 rajectory Mar 8,2|sit rate,2023, 2023 023|Col5|Col6|Col7|Col8|Col9|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|1|||||||||
||||||||||
|0|||||||||


1/ OIS: Fixed floating interest rate swap where the fixed interest rate is
associated with the effective overnight reference rate.
2/ For the observed reference rate of the US, the average interest rate of
the target range of the federal funds rate (5.00% - 5.25%) is used.
Source: Banco de México with data from Bloomberg.

Among the recent monetary policy decisions of major
advanced economies, the following stand out:

i) The US Federal Reserve maintained its pace of

increase for the reference rate by raising it in 25
basis points (bps) at its May meeting. Thus, it set
the target range for the federal funds rate
between 5.00 and 5.25%. The Federal Open
Market Committee (FOMC) also adjusted its

12


7 **―― US Federal Reserve 2/ Bank of England** End of 2022 End of 2023 End of 2024

6 **― Bank of Japan** Forecasts

**― European Central Bank deposit rate**
**― OIS implicit trajectory Mar 17,2023**

5 **--- OIS implicit trajectory Mar 30, 2023**

OIS implicit trajectory Mar 8,2023

4

3

2

1

0

-1

2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 2024


-----

forward guidance. It eliminated the statement
anticipating an additional tightening to bring
inflation back to 2%. Instead, it specified that, in
order to determine to what extent additional policy
tightening might be appropriate, the Committee
will take into account the cumulative tightening of
monetary policy, the lags with which monetary
policy affects economic activity and inflation, and
economic and financial developments. In

addition, it continued reducing the size of its
balance sheet. Regarding the financial

environment, it reiterated that tighter credit
conditions for households and businesses are
likely to affect economic activity, the labor market,
and inflation, although the extent of these effects
remains uncertain. During a press conference,
the chairman of that institution assured that the
Federal Reserve will maintain a stance

dependent on incoming data, that the

determination of the appropriate level of
monetary tightening will be based on an ongoing
assessment, and that in June’s meeting they will
evaluate whether the current interest rate level is
sufficiently restrictive. He pointed out that,
considering the current Committee’s inflation
forecasts, it would not be appropriate to cut
interest rates this year. He mentioned that as long
as there is a tightening of financial conditions
stemming from the problems at some US banks,
the Federal Reserve may not have to raise the
federal funds rate as much as it would have done
in the absence of such tightening. However, he
explained that this is difficult to forecast given the
uncertainty as to how persistent the effects of the
turbulence in the banking system will be, how
large they will be, and how long they will take to
be transmitted. He added that they are prepared
to tighten the stance further if necessary. Based
on the latest available information drawn from
financial instruments, the highest interest rate
level during 2023 is anticipated to be around
5.2% in the second quarter of 2023, to
subsequently decrease to around 4.64% by the
end of 2023 and to 3.21% by the end of 2024.

ii) The European Central Bank (ECB) moderated its

pace of reference rate increases from 50 to 25
bps at its May meeting. It set its refinancing, key
lending and key deposit rates at 3.75, 4.00 and
3.25%, respectively. It stated that the Governing
Council’s future decisions will ensure that policy
rates will be brought to levels sufficiently
restrictive to achieve a timely return of inflation to
the 2% medium-term target, and will be kept at
those levels for as long as necessary. It reiterated
that the Governing Council will continue to follow


a data-dependent approach in determining the
appropriate level and duration of monetary
restriction. The president of that institution
highlighted that they still have a long way to go in
the hiking process. The Governing Council
expects to discontinue reinvestments under the
Asset Purchase Program (APP) as of July 2023.

Since Mexico’s previous monetary policy decision,
most of the central banks of the major emerging
economies stopped increasing their reference rates.
Some suggested that they would maintain them at
their current levels for some time at least until
inflation starts to decline steadily, that they would not
hesitate to raise rates if necessary, or that future
adjustments would depend on how the outlook on
prices evolves. Other central banks continued
raising their reference rates, although some reduced
the pace of their increases.

In the context described above, after the turbulence
generated by the banking crisis in the United States
and Europe in previous months, international
financial markets stabilized, while global financial
conditions remained tight (Chart 5). Stock markets in
most of the major advanced and emerging
economies registered gains in an environment of
greater stability of the banking sector in the United
States and Europe relative to that observed in March
(Chart 6). However, risks and uncertainty persist
regarding the performance of some regional banks
in the United States. In foreign exchange markets,
the US dollar exhibited limited movements during the
period, in a context of concerns about possibly lower
growth in that country, of expectations that the
Federal Reserve is nearing a pause in its tightening
cycle, and of uncertainty regarding negotiations to
increase the debt ceiling in that country. Most
emerging market currencies appreciated against the
US dollar, although some weakened recently (Chart
7). Interest rates on short- and long-term government
bonds of the main advanced economies exhibited
volatility. In several cases, interest rates were above
the level observed at the time of Mexico’s previous
monetary policy decision. In addition, the cost of
insuring against default by the US government
(CDS) increased significantly at different maturities,
particularly at one year. This was due to the
uncertainty surrounding the agreements to raise the
country's debt ceiling. In emerging economies, most
long-term interest rates also exhibited volatility,
although in most countries they are currently below
the level registered at the time of Mexico’s previous
monetary policy decision.

13


-----

In this context, since Mexico’s previous monetary
policy decision, cumulative net inflows to emerging
economies were registered. For most of the period,
flows behaved differently across asset classes, with
cumulative net inflows to equity assets and moderate
outflows from fixed-income assets.

**Chart 5**

**Financial Conditions Indices[1/]**

Units


5%


**Chart 6**

**Change in Selected Financial Indicators from**

**March 30, 2023 to May 17, 2023**

Percent; basis points Percentage, basis points


15%

10%


75

50


25

0


103

102


101

100


0%

-5%


-10%


-25

-50


Financial Conditions Index - Global
Financial Conditions Index - United States
Financial Conditions Index for Euro area 2/

Source: Prepared by Banco de México with data from Bloomberg and
Goldman Sachs.
1/ The financial conditions index is constructed considering the effect of five
variables on economic activity: the reference interest rate, the 10-year
government bond, the spread of investment-grade bonds over the
government debt bond with equivalent maturity, the ratio of a stock index
with 10-year average earnings per share, and the trade-weighted exchange
rate.
2/ In the case of the euro area, the spread between the sovereign bonds of
France, Italy, Spain, the Netherlands, Belgium, Austria, Portugal and
Finland over the German 10-year bond is also considered. The vertical
black line indicates the last calendarized monetary policy meeting of Banco
de México.


Source: Bloomberg and ICE. 1/ MSCI Emerging Markets Index, which
includes 24 countries. 2/ DXY: a weighted average estimated by the
Intercontinental Exchange (ICE) of the nominal exchange rate of the main
six currencies operated globally with the following weights: EUR 57.6%,
JPY: 13.6%, GBP: 11.9%, CAD: 9.1%, SEK: 4.2%, and CHF: 3.6%

**Chart 7**

**Selected Emerging Economies: Financial**

**Assets Performance as of March 23, 2023**

Percent, basis points Percent, basis points


Note: An upward adjustment indicates currency appreciation. Interest rates
correspond to swap rates at the specified terms, except for Hungary, where
government securities with 3-year maturities were used as a reference. For
the Philippines, a 2-year swap rate was used, and for Russia, 2-year and
3-year swap rates were used. The latest CDS data for Russia is as of June
Source: Bloomberg.

14


-----

**A.2. Current situation of the Mexican economy**

**A.2.1. Mexican markets**

In the international context described above, since
Mexico’s previous monetary policy decision, the
Mexican peso appreciated against the US dollar,
while short-term interest rates increased and
medium- and long-term ones decreased (Chart 8).
The environment surrounding domestic financial
markets was affected by lower risk aversion, once
the effects of the credit events in the banking system
in developed countries partially dissipated. This was
accompanied by a decline in volatility across all
asset classes.

**Chart 8**

**Mexican Markets’ Performance**

Percent, MXN/USD and index


**Chart 9**

**Mexican Peso Exchange Rate**

MXN/USD


26

Mexican peso

25 100-day moving average

50-day moving average

24

23

22

21

20

19

18

17

**J          J         J        J         J        J         J**

2020 2021 2022 2023


11.6

11.2

10.8

10.4

10.0

9.6

9.2

8.8

8.4


19.7

19.4

19.1

18.8

18.5

18.2

17.9

17.6

17.3


56,000

55,000

54,000

53,000

52,000

51,000

50,000

49,000

48,000


M-bond


5.8

5.5

5.2

4.9

4.6

4.3

4.0

3.7

Inflation-indexed bonds


Range in 2023 Range since previous monetary policy Mar23,2023 May12,2023

decision

Source: Prepared by Banco de México.

The Mexican currency traded in a range of 1.37
pesos, between 17.43 and 18.80 pesos per US dollar
since the previous monetary policy decision. During
the period it appreciated 6.19% and reached its
lowest level since March 2016 (Chart 9). The above
occurred in a context in which trading conditions,
both realized and prospective, improved.


Source: Prepared by Banco de México.

Interest rates on government securities increased up
to 45 bps in the short-term nodes, while in the
medium- and long-term nodes they decreased up to
26 bps (Chart 10). The yield curve of real rate
instruments exhibited generalized increases

averaging 22 bps. In this context, breakeven inflation
implicit in spreads between nominal and real interest
rates of market instruments decreased up to 44 bps
(Chart 11). These movements took place in an
environment in which trading conditions showed an
improvement, although without reaching the levels
observed prior to the onset of the pandemic.

Regarding expectations for the path of the monetary
policy reference rate, information implicit in the
interest rate swaps curve incorporates that, for the
May decision, the reference rate would remain
unchanged (Chart 12). Most analysts surveyed by
Citibanamex anticipate that the reference rate will
remain unchanged in the May decision and that by
the end of 2023 it will still be at the current level of
11.25%.

15


Range in 2023 Range since previous monetary policy Mar23,2023 May12,2023


-----

**Chart 10**

**Nominal Yield Curve of Government Securities**

Percent, basis points

12.00

Mar-23rd 2023

11.50 May-12th 2023

11.00 Change (Mar-23rd 2023 to May-12th 2023)

Trading range over the period

10.50

10.00

9.50

9.00

8.50

8.00

Source: PIP.

**Chart 11**

**Breakeven Inflation and Inflation Risk**

**Implied in Government Securities’ Yields**

Basis points

600

550

500

450

3-year

400 10-year

20-year

350 30-year

3-year average
10-year average

300

20-year average
30-year average

250

J J            J           J            J

2021                      2022                     2023

Source: PIP.


**Chart 12**

**Interbank Funding Rate Implied in TIIE Swaps**

Percent

ontinue

12.50 Banxico overnight rate

11.50 Implied interest rate in TIIE swaps for 05/12/23

10.50 Implied interest rate in TIIE swaps for

03/23/2023

9.50

8.50

7.50

6.50

5.50

4.50

3.50

J J         J J         J        J

2021               2022               2023

Source: Prepared by Banco de México with Bloomberg data.

**A.2.2. Economic activity in Mexico**

According to Mexico’s GDP flash estimate published
by INEGI, the country’s economic activity increased
its rate of expansion during the first quarter of the
year, thus displaying resilience despite the prevailing
complex external scenario (Chart 13).

Regarding external demand, during the first quarter
of 2023, the value of manufacturing exports
registered moderate growth, following the decline
observed in the previous quarter. This was the result
of growth in both automotive exports and the rest of
manufacturing (Chart 14). As for domestic demand,
during the first bimester of 2023, private

consumption increased significantly as a result of the
good performance of both goods and services.
Meanwhile, gross fixed investment continued
increasing. Regarding the latter’s components,
investment in machinery and equipment continued
showing dynamism, while investment spending on
construction slowed its rate of recovery.

16


-----

**Chart 13**

**Gross Domestic Product**

Quarterly percentage change, s. a.


**Chart 15**

**Global Indicator of Economic Activity**

Indices 2019 = 100, s. a.


6

13.08

4

2

0

-2

-4

-17.77

Q-I 1/

-6

I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV I

2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023

s. a. / Seasonally adjusted figures. The chart’s range was adjusted to
facilitate its reading.
1/ The figure corresponding to the first quarter of 2023 refers to the timely
estimate of quarterly GDP published by INEGI.
Source: Mexico’s System on National Accounts (SCNM, for its Spanish
acronym), INEGI.


115

110

105

100

95

90

85

80

J

2017


2023


**Chart 14**

**Total Manufacturing Exports**

Indices 2019 = 100, s. a.


140

Total

Automotive

120 Non-automotive

100

80

60

10.5 March

40

J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J M

2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023

s. a. / Seasonally adjusted series and trend series based on data in nominal
US dollars. The former is represented by a solid line and the latter by a
dotted line. The chart’s range was adjusted to facilitate its reading
Source: Prepared by Banco de México with data from the Tax
Administration Service (SAT, for its Spanish acronym), the Ministry of the
Economy (SE, for its Spanish acronym), Banco de México, the National
Institute of Statistics and Geography (INEGI, for its Spanish acronym).
Mexico’s Merchandise Trade Balance, and the National System of
Statistical and Geographical Information (SNIEG, for its Spanish acronym),
Information of national interest.

On the production side, during the first bimester of
2023, services increased their dynamism, after
having slowed during the previous quarter. This
reflected the good performance across most of its
components (Chart 15). Industrial activity contracted
in March, mainly due to the weakness in
manufacturing. Mining reversed much of the
expansion of the previous month. In contrast,
construction registered an increase (Chart 16).


s. a. / Seasonally adjusted and trend series. The former is represented by
a solid line and the latter by a dotted line.
1/ Figures as of February 2023.
2/ Figures as of March 2023 from the Monthly Industrial Activity Indicator.
Source: Mexico’s System of National Accounts (SCNM, for its Spanish
acronym), INEGI.

**Chart 16**

**Industrial Activity [1/]**

Indices 2019 = 100, s. a.

120

110

100

90

Total

80

Mining (22.3%)

Manufacturing (49.7%)

70

Construction (23.3%)

Utilities (4.7%) March

60

J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J M

2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023

s. a. / Seasonally adjusted and trend series. The former is represented by
a solid line and the latter by a dotted line.
1/ Figures in parenthesis correspond to their share in the total in 2013.
Source: Mexico’s System of National Accounts (SCNM, for its Spanish
acronym), INEGI.

Regarding the cyclical position of the economy, in
light of the growth of economic activity during the first
quarter of 2023, negative output gap point estimate
continued closing (Chart 17). During the first quarter
of the year, the national and urban unemployment
rates continued decreasing and remained at
particularly low levels (Chart 18). Seasonally
adjusted figures for April show that the creation of
IMSS-insured jobs maintained its dynamism. Finally,
in March 2023, unit labor costs in the manufacturing
sector continued trending upwards and were above
the average level reported in 2022 (Chart 19).

17

|Total Automotive Non-automotive 10 J A J O J A J O J A J O J A 17 2018 2019 2020 Seasonally adjusted series and trend ollars. The former is represented by|.5 March J O J A J O J A J O J M 2021 2022 2023 series based on data in nominal a solid line and the latter by a|
|---|---|


-----

**Chart 17**

**Output Gap Estimates [1/]**

Percent of potential output, s. a.


12

8

4

0

-4

-8

-12

Global Economic Activity Index
(IGAE) 2/

-16

Gross Domestic Product 2/

-20 Q-I

95% confidence interval 3/ March

-24

J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J M

2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023


s. a. / Calculations based on seasonally adjusted figures.
1/ Output gap estimated with a tail-corrected Hodrick-Prescott filter; see
Banco de México (2009), “Inflation Report, April-June 2009”, p.74.
2/ GDP figures up to Q1-2023 and IGAE implicit up to March 2023,
consistent with said timely figure.
3/ Output gap confidence interval calculated with a method of unobserved
components.
Source: Prepared by Banco de México with INEGI data.

**Chart 18**

**National and Urban Unemployment Rates**

Percent, s. a.

6.5

Urban unemployment rate

6.0

National unemployment rate

5.5

5.0

4.5

4.0

3.5

3.0

March

2.5

J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J M

2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023

s. a. / Seasonally adjusted and trend series. The former is represented by
a solid line and the latter by a dotted line.
Source: Prepared by Banco de México with data from ENOE, ETOE (from
April to June 2020), and ENOE new edition (ENOE[N]) from July to date.


125

Unit labor costs 143.34

120

Productivity

115

110

105

100

95

90

March

85

J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J M

2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023

a.e. / Seasonally adjusted and trend series. The former is represented by a
solid line and the latter by a dotted line. The range of the chart was
narrowed to make it easier to read.
1/ Productivity based on hours worked.
Source: Prepared by Banco de México with seasonally adjusted data of the
Monthly Manufacturing Industry Survey and industrial activity indicators of
Mexico’s System of National Accounts (Sistema de Cuentas Nacionales de
México, SCNM), INEGI.

In March 2023, domestic financing to firms registered
a positive real annual variation for the ninth
consecutive month. Bank credit to firms continued
recovering gradually, although it moderated its rate
of expansion compared to the fourth quarter of 2022.
This slowdown was observed only for large firms. In
those issuing regularly in stock markets, part of the
contraction in bank credit reflected the fact that this
group of firms resorted to debt markets to obtain
funds and used a proportion of them to pay off bank
debt. In contrast, credit granted to smaller firms
maintained a high level of dynamism. This occurred
in a context in which the demand of firms for credit
continued recovering. Lending standards were more
restrictive for large companies and thus remained
tight. These conditions, however, have tended to
ease for smaller firms since the second half of 2021.

18


-----

As for credit to households, in March 2023,
commercial bank housing portfolio maintained its
rate of expansion. Performing credit to consumption
continued growing in real annual terms as a result of
the dynamism of credit cards and payroll loans. This
has taken place in a context in which household
demand for credit has continued to increase in
general. Mortgage lending and consumer credit
conditions remained relatively stable.

In March 2023, interest rates on bank credit to firms
increased consistent with the behavior of the
reference rate, reaching levels above those
observed at the end of 2019. Corporate credit
intermediation margins remained at levels below
those of February 2020, although they increased for
the second consecutive quarter for smaller firms.
Although interest rates on mortgages increased from
July 2022 to January of this year, and then remained
practically unchanged, their levels remained

relatively low. In December 2022, credit card interest
rates increased with respect to the level observed in
the third quarter. Those for payroll loans registered
similar levels.

As for portfolio quality, in March 2023 corporate and
housing loan delinquency rates remained stable with
respect to those observed in the previous month and
at low levels. Finally, consumer portfolio delinquency
rates did not show significant changes, following the
increases observed in the three previous months,
and remain at levels below those registered prior to
the onset of the pandemic.

**A.2.3. Development of inflation and inflation**
**outlook**

Annual headline inflation decreased from 6.85 to
6.25% between March and April 2023 (Chart 20 and
Table 1). This decline was due to the reduction in
both non-core and core inflation. Headline and core
inflation, however, remain at high levels.


Source: INEGI.

Between March and April 2023, annual core inflation
declined from 8.09 to 7.67%. This performance
mainly reflected the decrease in annual merchandise
inflation from 10.12 to 9.54% (Chart 21). Within its
components, the annual variation of food

merchandise prices continued decreasing, although
still from high levels, from 12.95 to 12.14% in those
months. The annual variation of non-food

merchandise prices continued decreasing,

registering 6.93 and 6.59% between the referred
dates (Chart 22). Meanwhile, annual services
inflation decreased from 5.71 to 5.46% during the
same period. This result reflected a decrease from
7.72 to 7.10% in the annual variation of prices of
services other than education and housing. In this
regard, the reduction in the annual variation of prices
of travel services, which is known for its volatility and
seasonal effects, stood out. In contrast, the annual
variation of housing prices continued increasing from
3.54 to 3.67%.

19


**Chart 20**

**Consumer Price Index**

Annual percentage change


14
13
12
11
10

9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0

-1
-2
-3

J

2017


M S J M S J

2018 2019


M S J

2020


M S J

2021


M S J

2022


M S J

2023


-----

**Chart 21**

**Merchandise and Services Core Price Sub-index**

Annual percentage change

12

Merchandise

11 Services

10

9

8

7

6

5

4

3

2


20

15

10

5

0

-5

-10

J

2017


**Chart 23**

**Non-core Price Sub-index**

Annual percentage change


M S J

2018


1

0

J M S J

2017 2018

Source: INEGI.


M S J

2019


M S J

2020


M S J

2021


M S J

2022


M S J

2023


M S J

2019


M S J

2020


M S J

2021


M S J

2022


April

M S J

2023


**Chart 22**

**Merchandise Core Price Sub-index**

Annual percentage change


16

14

12

10

8

6

4

2

0

J

2017


M S J

2018


M S J

2019


M S J

2020


M S J

2021


M S J

2022


April

M S J

2023


Source: INEGI.

Between March and April 2023, annual non-core
inflation decreased from 3.27 to 2.12% (Chart 23 and
Table 1). This result was mainly influenced by the
decline from -2.26 to -4.21% in the annual variation
of energy prices, where the decrease from -21.32 to
-26.38% in the price of L.P. gas and from 3.19 to
2.43% in the price of gasoline stood out. The annual
variation of agricultural and livestock product prices
decreased from 7.24 to 6.13% during the same
months. This mainly reflected a reduction from 5.82
to 3.73% in the prices of fruits and vegetables.


Source: INEGI.

Regarding inflation expectations drawn from the
survey conducted by Banco de México among
private sector specialists, between February and
April 2023, the medians for headline and core
inflation for the end of 2023 decreased from 5.28 to
5.05% and from 5.40 to 5.36%, respectively.
Meanwhile, the medians for headline and core
inflation expectations for the end of 2024 increased
slightly from 4.07 to 4.10% and from 4.04 to 4.10%,
respectively. The median of headline inflation
expectations for the next four years remained at
3.80%, while that for core inflation decreased from
3.85 to 3.80%. The median of headline inflation
expectations for longer terms (5 to 8 years)
decreased from 3.60 to 3.55%, while that for the core
component increased slightly from 3.50 to 3.55%.
Finally, compensation for inflation and inflationary
risk decreased during the reported period, although
it remains at high levels. Within it, inflation
expectations implied by market instruments

remained stable and continue at high levels, while
the inflation risk premium declined.

Inflation is still expected to converge to the 3% target
in the fourth quarter of 2024. This projection is
subject to risks. On the upside: i) persistence of core
inflation at high levels; ii) foreign exchange
depreciation due to volatility in international financial
markets; iii) greater cost-related pressures, and iv)
pressures on energy prices or on agricultural and
livestock product prices. On the downside: i) a
greater-than-anticipated slowdown of the world
economy; ii) a lower pass-through effect from some
cost-related pressures; iii) a better functioning of
production and distribution chains; and, iv) a largerthan-anticipated effect from the Federal

Government’s measures to fight elevated prices.
The balance of risks for the trajectory of inflation

20


-----

within the forecast horizon remains biased to the
upside.

**Table 1**

**Consumer Price Index and Components**

Annual percentage change

**Item** **February 2023** **March 2023** **April 2023**

**CPI** **7.62** **6.85** **6.25**

**SubyacenteCore** **8.29** **8.09** **7.67**

**Merchandise** **10.65** **10.12** **9.54**

Food, beverages and tobacco 13.70 12.95 12.14

Non-food merchandise 7.22 6.93 6.59

**Services** **5.55** **5.71** **5.46**

Housing 3.43 3.54 3.67

Education (tuitions) 4.83 4.88 4.88

Other services 7.51 7.72 7.10

**No SubyacenteNon-core** **5.65** **3.27** **2.12**

**Agricultural and livestock products** **9.29** **7.24** **6.13**

Fruits and vegetablesFruits abd vegetables 8.12 5.82 3.73

Livestock productsLivestock 10.22 8.37 8.01

**Energy and government-authorized prices Energéticos y Tarifas Aut. por Gobierno** **2.77** **0.16** **-1.08**

Energy productsEnergy 1.50 -2.26 -4.21

Government-authorized pricesTarifas Autorizadas por Gobierno 5.93 6.35 6.78

Source:INEGI.


21


-----

-----

