-----

-----

**FOREWARNING**
This document is provided for the reader’s convenience
only. The translation from the official Spanish version
was made by Banco de México’s staff. Discrepancies
may arise between the original document in Spanish
and its English translation. For this reason, the original
Spanish version is the only official document.


**1. PLACE, DATE AND PARTICIPANTS**

**1.1. Place: Meeting held by virtual means.**

**1.2. Date of Governing Board meeting: November**
8, 2023.

**1.3. Participants:**

- Victoria Rodríguez, Governor.

- Galia Borja, Deputy Governor.

- Irene Espinosa, Deputy Governor.

- Jonathan Heath, Deputy Governor.

- Omar Mejía, Deputy Governor.

- Rogelio Eduardo Ramírez, Secretary of Finance

and Public Credit.

- Gabriel Yorio, Undersecretary of Finance and

Public Credit.

- Eduardo Magallón, Alternate Secretary of the

Governing Board.

Prior to this meeting, preliminary work by Banco de
México’s staff analyzing the economic and financial
environment as well as the developments in inflation
and the determinants and outlook for inflation, was
conducted and presented to the Governing Board
(see Annex).

**2. ANALYSIS AND RATIONALE BEHIND THE**
**GOVERNING BOARD’S VOTING**

**_International environment_**

**Most members stated that during the third**
**quarter world economic activity continued**
**expanding. Some members highlighted that the rate**
of growth was greater than in the second quarter.
**Some members pointed out that it was also higher**
than anticipated. Most members added that
**economic growth has been heterogeneous**
**across countries. In this regard, they noted the**
**resilience of the US economy. Some members**
associated said resilience with the support from
private consumption. They mentioned that in the euro
area economic activity contracted. With respect to


China, some members stated that, during the same
period, economic activity surprised to the upside.
However, **one member noted that, from a**

longer-term perspective, the Chinese economy has
slowed down. **Another member indicated that**
investment in said economy remains weak. He/she
added that timely indicators continue suggesting a
deceleration in the manufacturing sector in advanced
economies and a weakening in the emerging ones.
He/she pointed out that for both groups of economies
the corresponding indicators for the services sector
are trending downwards, although they remain in
expansion territory. One member mentioned that in
the United States economic growth has been more
resilient than expected. He/she added that global
growth forecasts by international organizations
remained unchanged since Mexico’s last monetary
policy decision, although for the United States they
were revised upwards for 2023 and 2024.

**Some members considered that the balance of risks**
to global economic activity remains biased to the
downside. **One member emphasized the risk**
associated with challenges in the real estate sector
in China. He/she added that, in the United States,
uncertainty prevails as to the impact of the tightening
of financial and credit conditions, a reduction in
households’ excess savings, and the effect of higher
interest rates once the refinancing needs of
businesses and households arrive.

**Some members highlighted that labor markets**
remain tight in several countries. **One member**
mentioned that significant wage-related pressures
persist. However, another member stated that these
markets continue exhibiting signs of a better balance
between supply and demand. He/she pointed out
that, in the United States, the non-farm payroll has
trended downwards in recent months even with some
surprises to the downside, and the unemployment
rate has increased slightly. In this context, he/she
underlined that nominal wage growth in the United
States has moderated.

**Most members pointed out that headline inflation**
**continued decreasing in most economies.**
**Nevertheless, they indicated that it is still above**
**the central banks’ targets in a large number of**
**these economies.** **Some members underlined that**
in certain cases headline inflation has rebounded
somewhat. One member attributed the above to the
evolution of energy prices. Another member
mentioned that various pressures on prices have
been easing insofar as the effects of the shocks
associated with the pandemic and the military conflict
in Ukraine have been dissipating. He/she

1


-----

emphasized that the above, along with tight
monetary conditions worldwide, have contributed to
the decline of inflation at the global level. **Most**
**members underlined that overall inflation is**
**expected to converge to central banks’ targets by**
**the end of 2024 or during 2025.** **As for core**
**inflation, they pointed out that it has declined**
**more gradually than headline inflation. Some**
members stated that, regarding core inflation
components, services’ prices remained subject to
significant pressures. **Most members emphasized**
**that the geopolitical conflict in the Middle East**
**could** **have** **repercussions** **on** **the** **global**

**inflationary outlook. However, they noted that, so**
**far, its effects have been limited. One member**
stated that geopolitical shocks are often associated
with increases in commodity prices, especially those
of energy products, and that sometimes they have
led to economic contractions and severe inflationary
periods. He/she added that the transmission of these
shocks typically depends on three factors: their
magnitude and duration, the cyclical position of the
global economy and the macroeconomic balances
that prevail. Another member expressed that, up to
now, international crude oil reference prices have
declined. **Some members argued that, looking**
ahead, it will be relevant to continue monitoring the
evolution of the military conflict and its potential
implications for economic activity, inflation, and
global financial markets.

**Most members pointed out that the majority of**
**central banks in advanced economies left their**
**reference rates unchanged. Some members**
added that these authorities are expected to be
nearing the end of their hiking cycles. Nevertheless,
**one member considered that they have left open the**
possibility of additional increases. **Some members**
added that the central banks remain cautious and
data-dependent. **Most members highlighted that**
**the monetary authorities in the major advanced**
**economies are expected to maintain high**
**reference rates for an extended period.** **One**
member indicated that the European Central Bank
stated in its latest monetary policy decision that such
policy would contribute substantially to the

convergence of inflation to its target. **Another**
member cautioned about the risk of a premature
easing by monetary authorities, which, in his/her
opinion, would hinder the attainment of goals within
the foreseen horizon.

**Most members mentioned that, in its November**
**meeting, the US Federal Reserve left the target**
**range for the federal funds rate unchanged.** **One**
member added that this is the second consecutive


pause, and that the chairman of that institution
highlighted that tighter financial and credit conditions
are likely to affect economic activity, the labor
market, and inflation. However, he pointed out that
the extent of these effects remains uncertain.
**Another member mentioned that the chairman**
underlined the dependence on incoming data for
subsequent decisions.

**All members pointed out that, after Banco de**
**México’s previous monetary policy meeting,**
**international financial markets exhibited higher**
**volatility. Most members highlighted that the US**
**dollar registered a generalized appreciation, in a**
**context of greater risk aversion.** **They added that**
**long-term sovereign interest rates increased**
**significantly worldwide. They pointed out that the**
**expectation that reference rates in the main**
**advanced economies will remain high for a**
**longer** **period** **than** **previously** **anticipated,**

**contributed to the above. Some members stated**
that concerns regarding the financing needs of the
United States also affected the above. One member
stated that interest rates in the United States reached
levels unseen since 2006. He/she mentioned that
yield curves exhibited increases in several countries.
**Another member warned that tighter global financial**
conditions could significantly impact financing costs,
especially for governments with unprecedented high
levels of public debt, leaving them with no room for
maneuver to face future shocks. He/she underlined
that emerging economies continue registering
outflows from fixed-income assets and more
moderate outflows from equity assets. **However,**
**most** **members** **mentioned** **that** **these**

**adjustments in financial markets tended to revert**
**in recent days.** **Some members indicated that this**
occurred after the release of figures that showed a
moderation in the dynamism of the US labor market
and after the Federal Reserve’s monetary policy
decision. **One member explained that, so far this**
year, assets in Asian economies exhibited an
unfavorable performance, while assets in Europe
and Latin America continued performing positively.

**_Economic activity in Mexico_**

**Most members underlined that, according to the**
**GDP flash estimate of the third quarter of 2023,**
**the** **Mexican** **economy** **exhibited** **a**

**higher-than-expected dynamism. Some members**
indicated that the economy expanded at a rate of
0.9% with respect to the previous quarter, which
represented an acceleration relative to the two
previous quarters. **Most members stated that the**
**growth rate remains robust.** **They pointed out**

2


-----

**that the economic expansion has been driven by**
**the three sectors of the economy. However, one**
member mentioned that growth of aggregate activity,
excluding the construction sector, has moderated.

On the production side, some members stated that
industrial production continued expanding. They
mostly attributed it to the high dynamism of
construction. They particularly highlighted the
strength of public construction associated with
railway works, and, to a lesser extent, of private
construction of industrial, commercial, and service
buildings associated with the infrastructure projects
in the southern part of Mexico. Meanwhile, **some**
members underlined that manufacturing shows
stagnation. One member added that a slight decline
in capacity utilization has been observed, except in
the automotive industry. **Some members indicated**
that services continued trending upwards, although
with a differentiated behavior among sectors. **One**
member added that some of those sectors show
declines.

**As** **for** **domestic** **demand,** **all** **members**

**highlighted that investment has maintained high**
**growth rates. Some members underlined that gross**
fixed capital formation is growing at a faster rate than
economic activity overall. Most members noted that
**the dynamism of investment is mainly attributed**
**to non-residential construction, although they**
**added that** **investment** **in** **machinery** **and**

**equipment has also contributed to it.** **One**
member mentioned that expectations generated by
the nearshoring phenomenon are fueling these two
sectors. However, another member underlined that
investment in machinery and equipment has slowed
down.

**Most members highlighted the dynamism of**
**consumption. Some members considered that the**
favorable performance of this indicator is attributed
to the dynamics of the imported goods’ segment.
**One member noted that domestic goods and**
services show weakness, which could persist,
especially in the case of services. Another member
pointed out that consumption has been supported by
labor market dynamics, the increase in remittances,
certain public policies that have allowed a
strengthening of households’ consumption, and by
the high growth rate of consumption credit. **Some**
members agreed that domestic spending has gained
more relevance in the dynamism of the Mexican
economy. **One member mentioned that domestic**
spending is expected to continue contributing to the
resilience of Mexico’s economic activity.


**Regarding the external sector, most members**
**pointed out that manufacturing exports exhibit a**
**heterogeneous behavior across components.**
**Some** members distinguished between the

significant dynamism of automotive exports and the
weakness of non-automotive ones. However, **one**
member pointed out that the latter are at relatively
high levels. **Another member mentioned that it**
cannot be ruled out that a greater-than-expected
slowdown in the US economy could moderate
external demand. **One member reflected on the**
importance of external demand as a driving force for
economic activity from a medium-term perspective,
especially for the recovery after the shock in the
second quarter of 2020. He/she explained that,
nevertheless, as the reopening process and the
normalization of expenditure patterns advanced,
private consumption has gained relevance.

**Most members indicated that the point estimate**
**for the output gap is positive. Some** members
mentioned that it is not statistically different from
zero. One member pointed out that it has expanded
into positive territory. Another member agreed that
indicators suggest tight conditions. **One member**
mentioned that, if the economy remains resilient, its
cyclical position will exhibit tighter conditions.
However, another member underlined that said tight
conditions are expected to fade gradually, although it
will be important to remain vigilant over the
implications for the economy’s price formation
process. Likewise, **one member argued that the**
consumption gap indicator has been turning less
positive, while the labor market one has stopped
increasing, despite remaining at elevated levels.

**Most members pointed out that the labor market**
**remains strong. They underlined that the**
**unemployment rates remain at historic lows. One**
member highlighted that the unemployment gap is
clearly in negative territory. **Another member**
mentioned that the labor participation rate is high.
**Some members pointed out that the number of**
IMSS-insured jobs continued growing. One member
stated, however, that these have been increasing at
a slower rate, which could be reflecting, in part, the
lack of dynamism of manufacturing. **Another**
member considered that the higher levels of
employment observed in the northern border’s free
zone could be associated with the nearshoring
process.

**Most members stated that annual wage growth**
**remains high. Some members underlined that**
wages of IMSS-insured workers continue registering
double-digit annual variations. Nevertheless, **some**

3


-----

members noted that this wage indicator has started
to stabilize. One member added that its growth rate
rebounded slightly in September. Another member
added that considering the evolution of wages in the
National Occupation and Employment Survey
(ENOE, for its acronym in Spanish) they seem to
respond with some lag to the dynamics of inflation,
and thus an adjustment process in wages due to the
previously observed high levels of inflation could still
be taking place. He/she expressed that, to preserve
price stability, it is necessary to remain vigilant to
labor dynamics not extending these pressures for
longer. **One member added that the 12-month**
moving average of contractual wage revisions for
private firms increased to 9.3%.

**_Inflation in Mexico_**

**All members agreed that inflation has decreased**
**significantly** **in** **Mexico.** **Most** **members**

**underlined that headline inflation continues**
**trending downwards. They pointed out that, in**
**view of the progress in the disinflation process,**
**headline inflation registered a level of 4.26% in**
**October 2023. One member stated that this is the**
lowest figure since February 2021. Another member
noted that headline inflation fell 444 basis points from
its maximum level of 8.70% registered in August
2022. He/she added that various inflation trend
measures are on a downward trajectory, and that the
share of the CPI basket items with seasonally
adjusted annualized monthly variations higher than
10% has decreased. This figure has dropped from
around 40% in 2022 to approximately 10% in the
latest data. One member agreed that various metrics
point to the consolidation of a clear and sustained
convergence trajectory towards the target. He/she
added that variations in headline inflation have been
closer to their historical averages and more in line
with what was observed prior to the pandemic. Some
members asserted that the monetary policy stance
has contributed to the progress in the disinflationary
process. One member also added the dissipation of
shocks associated with the pandemic and the military
conflict in Ukraine. He/she underlined that the
disinflationary process has advanced amid a
complex external environment and a resilient
economic activity in Mexico. Some members
considered that the performance of various inflation
determinants has improved. **One** member

exemplified the above with the stabilization of
nominal wages, the deceleration of consumption,
and the improvement in inflation expectations for
different terms. He/she added that lower inflation
levels will lead to less frequent price revisions.
However, **another member noted that, although**


headline inflation has continued decreasing, its
decline has slowed down. One member emphasized
the significant contribution of the non-core

component to the decline in headline inflation over
the last year, as well as the equally important role of
the base effects.

**Most members highlighted that the decline in**
**headline** **inflation** **in October** **was** **mainly**

**supported by the favorable evolution of the core**
**component. They indicated that the latter**
**continued decreasing and registered 5.50% in**
**said month. One member pointed out that its**
contribution has gained greater relevance, and that,
in recent months, it has accounted for almost the
entire decline in headline inflation. **Most members**
**noted the 301 basis-point decline in the core**
**component since its highest level registered in**
**November 2022. One member specified that, while**
it has decreased more gradually than headline
inflation, the magnitude of its decline is only
comparable to the disinflation observed between
2009 and 2015. Another member added that, as in
the case of headline inflation, various trend
measures of core inflation also show an

improvement, such as the trimmed mean, which is on
a decreasing trajectory, as well as the fraction of the
basket with extreme variations, which has declined
markedly relative to a year ago. However, **one**
member warned that the annualized monthly rate of
this component appears to have resumed an upward
trend.

**Most members** **highlighted the mixed behavior**
**within the core component. They described that**
**merchandise inflation continues decreasing,**
**while services inflation still does not show a clear**
**downward inflection point. Regarding the former,**
**one member stated that in October it registered**
5.64%, having maintained a clear downward trend
since November 2022, when it attained its maximum
level of 11.28%. He/she pointed out that over the
16-month period between July 2021 and November
2022, merchandise inflation increased by

approximately 550 basis points, while during the
disinflationary phase this increase has reversed in
less than a year, reflecting a relatively rapid
reduction. **Some members attributed this good**
performance to the normalization of supply chains,
the lower prices of various commodities, and the
foreign exchange rate appreciation. They specified
that the appreciation has contributed to ease
pressures on imported goods’ prices.

**Regarding services inflation, most members**
**noted that it has rebounded in its latest readings.**

4


-----

**Some members mentioned that the annual variations**
in the prices of educational, housing, and tourism
services have increased. They added that the
remaining services exhibit a high resistance to
decline from elevated levels. **Most members**
**expressed that services inflation continues being**
**subject to significant pressures. They underlined**
**that cost increases have not been fully passed on**
**to services prices yet. Some members mentioned**
that this is due to the slow recovery of demand for
them. **One member added that, in general, the**
difference in the performance of merchandise and
services is attributed to the nature of

non-simultaneous shocks and their unsynchronized
fading process. He/she added that pressures on
services prices also reflect, in part, that their
production implies a higher share of labor costs as
compared to merchandise. He/she pointed out that
said pressures emerged during the second half of
2022 and became more prominent in 2023. Another
member argued that services prices continue to
reflect the impact of the shocks associated with the
pandemic and the military conflict in Ukraine, and
that for this reason its evolution is not necessarily
explained by domestic pressures.

**Most members noted that non-core inflation**
**remained at unusually low levels, reaching 0.56%**
**in October. One member recalled that this**
component shifted from 10.65% in August 2022
to -0.67% in July 2023. However, he/she noted that
its rebound has been lower than expected.

**Most members noted that longer-term inflation**
**expectations remained relatively stable at levels**
**above target. Some members pointed out that they**
remained above their historical averages. **One**
member underlined that, while their median has
exhibited few adjustments, other measures such as
the interquartile range and skewness point to an
improvement in their distribution. **Some members**
added that short-term expectations have decreased
gradually. **One member stated that they remain at**
levels above 4%. Another member pointed out that
both their trend and their dispersion have

systematically shown a resistance to decline.
However, **one member mentioned that in October**
the median of expectations for the next 12 months
continued declining with respect to its level in March.
**Another member warned that the anticipated**
increase in annual headline inflation for November
and December could affect short-term inflation
expectations. As for expectations drawn from market
instruments, **one member indicated that breakeven**
inflation rose mainly due to the increases in the
inflation risk premium for different terms.


**Most members mentioned that headline and core**
**inflation are still anticipated to trend downwards.**
**They added that the central bank forecasts still**
**foresee inflation converging to the target in the**
**second quarter of 2025. Some members pointed**
out that these forecasts remained practically
unchanged from the previous meeting. One member
noted that the expected decline in inflation during
2024 considers the implemented monetary policy
actions, as well as prospects that various pressures
on inflation will continue to dissipate. **Another**
member stated that he/she expects the mitigation of
the shocks associated with the pandemic and the
military conflict in Ukraine to be reflected in a more
noticeable reduction in services inflation. **Most**
**members noted that temporary increases in**
**headline inflation are anticipated in November**
**and December. Some members explained that**
non-core inflation is expected to show additional
increases in the coming months. **One member**
indicated that, although a rebound of inflation is
anticipated in some periods, it is expected to
continue on a downward trend.

**All members stated that, despite the progress in**
**disinflation,** **the** **outlook** **continues** **to** **be**

**challenging. In this regard, they agreed that the**
**balance of risks for the trajectory of inflation**
**within the forecast horizon remains biased to the**
**upside. One member considered that this balance**
has increased its upward bias due to the resilient
economic activity, the tight labor market, the
persistence of core inflation, inflation expectations
that are not reversing, and a procyclical fiscal policy.
**Another member stated that the balance of risks has**
improved with respect to that observed in March.
He/she partly attributed this to the greater relevance
of the risk of an external slowdown that moderates
external demand. He/she added that the revision of
forecasts at the September policy meeting implied
the materialization of the risk on core inflation’s
persistence. **One member argued that to continue**
labeling the balance of risks as biased to the upside
does not mean that the environment is as adverse as
it was last year. He/she pointed out that at that time
the upward bias meant the possibility that inflation
would increase at an even greater rate than what was
being observed, while in the disinflation phase it
means that inflation could decrease more gradually
than what is foreseen during the forecast horizon.

**Among upside risks, most members highlighted**
**core inflation’s persistence at high levels.**
However, one member expressed that this risk might
have decreased as a result of the current lower levels
of inflation. He/she stated that, based on empirical

5


-----

evidence, the higher the levels of inflation, the
greater the probability that high levels of inflation
become entrenched in the economy. Consequently,
he/she argued that the reduction already shown by
the core component might have eased this risk. Most
**members mentioned as a risk episodes of**
**exchange** **rate** **depreciation** **in** **case** **of**

**international financial volatility.** **One member**
warned that this could undermine the positive
contribution that the exchange rate has had on input
costs. **Some members highlighted that market**
structures that have not allowed for greater
competition in certain products could contribute to a
slower reduction in inflation.

**As an additional upside risk to inflation, most**
**members** **noted** **the** **possibility** **of** **a**

**greater-than-expected resilience of the economy**
**and that the labor market remains tight.** **One**
member added that, given that the cyclical position
of the economy suggests tight conditions, it will be
necessary to remain alert to their implications for the
price formation process. In this regard, **another**
member warned that higher-than-expected

demand-related pressures are likely to be observed,
especially considering that the output gap is in
positive territory. **One member considered that the**
dynamism of both aggregate demand and the labor
market points to greater pressures on prices and
suggests that the disinflationary process could slow
down. He/she stated that this, along with the
dissipation of the base effect and the expected
increase in the non-core component, raise the
possibility that inflation remains above the variability
range longer than expected. **Some members**
mentioned the pro-cyclical fiscal policy as a risk. One
member noted that although a lower deficit than the
one approved is expected for 2023, a public balance
deficit of 4.9% of GDP is anticipated for 2024. He/she
mentioned that, the above, together with changes in
the composition of government expenditures, implies
substantial challenges for the fiscal consolidation
foreseen for 2025. Additionally, he/she argued that
the lack of a plan to ensure Pemex's viability in the
medium and long terms, beyond the support granted
to provide it with liquidity, represents a risk for the
sustainability of public finances and for credit ratings.

**Most members mentioned the possibility of**
**higher-than-expected** **cost-related** **pressures.**

**One member considered that due to the still**
incomplete pass-through of costs and the fact that
the adjustment of relative prices between services
and merchandise has not yet concluded, services


inflation could continue being subject to pressures in
the coming months. He/she stated that costs could
increase more than expected, due to the

aforementioned tightening of the labor market and to
idiosyncratic factors, such as the levels of insecurity,
the anticipated minimum wage increases, and the
effects of Hurricane Otis. Regarding the latter, he/she
emphasized that greater weight should be given to
climate-related factors in the balance of risks to
inflation. **Some members highlighted the risk of**
pressures on energy prices due to the escalation of
geopolitical conflicts. As for downside risks, **some**
members underlined the possibility of a

greater-than-anticipated slowdown of the world
economy, as well as a lower pass-through effect from
some cost-related pressures.

**_Macrofinancial environment_**

**All members indicated that, in line with**
**developments in international markets, volatility**
**increased in domestic financial markets. They**
**highlighted that after the last policy meeting, the**
**Mexican peso depreciated. Most members stated**
**that trading conditions in the foreign exchange**
**market deteriorated somewhat. One member**
added that for some weeks the Mexican peso lost
part of its attractiveness despite maintaining a high
interest rate differential, given the increase in its
volatility, higher than that of other currencies.
However, **another member noted that, considering**
the events throughout 2023, the Mexican peso
continued standing out among its peers due to its
resilient performance. **Most members expressed**
**that recently, once risk aversion in international**
**markets decreased, the peso reversed part of the**
**depreciation it had registered.**

**The majority noted that, since the previous policy**
**meeting, interest rates on government securities**
**increased for all terms. They pointed out that, in**
**line with developments in international financial**
**markets, these adjustments tended to reverse in**
**the last few days. Some members highlighted that**
Mexico’s sovereign rates exhibited a high correlation
and sensitivity to the evolution of US Treasury bonds.
**One member pointed out that the stock market**
registered a negative performance, affected by the
industrial sector. **Another member asserted that**
sovereign risk premia decreased, showing a
behavior different from that of other emerging
economies. **One member mentioned that the**
tightening of financial conditions and its potential
effects on domestic financial markets must be
monitored. Some members argued that the implied
expectations for the path of the reference rate in TIIE

6


-----

swaps adjusted upwards and exhibited some
volatility, discounting with a greater probability that
the first interest rate cut takes place between the
March and May decisions and that subsequent
decreases will be gradual.

Regarding financing in the economy, some members
noted that total financing continued increasing. One
member highlighted that its growth rate in real terms
rose to 2.8%. **Some members pointed out that the**
expansion is attributed to the domestic component.
**One** member stated that external financing

decreased. Some members highlighted the increase
in credit to consumers and to firms. **One member**
indicated that, according to information from the third
quarter, there has been an increase in the demand
for credit, although in certain cases the general
conditions or lending approval standards have
tightened. He/she stated that the dynamism in credit
reflects the favorable performance of the economy
and the strength of the labor market. **Another**
member indicated that, based on October figures, the
financial conditions index in Mexico tightened
somewhat and remains in restrictive territory,
although at relatively low levels. He/she mentioned
that delinquency rates are at low and stable levels,
although those corresponding to consumption have
recently increased marginally.

**_Monetary policy_**

**The Governing Board evaluated the magnitude**
**and diversity of the inflationary shocks and their**
**determinants, along with the evolution of**
**medium- and long-term inflation expectations**
**and the price formation process. It acknowledged**
**the progress of the disinflationary process in**
**Mexico. Nevertheless, it deemed that the outlook**
**is still challenging. Based on the above, and**
**taking into consideration the monetary policy**
**stance already attained and the persistence of**
**the shocks that the Mexican economy is facing,**
**with the presence of all its members, the Board**
**decided unanimously to maintain the target for**
**the overnight interbank interest rate at 11.25%.**
**With this decision, the monetary policy stance**
**remains in the trajectory required for inflation to**
**converge to its 3% target within the forecast**
**horizon.**

**The Board will thoroughly monitor inflationary**
**pressures as well as all factors that have an**
**incidence on the foreseen path for inflation and**
**its expectations. It considers that, in order to**
**achieve an orderly and sustained convergence of**
**headline inflation to the 3% target, the reference**
**rate must be maintained at its current level for**


**some time. The latter, taking into account that**
**although the outlook remains complicated,**
**progress on disinflation has been made. The**
**central bank reaffirms its commitment with its**
**primary mandate and the need to continue its**
**efforts to consolidate an environment of low and**
**stable inflation.**

**One** **member argued that while the current**
inflationary outlook is less adverse than the one
faced in 2022, it remains complicated and with
upside risks, and thus monetary policy should
continue to be conducted with a cautious approach.
He/she considered that the reference rate should
remain at its current level, taking into account the
revised forecasts from the September policy
decision, the pressures on prices, mainly of services,
and the levels of headline and core inflation that still
prevail. However, he/she asserted that such levels
reflect not only the road that remains to be covered,
but also the significant progress in disinflation. In this
regard, he/she highlighted the decrease in headline
and core inflation since the third and fourth quarters
of 2022, respectively, and that, looking forward,
disinflation is expected to remain underway. In this
context, he/she argued that the possibility of
adjusting the reference rate downwards could begin
to be evaluated in the policy meetings of the first
quarter of 2024. He/she noted that such option would
be on the table and that the decisions to be taken
would be subject to available information. He/she
added that acting cautiously will be required given
the challenges that still prevail, so that when
macroeconomic conditions allow for downward
adjustments, these would be gradual. He/she noted
that, depending on the evolution of the inflationary
outlook, a cycle of continuous decreases would not
necessarily take place. In this regard, he/she pointed
out that decisions should be such that the monetary
policy stance remains solid. In particular, he/she
specified that the restrictive stance should continue
to contribute to the reduction of inflation in order to
achieve the convergence of inflation to the target.
He/she reiterated that monetary policy’s priority must
continue to be to reduce inflation and consolidate an
environment of low and stable inflation. He/she
stated that such a policy is consistent with the
primary mandate of price stability and that it is for the
benefit of Mexico’s population.

**Another** **member** mentioned that, although

significant progress has been made in the
disinflationary process, an environment of high
uncertainty and risks still prevails. He/she stated that
it is not yet possible to declare victory in the battle
against inflation and that Banco de México must not

7


-----

drop its guard. In this context, he/she considered that
the reference rate should remain at its current level.
He/she pointed out that, looking ahead, several
factors may hinder the expected path of inflation and
complicate the conduction of monetary policy.
Among these factors, he/she highlighted a

higher-than-expected growth; a pro-cyclical fiscal
policy; and the possibility of fiscal pressures derived
from the need to support the population affected by
Hurricane Otis; all of this with a positive point
estimate for the output gap and with an outlook for it
narrowing further. Regarding the external front,
he/she underlined the lengthening of the Federal
Reserve's strategy of maintaining higher interest
rates for a longer period, which could trigger new
episodes of depreciation. He/she also mentioned the
possibility of a prolongation or escalation of
geopolitical conflicts that could affect commodity
prices and the stability of financial markets. He/she
reiterated that given the increase in the upward bias
of the balance of risks for inflation, it is necessary to
maintain the level of monetary restriction attained.
He/she pointed out that the statement of this decision
should maintain a cautious tone, underline the high
level of uncertainty, and highlight that the upwards
bias in the balance of risks for inflation has increased.
He/she indicated that, although there is the possibility
of adjusting the monetary policy stance in the first
quarter of next year, it is subject to assumptions
related to the inflationary outlook, which can change
rapidly under the present adverse environment,
given the risks mentioned above. He/she expressed
that, for this reason, it is neither prudent nor
necessary to bring forward a signal that could change
soon, especially when the market has already
internalized the possibility of a first cut to the
reference rate between March and May of next year.
He/she mentioned that a flexible and data-dependent
approach should be maintained, and that such
communication should be evaluated once again in
the next policy decision.

**One** **member considered that, while the reference**
rate should remain at its current level, in the policy
decisions of the first quarter of 2024 a discussion
regarding the possibility of a fine-tuning of the
reference rate could begin. He/she argued that such
discussion could take place depending on available
information suggesting that the risks that have been
pointed out have not materialized, and that inflation
remains on the foreseen trajectory. He/she

highlighted that progress in disinflation must be
acknowledged. He/she noted that, due to the
reduction in 12-month inflation expectations, the
ex-ante real interest rate has increased by almost 80
basis points since March. He/she argued that in the


next months said rate should be maintained between
7 and 7.5% in order to guarantee the convergence of
inflation to the target; for this reason, the fine-tuning,
in his/her opinion, would take place in order to
prevent the ex-ante real rate from moving out of that
interval. He/she stated that Banco de México should
use more and better forward guidance, in line with
the recommendations of international organizations.
He/she stated that the period during which the
reference rate will remain fixed should no longer be
categorized as “extended”, and it should rather be
indicated explicitly that it will remain unchanged at
least until the end of the year. He/she expressed that
it should be made clear that next year's policy
decisions will be subject to the evolution of incoming
data, in order for expectations about the first cut to
the reference rate not to be anticipated or postponed
in an unjustified manner. He/she noted that analysts
estimate a first adjustment to the rate in March 2024,
while, according to market instruments, this would
occur between March and May. He/she pointed out
that expectations should be monitored so that they
do not diverge significantly as a reflection of the
greater uncertainty about the next reference rate
adjustment. He/she recommended communicating
that, although monetary policy normalization seems
distant, occasional and gradual adjustments during
the first quarters of next year are not ruled out.
He/she pointed out that, given the domestic
pressures, when conducting monetary policy, the
main objective should be the absolute policy stance.
Regarding the relative stance, he/she stated that the
interest rate differential between Mexico and the
United States is sufficient to counter financial
volatility, although he/she warned that this has
started to affect the exchange rate, which could
reduce the positive contribution it has had on input
costs. He/she added that the lack of coordination
between fiscal and monetary policies could delay the
transmission of monetary policy and hinder its
normalization. He/she argued that, in his/her opinion,
monetary policy transmission in Mexico is less
effective than in other countries, due to the low levels
of financial depth and inclusion, low credit
penetration, the high levels of informality, and the
lack of competition in the financial system. He/she
pointed out that, this same lack of competition in
other sectors has allowed those firms with market
power to continue increasing their prices, despite the
fact that the supply shocks which drove those
increases have dissipated. He/she stated that the
above has slowed down the decline in inflation.

**Another member stated that the reference rate**
should still remain at its current level for some time,
and that the restrictive monetary policy stance should

8


-----

probably be maintained throughout the forecast
horizon in order to mitigate risks, consolidate the
downward trend in inflation, and continue lowering its
expectations. In this regard, he/she highlighted that
the disinflationary process has advanced, particularly
in the last twelve months, at a speed unseen since
the 3% target was set, supported, in part, by the
restrictive monetary policy stance. He/she added that
price dynamics have started to come close to their
historical pattern and that the decrease in inflation
cannot be attributed to short-run factors alone, and
thus, in general, the observed determinants of
inflation have been more consistent with what Banco
de México has foreseen. However, he/she stated that
inflation expectations have decreased gradually,
which could be because in Mexico the formation of
inflation expectations seems to be more of a
retrospective process rather than a prospective one.
He/she mentioned that this is more noticeable in the
behavior of business sector expectations. He/she
pointed out that in economies where the formation of
expectations is of a more retrospective nature,
monetary tightening has a lesser effect on inflation
than in economies where there are more prospective
conditions. He/she considered that the monetary
policy transmission channels continue operating in
the right direction, although with a heterogeneous
impact on economic activity and inflation, and thus
they require some time to continue contributing to the
disinflationary process. He/she also recalled that the
balance of risks for inflation is still biased to the
upside. He/she mentioned that, taking all of the
above into consideration, an equilibrium must be
achieved between the progress in disinflation and the
existing risks within the forecast horizon. He/she
argued that, given the increase in the ex-ante real
interest rate and the tighter monetary conditions,
which are reflected in the real exchange rate and in
market instruments, it would be possible to evaluate,
later on, whether the observed and anticipated
disinflationary process are compatible with lower
nominal interest rate levels. He/she argued that,
given the environment of uncertainty surrounding
decision-making, monetary policy’s approach should
remain prudent, cautious and gradual, in line with the
challenges that continue to be faced, in order for
inflation to converge to the target, and consistent with
seeking an orderly behavior of markets, the financial
system, and the economy as a whole.

**One member** mentioned that the monetary policy
stance is sufficiently solid and that, along with the
mitigation of inflationary shocks, it has improved the
inflationary outlook. Highlighting the progress made,
he/she pointed out that the ex-ante real rate is at a
clearly restrictive level of around 373 basis points


above the neutral range. He/she also underlined that,
since March, when the rate reached its current level,
headline and core inflation have, both, accumulated
259 basis point declines. He/she stated that the
improvement in the inflationary outlook has been
observed in its determinants; thus, the lower inflation
level will signify less frequent price revisions, wages
have stabilized and consumption has decelerated,
while inflation expectations continue showing

improvements. Furthermore, he/she stated that its
balance of risks, without ignoring that it remains
biased to the upside, has improved relative to March
given the latest forecast revision and certain
downside risks that have gained relevance, such as
a possible deceleration of the global economy.
However, he/she argued that challenges remain,
such as the core component’s persistence, due, in
part, to the behavior of services, which continue to be
affected by the shocks of the pandemic and the
conflict in Ukraine. He/she stated that monetary
policy has been consistent with an environment
characterized by a resilient economic activity and an
inflation partly stemming from shocks over which
monetary policy has no effect. He/she pointed out
that, in this complex environment, monetary policy
has prevented expectations from becoming

unanchored and a contamination of the price
formation process. He/she argued that, considering
the improvements in the inflationary outlook and that
the transmission channels are operating and will
continue to have an incidence on inflation in the
following quarters, there is room to discuss cuts to
the reference rate. He/she mentioned that the
challenge is to adjust the monetary policy stance in
order to be consistent with the fact that inflation, while
still above target, is already trending downwards.
He/she stated that, considering the expected
progress on the inflationary outlook, the first
reference rate cut could occur at the beginning of the
first quarter of 2024. He/she mentioned that, in a
context in which the disinflationary process may not
be linear, the solid monetary policy stance would
continue operating even if rate adjustments are
implemented. He/she added that, given the

prevailing environment of uncertainty, adjustments
would be gradual and not necessarily continuous.
He/she deemed it adequate to communicate that the
reference rate will remain at its current level for some
time and that looking ahead a restrictive policy
stance that ensures the convergence of inflation to
the target should continue.

**3. MONETARY POLICY DECISION**

The Governing Board evaluated the magnitude and
diversity of the inflationary shocks and their

9


-----

determinants, along with the evolution of mediumand long-term inflation expectations and the price
formation process. It acknowledged the progress of
the disinflationary process in Mexico. Nevertheless,
it deemed that the outlook is still challenging. Based
on the above, and taking into consideration the
monetary policy stance already attained and the
persistence of the shocks that the Mexican economy
is facing, with the presence of all its members, the
Board decided unanimously to maintain the target for
the overnight interbank interest rate at 11.25%. With
this decision, the monetary policy stance remains in
the trajectory required for inflation to converge to its
3% target within the forecast horizon.

The Board will thoroughly monitor inflationary
pressures as well as all factors that have an
incidence on the foreseen path for inflation and its
expectations. It considers that, in order to achieve an
orderly and sustained convergence of headline
inflation to the 3% target, the reference rate must be
maintained at its current level for some time. The
latter, taking into account that although the outlook
remains complicated, progress on disinflation has
been made. The central bank reaffirms its
commitment with its primary mandate and the need
to continue its efforts to consolidate an environment
of low and stable inflation.

**4. VOTING**

Victoria Rodríguez, Galia Borja, Irene Espinosa,
Jonathan Heath, and Omar Mejía voted in favor of


maintaining the target for the overnight interbank
interest rate at 11.25%.

**5. DISSENTING OPINIONS/ VOTES**

**Dissenting opinion on the monetary policy**
**statement.** Irene Espinosa.

Although inflation has been decreasing, its

convergence to the target in the second quarter of
2025 has become more challenging. During the
current half of the year, the disinflationary process
has slowed down. Core inflation has fallen mainly
due to the decline in merchandise inflation as
services inflation has shown a resistance to decline
and recently it has increased. In my opinion, the
upward bias in the risks to inflation has increased,
with a more resilient economic activity, a cyclical
position of the economy in positive territory, a tight
labor market, core inflation persistence, non-core
inflation trending upwards, inflation expectations
above our target and not reverting, and a procyclical
fiscal policy for 2024. Looking ahead, the

commitment to attain fiscal consolidation starting in
2025 represents an additional enormous challenge.
Under such conditions, I believe we should remain
prudent and cautious in our communication and
avoid modifying our forward guidance in advance,
given the high level of uncertainty regarding
inflation’s downward trajectory.

10


-----

**ANNEX**

The information in this Annex was prepared for this
meeting by the staff of Banco de México’s
Directorate General of Economic Research and
Directorate General of Central Bank Operations. It
does not necessarily reflect the considerations of the
members of the Governing Board as to the monetary
policy decision.

**A.1. External conditions**

**A.1.1. World economic activity**

During the third quarter of 2023, global economic
activity is expected to have expanded at a greater
rate than in the previous quarter, with economic
performance remaining quite heterogeneous across
countries. The United States and China exhibited
greater dynamism as compared to the second
quarter. In contrast, economic activity in the euro
area remained weak. Purchasing Managers’ Indices
point to a deceleration in the services sector, mainly
in advanced economies, and to a continuous
weakness in global manufacturing activity (Chart 1).
Among global risks, the following stand out:
persistence of inflationary pressures, intensification
of geopolitical tensions, tighter financial conditions,
and, to a lesser extent, challenges to financial
stability.

During the third quarter of 2023, economic activity in
the United States expanded more than expected at
the beginning of the period. Gross Domestic Product
(GDP) increased at a seasonally adjusted quarterly
rate of 1.2%, after having grown 0.5% in the second
quarter (Chart 2).[1] This growth was mainly driven by
private consumption, inventory accumulation, and
government spending. The strike in the automotive
industry is estimated to not have generated
significant effects during this quarter.

1 Expressed as a seasonally adjusted annualized quarterly rate,
the change in US GDP was 4.9% in the third quarter of 2023.


**Chart 1**

**Global: Purchasing Managers’ Index:**

**production component**

Diffusion index, s. a.[1/ ]

60

58

56

54

52

50

Manufacturing

48 Manufacturing (excl. China)

46 Services

Services (excl. China)

44 32.5

24.8

42 23.7 October

20.7

40

J J J J J J J J J J J J J J

2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023

s. a. / Seasonally adjusted figures.
1/ The index varies between 0 and 100 points. A reading above 50 points
is considered an overall increase compared to the previous month and
below 50 points, an overall decrease.
Note: Figures in the chart correspond to respective minimum levels of each
indicator.
Source: IHS Markit.

**Chart 2**

**US: real GDP and components**

Quarterly percentage rate and contribution

in percentage points, s. a.

3.0 Private consumption expenditures

Residential investment

2.5 Nonresidential investment

Change in private inventories

2.0 Net exportsGovernment consumption expenditures

Total

1.5

1.0

0.5

0.0

-0.5

-1.0

-1.5

-2.0

I II III IV I II III IV I II III

2021 2022 2023

s. a. / Seasonally adjusted figures.
Source: Bureau of Economic Activity (BEA).

In September, US industrial production maintained a
lackluster performance as it expanded at a
seasonally adjusted monthly rate of 0.3%, after
having remained stagnant in August. This growth
was driven by progress in the manufacturing and
mining sectors, which was partially offset by a
decline in electricity and gas generation.

11


-----

Manufacturing activity increased 0.4% as a result of
growth in durable goods’ production. Looking ahead,
Purchasing Managers' Indices suggest that activity
in the services sector will be moderate and
manufacturing production will remain somewhat
sluggish.

In the United States, the non-farm payroll continued
expanding, albeit at a more moderate pace. New job
creation figures decreased from a monthly average
of 233 thousand during the third quarter to 150
thousand in October. The number of new vacancies
remained at high levels. Wages registered lower
growth, adjusting from a monthly average of 5.9%
during the second quarter to 5.4% in the third one.
Initial claims for unemployment insurance remained
at low levels. The unemployment rate increased
marginally from 3.8% in September to 3.9% in
October.

In the euro area, economic activity contracted at a
seasonally adjusted quarterly rate of 0.1% in the third
quarter of 2023, after having remained weak during
the previous two quarters.[2] This was the result of a
lower external demand and tight domestic financial
conditions that would have eased residential and
business investment. Additionally, the manufacturing
sector remained weak and the services sector lost
dynamism. In September, relative to the previous
month, the unemployment rate increased slightly to
6.5%.

Economic activity in the major emerging economies
is expected to have expanded during the third
quarter of 2023. However, the rate of economic
growth in Europe and Emerging Asia, as well as
Latin America, is estimated to have differed across
countries. In the case of China, higher growth was
registered in the third quarter with respect to the
second one, as a result of a rebound in retail sales
and despite the stagnation in industrial production
and lower fixed investment. During this period, a
stimulus package designed to boost the growth of
China’s economy was implemented.

2 Expressed as a seasonally adjusted annualized quarterly rate,
the change in euro area GDP was 0.2% in the first quarter, 0.6%


International commodity prices exhibited a mixed
behavior since Mexico’s previous monetary policy
decision. Crude oil reference prices decreased
between late September and the second half of
October, due to the increase in Russian exports and
higher crude oil production in Nigeria and Iran.
Subsequently, certain upward pressures were
observed in mid-October due to the political tensions
caused by the conflict in the Middle East, which could
involve major oil producers in that region. Said
pressures decreased at the end of October due to
the mitigation of the conflict's impact on these goods’
prices and the increase in production by some
members of the Organization of the Petroleum
Exporting Countries (OPEC) and the United States.
Meanwhile, natural gas reference prices increased
during the first half of October due to the lower
production, a higher demand amid lower

temperatures in the United States, damages to a gas
pipeline in the Baltic Sea, strikes by gas sector
workers in Australia, and tensions in the Middle East.
Grain prices increased slightly in October due to
droughts in South America, as well as the blockade
and attacks on Ukrainian ports by Russia. Finally,
industrial metal prices overall trended downwards in
October due to weak investment in China’s real
estate sector and expectations that the United States
will maintain high interest rates for a longer period.
However, in early November, metal prices

rebounded in the context of news about the fiscal
stimulus in China.

**A.1.2. Monetary policy and international financial**
**markets**

In a large number of major advanced and emerging
economies, annual headline inflation continued
decreasing, although in some cases it increased in
its more recent readings. In most countries it remains
at elevated levels and above their central banks’
targets. Core inflation continued to decline.

In some advanced economies, pressures on energy
prices resulted in increases in headline inflation
(Chart 3). In some of these countries, these
pressures have started to ease. In most advanced
economies, core inflation decreased in its last
reading. Nevertheless, this component has declined
gradually, largely reflecting some persistence of
pressures on services’ prices. In the United States,
annual headline inflation measured by the consumer

in the second quarter of 2023 and -0.4% in the third quarter of
2023.

12


-----

expenditure deflator remained virtually unchanged,
declining marginally from 3.45% in August to 3.44%
in September. Hence, it still remains at levels above
the 2% target. A lower annual deflation in energy
prices and a decrease in both food inflation and the
core component were observed. The annual
variation of the latter shifted from 3.8 to 3.7% during
the same period. US headline inflation measured by
the personal consumption expenditures price index
increased marginally in annual terms from 3.67% in
August to 3.70% in September. Annual core inflation
decreased from 4.3 to 4.1% during the same period.

**Chart 3**

**Selected advanced economies:**

**headline inflation**

Annual percentage change

12

United States PCE 1/

10 United States CPI

Japan

8 Euro area 2/

United Kingdom

6

Canada

4

2

September

October

0

-2

J J J J J J J J J J

2019 2020 2021 2022 2023

1/ The personal consumption expenditures price index is used.
2/ Preliminary figures as of October.
Source: Bureau of Economic Analysis, Bureau of Labor Statistics, Eurostat,
Bank of Japan, The UK Office for National Statistics and Statistics Canada.

Analysts’ short-term inflation forecasts for most
major advanced economies remained relatively
stable. Although these forecasts continued

anticipating a moderation of headline inflation
throughout 2024 relative to the levels foreseen for
2023, it would remain above the central banks’
targets. Longer-term inflation expectations drawn
from financial instruments exhibited relative stability
with respect to the levels registered in late
September.

In a large number of emerging economies, annual
headline inflation decreased as a result of lower
pressures on energy and food prices and on the core
component. In most of the major emerging
economies, it remains above their respective central
banks’ targets. Nevertheless, in other countries,
such as South Africa, India and Indonesia, it was
within each central bank’s variability interval. In the

3 The Bank of Japan indicated that, despite maintaining the target
level for yields on 10-year Japanese government bonds (JGB) at
around 0%, it will conduct yield curve control by allowing these


particular cases of China and Thailand, annual
headline Inflation remained close to 0%. In most of
the major emerging economies, core inflation
declined.

In this environment, since Mexico's last monetary
policy decision, the central banks of the main
advanced and emerging economies have made
heterogeneous adjustments to their monetary policy
reference rates, depending on the evolution of
economic indicators which, at the same time, have
exhibited differences across countries. Regarding
future adjustments, several central banks highlighted
that these will depend on the evolution of relevant
data and on the inflationary outlook. However, some
central banks anticipate that their reference rates will
remain at restrictive levels for a longer period, in
order for inflation to return to its target level.

Since the previous monetary policy decision, the
central banks of major advanced economies left their
reference rates unchanged during the analyzed
period. However, in October, the Bank of Japan
decided to further increase flexibility in controlling the
country’s yield curve, compared to what it had
stipulated in its July meeting.[3 ]As for asset-purchase
programs, most central banks in this group of
economies continued to gradually reduce their
securities’ holdings. Regarding expectations for the
monetary policy rate of the main advanced
economies, based on the latest available

information, interest rates implicit in interest rate
swap curves (OIS) are expected to remain at their
current levels for the remainder of 2023 and to
decline starting in the second quarter of 2024 (Chart
4).

yields to fluctuate with an upper limit of 1.0 percentage point from
the target level. Additionally, it will carry out large-scale purchases
of JGBs.

13


-----

**Chart 4**

**Reference rates and trajectories**

**implied in OIS curves[1/]**

Percent

7 **―― US Federal Reserve 2/ Bank of England** End of 2022 End of 2023 End of 2024

6 **― Bank of Japan**

**― European Central Bank deposit rate**
**― OIS implicit trajectory Nov 08, 2023**

5 **--- OIS implicit trajectory Sep 28, 2023**

4

3

2

1

Forecasts

0

-1

2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 2024

1/ OIS: Fixed floating interest rate swap where the fixed interest rate is
associated with the effective overnight reference rate.
2/ For the observed reference rate of the US, the average interest rate of
the target range of the federal funds rate (5.00%- 5.25%) is used.
Source: Banco de México with data from Bloomberg.

Regarding recent monetary policy decisions in the
United States and the euro area, the following stood
out:

i) At its November meeting, the US Federal

Reserve left the target range for the federal funds
rate unchanged for the second consecutive
decision. The target range thus remained
between 5.25 and 5.50%. The Fed also continued
to reduce the size of its balance sheet. It
reiterated that it will continue evaluating incoming
information and that, in order to determine the
degree of additional tightening that might be
appropriate, it will take into account the
cumulative tightening of monetary policy, the lags
with which it affects economic activity, and
inflation, as well as economic and financial
developments. During the press conference, the
chairman of that institution stated that the
Committee will continue assessing in their future
decisions whether additional tightening is

required to return inflation to its target. He added
that the Committee is not considering policy rate
cuts at this time. Based on the latest available
information, expectations drawn from financial
instruments anticipate an interest rate level of
5.4% in the first quarter of 2024, which would
subsequently decline to levels near 4.7% towards
the end of that year.

ii) After increasing its reference rate by 25 basis

points in September, the European Central Bank
(ECB) left it unchanged in October. Thus, its
refinancing, key lending and key deposit rates
thus stood at 4.50, 4.75 and 4.00%, respectively.


In this regard, its Governing Council considers
that interest rates are at levels that, if maintained
for a sufficiently long period, will contribute
substantially to the timely return of inflation to its
target. It also reiterated that it will continue using
a data-dependent approach to determine the
appropriate level and duration of monetary
tightening. The president of that institution
indicated that it is premature to consider a
discussion about a rate cut.

Since Mexico's last monetary policy decision, in the
main emerging economies, most central banks left
their interest rates unchanged. Such was the case,
for instance, of the central bank of China. However,
considering the specific economic circumstances in
each country, some of them announced cuts, such
as the central banks of Brazil, Chile, Peru, Poland,
and Hungary. In contrast, the central banks of
Indonesia and the Philippines raised their reference
rates for the first time since the beginning of this
year, while the central banks of Russia and Turkey
continued raising their monetary policy rates.

International financial markets registered high
volatility and tighter financial conditions since the last
monetary policy decision, which slightly moderated
at the margin (Chart 5). The tightening of financial
conditions responded to concerns regarding the
fiscal position in the United States and expectations
of a tight monetary policy stance for a longer period
than previously anticipated, among other factors.
Thus, in most advanced economies, sovereign debt
interest rates rose in October. However, in early
November, this trend was interrupted by the
expectation of a less tight monetary policy stance by
the US Federal Reserve. Figures suggesting a
certain rebalancing in slack conditions in the US
labor market partly contributed to the above. Stock
markets in both advanced and emerging economies
registered some losses overall (Chart 6). In foreign
exchange markets, the US dollar remained stable.
Since Mexico's last monetary policy decision, the
currencies of most emerging economies exhibited a
mixed behavior against the US dollar (Chart 7
. Lastly, during the reporting period, emerging
economies registered moderate capital outflows,
which were observed in both equity assets and fixedincome assets.

14


-----

**Chart 5**

**Financial conditions indices[1/]**

Units


103

102

101

100


Financial Conditions Index - global
Financial Conditions Index - United States
Financial Conditions Index - euro area 2/

Source: Prepared by Banco de México with data from Bloomberg and
Goldman Sachs. 1/ The financial conditions index is constructed
considering the effect of five variables on economic activity: the reference
interest rate, the 10-year government bond, the spread of investment-grade
bonds over the government debt bond with equivalent maturity, the ratio of
a stock index with 10-year average earnings per share, and the tradeweighted exchange rate. 2/ In the case of the euro area, the spread
between the sovereign bonds of France, Italy, Spain, the Netherlands,
Belgium, Austria, Portugal and Finland over the German 10-year bond is
also considered. The vertical black line indicates the last calendarized
monetary policy meeting of Banco de México.


**Chart 6**

**Change in selected financial indicators from**

**September 28 to November 8, 2023**

Percent, basis pointsPercentage, basis points

10%


5%


50

25


0%

-5%


0

-25


-10%


-50


Source: Bloomberg and ICE. 1/ MSCI Emerging Markets Index, which
includes 24 countries. 2/ DXY: a weighted average estimated by the
Intercontinental Exchange (ICE) of the nominal exchange rate of the main
six currencies operated globally with the following weights: EUR: 57.6%,
JPY: 13.6%, GBP: 11.9%, CAD: 9.1%, SEK: 4.2% and CHF: 3.6%.


**Chart 7**

**Selected emerging economies: financial assets**

**performance as of September 22, 2023**

Percent, basis points

**2-year** **10-year**

**Equity**
**Region** **Country** **Currencies** **interest** **interest** **CDS**

**markets**

**rates** **rates**

**Mexico** **-1.58%** **-0.79%** **-5** **-4** **-19**

**Brazil** **0.75%** **1.85%** **38** **2** **-21**

**Latin**

**Chile** **1.77%** **-3.73%** **74** **28** **-3**

**America**

**Colombia** **0.04%** **0.75%** **6** **-35** **-29**

**Peru** **0.01%** **-5.24%** **26** **30** **2**

**Russia** **3.46%** **5.69%** **260** **-64** **N.D.**

**Poland** **3.78%** **9.46%** **9** **-27** **-3**

**Emerging**

**Turkey** **-4.68%** **-2.22%** **663** **244** **-15**

**Europe**

**Czech Rep.** **0.65%** **2.52%** **-38** **-19** **-1**

**Hungary** **3.28%** **3.59%** **-4** **12** **3**

**China** **0.39%** **-2.36%** **12** **-4** **-10**

**Malaysia** **0.99%** **1.00%** **2** **-9** **4**

**India** **-0.33%** **-1.59%** **12** **12** **-13**

**Asia**

**Philippines** **1.55%** **-1.05%** **46** **38** **-7**

**Thailand** **1.42%** **-6.92%** **-1** **0** **8**

**Indonesia** **-1.06%** **-1.97%** **50** **10** **-6**

**Africa** **South Africa** **2.58%** **-0.31%** **-22** **-32** **-12**

Note: An upward adjustment indicates currency appreciation. Interest rates
correspond to swap rates at the specified terms, except for Hungary, where
government securities with 3-year maturities were used as a reference. For
the Philippines, a 2-year swap rate was used, and for Russia, 2-year and
3-year swap rates were used. The latest CDS data for Russia is as of June
1, 2022.
Source: Bloomberg.

**A.2. Current situation of the Mexican economy**

**A.2.1. Mexican markets**

In the international context described, the Mexican
peso depreciated and interest rates on government
securities increased for all terms. However, in line
with the behavior of international financial markets,
these adjustments tended to reverse.

In particular, the Mexican peso maintained a
depreciating trend since Mexico's last monetary
policy decision. However, in the latest trading
sessions, the currency registered an appreciation
similar to that of other emerging countries. The
Mexican peso traded in a range of 1 peso and 13
cents, between 17.20 and 18.33 pesos per US dollar.
Hence, during the period it registered a depreciation
of 1.58% (Chart 8).


15


-----

**Chart 8**

**Mexican peso exchange rate**

MXN/USD


movements occurred in an environment in which
trading conditions slightly deteriorated.

**Chart 10**

**Nominal yield curve of government securities**

Percent, basis points


26

25

24

23

22

21

20

19

18

17

16

J   M   M   J   S   N   J   M  M   J   S   N   J   M   M   J   S   N   J   M  M   J   S   N

2020 2021 2022 2023


Source: Prepared by Banco de México.

Interest rates registered negative dynamics during
most of the period, with increases along the entire
curve. This trend recently exhibited a significant
correction. As a result, at the end of the period,
marginal changes were observed for most terms with
respect to the levels prevailing at the moment of the
previous monetary policy decision in Mexico (Chart
9).

**Chart 9**

**Mexican markets’ performance**

Percent, MXN/USD and index


600

550

500

450

400

350

300

250


September-22nd 2023
November-3rd 2023
Change (September-22nd 2023 to November-3rd 2023)
Trading range over the period


Source: PIP.

**Chart 11**

**Breakeven inflation and inflation risk**

**implied in government securities’ yields**

Basis points


11.6

11.2

10.8

10.4

10.0

9.6

9.2

8.8

8.4


16.6


19.6

19.1


18.6

18.1


17.6

17.1


J M  M  J   S  N  J   M  M  J   S   N  J   M  M  J   S   N

2021                 2022                 2023


56,000

55,000

54,000

53,000

52,000

51,000

50,000

49,000

48,000


M-bond


6.7

6.4

6.1

5.8

5.5

5.2

4.9

4.6

4.3

4.0

3.7

Inflation-indexed bonds


Range in 2023 Range since previous monetary policy Sep22,2023 Nov03, 2023

decision

Source: Prepared by Banco de México.

Interest rates on government securities registered
mixed dynamics, with increases of up to 20 basis
points in the short term and decreases of up to 9
basis points in the long-term nodes (Chart 10). The
yield curve of real rate instruments fluctuated within
a narrow range without a defined trend. In this
context, breakeven inflation implicit in spreads
between nominal and real rates of market
instruments exhibited volatility throughout the period,
closing with decreases in all terms (Chart 11). These


Source: PIP.

Regarding expectations for the path of the monetary
policy reference rate, information implicit in the
interest rate swap curve does not foresee any
adjustment for the November decision and

incorporates the first cut of 25 basis points between
March and May 2024 (Chart 12). Most analysts
surveyed by Citibanamex anticipate that the interest
rate will remain unchanged for the rest of 2023.

16


Range in 2023 Range since previous monetary policy Sep22,2023 Nov03, 2023


-----

**Chart 12**

**Interbank funding rate implied in TIIE swaps**

PercentPercent


**Chart 13**

**Gross Domestic Product**

. Quarterly percentage change, s. a.


12.50

11.50

10.50

9.50

8.50

7.50

6.50

5.50 Banxico overnight rate (reference rate)

Implied interest rate in TIIE swaps for 11/03/23

4.50

Implied interest rate in TIIE swaps for 09/22/23

3.50

J A  J   O   J   A  J   O   J  A   J   O  J   A   J   O

2021           2022          2023          2024

Note: Shaded areas represent the range since the last monetary policy
decision.
Source: Prepared by Banco de México with Bloomberg data.

**A.2.2. Economic activity in Mexico**

According to Mexico's GDP flash estimate published
by INEGI, in the third quarter of 2023, economic
activity was resilient and continued experiencing
robust growth, by expanding at a seasonally
adjusted quarterly rate of 0.9% (Chart 13).

During the bimester July-August 2023, private
consumption continued growing as a reflection of a
certain acceleration in the consumption of goods,
given that the consumption of services has trended
downwards since the end of the second quarter.
During the same period, gross fixed investment
maintained a significant dynamism. This was mainly
due to the strength of non-residential construction
investment. Spending on investment in machinery
and equipment moderated its rate of growth. As for
external demand, during the period of JulySeptember, the value of manufacturing exports
increased with respect to the second quarter. This
was due to a rebound in automotive shipments
(Chart 14). The rest of manufacturing exports
contracted.

|Col1|Col2|
|---|---|
|10.50 9.50 8.50 7.50 6.50 5.50 4.50|Banxico overnight rate (reference rate) Implied interest rate in TIIE swaps for 11/03/23 Implied interest rate in TIIE swaps for 09/22/23|
|||


s. a. / Seasonally adjusted series and trend series based on data in nominal
US dollars. The former is represented by a solid line and the latter by a
dotted line. The chart’s range was adjusted to facilitate its reading.
Source: Prepared by Banco de México with data from the Tax
Administration Service (SAT, for its Spanish acronym), the Ministry of the
Economy (SE, for its Spanish acronym), Banco de México, the National
Institute of Statistics and Geography (INEGI, for its Spanish acronym).
Mexico’s Merchandise Trade Balance, and the National System of
Statistical and Geographical Information (SNIEG, for its Spanish acronym),
Information of national interest.

On the production side, during the bimester JulyAugust, industrial activity continued showing a
positive performance (Chart 15). This is attributed to
the high dynamism of construction (Chart 16),
particularly the extraordinary pace of expansion of
civil engineering works. Manufacturing remained
stagnant, as a result of the fall in transportation
equipment in August and the weakness in the rest of
manufacturing. The equipment sector is expected to
reverse its August decline, given the performance of

17


5

4

3

2

1

0


-1


20/09/2023

-2 19/09/2023

18/09/2023

-3 15/09/2023

14/09/2023

-4 13/09/2023

-5 -19.2212/09/2023 Q-III 1/

I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV I11/09/2023II III IV I II III IV I II III

2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023

s. a. / Seasonally adjusted figures. The chart’s range was adjusted to
facilitate its reading.
1/ The figure corresponding to the third quarter of 2023 refers to the
quarterly GDP flash estimate published by INEGI.
Source: Mexico’s System of National Accounts (SCNM, for its Spanish
acronym), INEGI.


-2

-3

-4

-5


**Chart 14**

**Manufacturing exports**

Indices 2019 = 100, s. a.


160

140


120

100


80

60


40

J

2017


-----

light vehicle manufacturing reported in September.
Services as a whole remained resilient and
continued trending upwards. However, a

differentiated behavior was observed among its
subsectors.

Regarding the cyclical position of the economy, the
point estimate of the output gap, which was already
in positive territory, widened, without being

statistically different from zero (Chart 17). The labor
market continued showing strength. In September,
both national and urban unemployment rates
remained at low levels (Chart 18). With seasonally
adjusted figures, between July and October, the
number of newly created IMSS-insured jobs
continued increasing, although with a lower
dynamism than that registered in the first half of the
year. Finally, in August, unit labor costs in the
manufacturing sector registered particularly high
levels, from a historical perspective (Chart 19).

**Chart 15**

**Global Indicator of Economic Activity**

Indices 2019 = 100, s. a.

115

Total

Secondary activities

110

Tertiary activities

Primary activities

105

100

95

90

78.1

76.1 July

70.2 August

85

J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J A

2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023

s. a. / Seasonally adjusted and trend series. The former is represented by
a solid line and the latter by a dotted line. The range of the chart was
narrowed to facilitate reading.
Source: Mexico’s System of National Accounts (SCNM, for its Spanish
acronym), INEGI.


J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J A

2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023

s. a. / Seasonally adjusted and trend series. The former is represented by
a solid line and the latter by a dotted line.
1/ Figures in parenthesis correspond to their share in the total in 2018.
Source: Mexico’s System of National Accounts (SCNM, for its Spanish
acronym), INEGI.

**Chart 17**

**Output gap estimates [1/]**

Percent of potential output, s. a

12

8

4

0

-4

-8

-12 Global Economic Activity

Index (IGAE) 2/

-16

Gross Domestic Product 2/

-20 Q-III

95% confidence interval 3/ September

-24

J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S

2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023

s. a. / Calculations based on seasonally adjusted figures.
1/ Output gap estimated with a tail-corrected Hodrick-Prescott filter; see
Banco de México (2009), “Inflation Report, April-June 2009”, p.74
2/ GDP flash estimate up to Q3-2023 and IGAE implicit up to September
2023, consistent with said timely figure.
3/ Output gap confidence interval calculated with a method of unobserved
components.
Source: Prepared by Banco de México with INEGI data.

18


**Chart 16**

**Industrial activity [1/]**

Indices 2019 = 100, s. a.


125

115

105

95

85

75

65

55


August


-----

**Chart 18**

**National and urban unemployment rates**

Percent, s. a.


6.5

6.0

5.5

5.0

4.5

4.0

3.5

3.0

2.5

2.0


J

2017


M S J

2018


M S J

2019


M S J

2020


M S J

2021


M S J

2022


M S J

2023


M S


s. a. / Seasonally adjusted and trend series. The former is represented by
a solid line and the latter by a dotted line.
Source: Prepared by Banco de México with data from ENOE, ETOE (from
April to June 2020), and ENOE new edition (ENOE[N]) from July to date.

**Chart 19**

**Productivity and unit labor costs**

**in the manufacturing sector [1/]**

Indices 2019 = 100, s. a.

125

Unit labor costs 142.5

120

Productivity

115

110

105

100

95

90

August

85

J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J A

2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023

s. a. / Seasonally adjusted and trend series. The former is represented by
a solid line and the latter by a dotted line. The range of the chart was
narrowed to make it easier to read.
1/ Productivity based on hours worked.
Source: Prepared by Banco de México with seasonally adjusted data of the
Monthly Manufacturing Industry Survey and industrial activity indicators of
Mexico’s System of National Accounts (Sistema de Cuentas Nacionales de
México, SCNM), INEGI.

In September 2023, domestic financing to the private
sector continued showing dynamism. Within it, bank
lending to firms continued expanding, and thus its
real annual variation reached levels similar to those
observed at the beginning of the year (Chart 20). As
for lending to households, the bank housing portfolio
continued increasing. Meanwhile, commercial bank
consumer credit registered the highest rates of
change since the first half of 2013. The dynamism of
commercial bank credit to the private sector
continued to be driven mainly by an increased


demand for financing from firms and households, in
line with the continued expansion of economic
activity and the strength of the labor market.

**Chart 20**

**Performing credit from commercial banks**

**to the non-financial private sector**

Real annual percentage change

15

10

5

0

-5

Consumption

-10 Mortgage 1/

2/

Non-financial private firms

-15

September

-20

J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S

2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023

1/ Adjusted to account for the withdrawal from and the incorporation of nonbank financial intermediaries to the credit statistics.
2/ Adjusted for valuation effects due to movements in the exchange rate.

As for the cost of financing, interest rates on bank
lending to firms remained stable and at high levels in
September 2023. Corporate credit intermediation
margins continued to be generally lower than those
observed prior to the pandemic. Interest rates on
mortgages did not register significant changes with
respect to previous months, and continued being at
levels similar to pre-pandemic ones. Within

consumer credit, credit card interest rates have been
adjusting with a lag to changes in the reference rate,
after having remained relatively stable until June
2022. Lastly, interest rates on payroll loans have
remained relatively stable since August 2021.

As for portfolio quality, in September 2023 corporate
and mortgage delinquency rates remained at low
levels similar to those of August. Consumer portfolio
delinquency rates continued being at levels lower
than those registered prior to the onset of the
pandemic, although they increased for the fourth
consecutive month.

19


-----

**A.2.3. Development of inflation and inflation**
**outlook**

Progress on disinflation continued in Mexico. Annual
headline inflation decreased from 4.45% in

September 2023 to 4.26% in October. This
downward adjustment was mainly due to the
reduction in core inflation, as the decline in non-core
inflation was marginal (Chart 21).

**Chart 21**

**Consumer Price Index**

Annual percentage change

14 CPI
13 Core
12 Non-core
11
10

9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0

-1 October
-2
-3

J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S

2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023

Source: INEGI.

Annual core inflation decreased from 5.76 to 5.50%
between September and October 2023. As the
effects of the various shocks that have affected it
have continued to be absorbed, annual merchandise
inflation kept decreasing from 6.20 to 5.64% (Chart
22). During this period, the annual inflation of food
merchandise fell from 7.57 to 6.95% and that of nonfood merchandise from 4.59 to 4.09% (Chart 23). In
contrast, annual services inflation increased from
5.23 to 5.34%. Prices of this component continued
being subject to pressures from the resilience of
economic activity, the strength of the labor market,
the increased demand for services after

confinement, and the pass-through of cumulative
cost-related pressures to consumers. On the
aforementioned dates, annual inflation of services
other than education and housing rose from 6.32 to
6.48%, driven primarily by the higher annual
variations of prices of travel services. Annual inflation
of education services remained high at 6.59 and
6.60% during the same period, while housing
inflation registered levels of 3.58 and 3.67%,
respectively.


**Chart 22**

**Merchandise and services core price subindex**

Annual percentage change

12

Merchandise

11 Services

10

9

8

7

6

5

4

3

2

1

October

0

J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S

2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023

Source: INEGI.

**Chart 23**

**Merchandise core price subindex**

Annual percentage change

16

Food, beverages and tobacco

14 Non-food merchandise

12

10

8

6

4

2

October

0

J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S

2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023

Source: INEGI.

Annual non-core inflation went from 0.60 to 0.56%
between September and October 2023 (Chart 24).
This result reflected, on the one hand, the reduction
from 3.25 to 1.62% in the annual inflation of
agricultural and livestock products. On the other
hand, this was offset by the increase in the annual
inflation of energy products, which went from -4.61
to -2.59%, influenced by the higher annual variation
in the prices of L.P. gas and electricity.

20

|CPI|Col2|Col3|Col4|
|---|---|---|---|
|CPI Core Non-core||||
|||||
|October||||


-----

**Chart 24**

**Non-core price sub-index**

Annual percentage change


25

20

15

10

5

0

-5

-10

-15

J

2017


M S J M S J

2018 2019


M S J

2020


M S J

2021


M S J

2022


M S J

2023


M S


Source: INEGI.

Regarding inflation expectations drawn from the
survey conducted by Banco de México among
private sector specialists, between August and
October 2023, the median for headline and core
inflation at the end of 2023 decreased from 4.66 to
4.60% and from 5.21 to 5.11%, respectively. The
median of headline inflation expectations for the end
of 2024 remained unchanged at 4.00%, while that of
the core component adjusted marginally from 4.12 to
4.11%. The median of headline inflation

expectations for the next four years remained at
3.80%, while that of core inflation adjusted from 3.79
to 3.78%. The median of headline inflation
expectations for the long term (5 to 8 years) went
from 3.53 to 3.60%, while that of core inflation
registered 3.59%, figure similar to that of August
of 3.60%. Finally, compensation for inflation and
inflationary risk has remained relatively stable since
the previous monetary policy decision. Regarding its
components, expectations implied by market

instruments increased moderately, while the inflation
risk premium declined slightly.


Inflation is still projected to converge to the 3% target
in the second quarter of 2025. This forecast is
subject to risks. On the upside: i) persistence of core
inflation at high levels; ii) exchange rate depreciation;
iii) greater cost-related pressures; iv) that the
economy shows greater resilience than expected;
and v) pressures on energy prices or agricultural and
livestock product prices. On the downside: i) a
greater-than-anticipated slowdown of the world
economy; ii) a lower pass-through effect from some
cost-related pressures, and iii) that the lower levels
of the exchange rate compared to the beginning of
the year contribute more than anticipated to mitigate
some pressures on inflation. The balance of risks for
the trajectory of inflation within the forecast horizon
remains biased to the upside.

21


-----

**Table 1**

**Consumer Price Index and components**

Annual percentage change

**Item** **August 2023** **September 2023** **October 2023**

**CPI** **4.64** **4.45** **4.26**

**SubyacenteCore** **6.08** **5.76** **5.50**

**Merchandise** **6.86** **6.20** **5.64**

Food, beverages and tobacco 8.44 7.57 6.95

Non-food merchandise 5.03 4.59 4.09

**Services** **5.15** **5.23** **5.34**

Housing 3.59 3.58 3.67

Education (tuitions) 5.49 6.59 6.60

Other services 6.38 6.32 6.48

**No SubyacenteNon-core** **0.37** **0.60** **0.56**

**Agricultural and livestock products** **3.94** **3.25** **1.62**

Fruits and vegetablesFruits abd vegetables 8.15 6.75 4.77

Livestock productsLivestock 0.47 0.33 -0.97

**Energy and government-authorized prices Energéticos y Tarifas Aut. por Gobierno** **-2.68** **-1.71** **-0.35**

Energy productsEnergy -5.99 -4.61 -2.59

Government-authorized pricesTarifas Autorizadas por Gobierno 5.24 5.14 5.03

Source: INEGI.


-----

-----

-----

