-----

-----

**FOREWARNING**
This document is provided for the reader’s convenience
only. The translation from the official Spanish version
was made by Banco de México’s staff. Discrepancies
may arise between the original document in Spanish
and its English translation. For this reason, the original
Spanish version is the only official document.


**1. PLACE, DATE AND PARTICIPANTS**

**1.1. Place: Meeting held by virtual means.**

**1.2. Date of Governing Board meeting: March 29,**
2023.

**1.3. Participants:**

Victoria Rodríguez, Governor.
Galia Borja, Deputy Governor.
Irene Espinosa, Deputy Governor.
Jonathan Heath, Deputy Governor.
Omar Mejía, Deputy Governor.
Gabriel Yorio, Undersecretary of Finance and Public
Credit.
Elías Villanueva, Secretary of the Governing Board.

Prior to this meeting, preliminary work by Banco de
México’s staff analyzing the economic and financial
environment as well as the developments in inflation
and the determinants and outlook for inflation, was
conducted and presented to the Governing Board
(see Annex).

**2. ANALYSIS AND RATIONALE BEHIND THE**
**GOVERNING BOARD’S VOTING**

**_International environment_**

**Most members highlighted that during the first**
**quarter of the year, global economic activity**
**recovered compared to the fourth quarter of**
**2022, showing greater dynamism than expected.**
**They added that, in various economies, labor**
**markets continued showing signs of tightening.**
**One member pointed out that, in advanced**
economies, nominal wages continued increasing at
relatively high rates, although in real terms these
show negative annual variations.

**Most members mentioned that in the weeks**
**following the last monetary policy meeting, the**
**global growth outlook for 2023 was revised**
**slightly upwards. However, they noted it**
**continued** **implying** **a** **deceleration.** **They**

**indicated that the likelihood of a recession this**
**year has diminished.** **One member added that**
forecasts for an economic recovery by 2024 are
maintained. Among global risks, **another member**


noted the worsening of geopolitical tensions and
tighter financial conditions.

**Most members mentioned that global inflation**
**remains at high levels, although in a large**
**number** **of** **economies,** **headline** **inflation**

**continued decreasing. They attributed this**
**reduction** **to** **lower** **commodity** **prices,**

**particularly those of energy. One member added**
the lower sea freight costs and lesser pressures on
global supply chains. **Another member pointed out**
the fading, although moderate, of certain pressures
on merchandise prices excluding those related to
food and energy.

**Most members warned that at the global level**
**core inflation shows persistence. Some members**
noted that the core components’ behavior is taking
place in a context of economic expansion and a
strong labor market. Some members highlighted the
contribution of the services component to the
persistence of core inflation. They considered that,
given the resistance of the latter to decline, in most
economies, convergence of inflation to their central
banks' targets, foreseen for the end of 2024 and
early 2025, remains uncertain.

**One member reflected on the asymmetric effects**
that global shocks have had on the economic sectors
during this episode. He/she pointed out that the
services sector initially registered a contraction and
a fall in relative prices, while the opposite was
observed with merchandise. He/she highlighted that
services are currently recovering and their prices
have been subject to upward pressures, as opposed
to merchandise prices, which have started to
normalize, which explains why some inflationary
pressures are common across different economies.
He/she also considered that these adjustments are
not perfectly synchronized, which continues to be a
source of heterogeneity and pose challenges for
monetary policy. In this context, he/she estimated
that, in the absence of shocks of similar magnitude,
it is feasible to return to patterns similar to those
observed prior to the pandemic. However, he/she
warned that the potential long-term effects of the
shocks are uncertain and need to be monitored.

**All members referred to the developments in the**
**US and European banking systems since the**
**second week of March, as well as to concerns**
**about financial stability. One member highlighted**
that the latter was generated by the failure of certain
regional commercial banks in the United States and
the subsequent difficulties of a Swiss bank of global
systemic importance. He/she pointed out that one of
the US banks had high investments in long-term
fixed-income securities and that the other affected
banks had a high proportion of depositors with


-----

balances above the limit covered by deposit
insurance. He/she considered that this, together with
an inadequate risk management, had left these
institutions in a vulnerable position. **Another**
member pointed out that monetary tightening did not
generate the problems of these institutions. He/she
explained that the new financial conditions only
exposed their vulnerabilities, as well as the need to
strengthen supervision and compliance with risk
management standards.

**Most members highlighted that the financial**
**authorities of the referred countries have**
**implemented** **measures** **to** **strengthen**

**confidence in their banking sectors, such as**
**liquidity provision and increasing bank deposit**
**insurance. They added that the authorities**
**reported being prepared to use all their tools to**
**maintain the soundness of their banking**
**systems.**

**All members noted that developments in the US**
**and European banking systems led to greater**
**risk aversion and high volatility in international**
**financial markets. Most members mentioned**
**that, in this context, interest rates on mainly**
**short-term** **government** **securities** **adjusted**

**downwards and that the US dollar appreciated.**
**Some members added that stock market indices fell.**
**One member noted that emerging markets showed,**
in general, a negative performance, with exchange
rate depreciations and higher risk premia. He/she
added that the latter led to tighter financial
conditions. **Another member expressed his/her**
concern about additional events that could generate
instability in the international financial system and,
therefore, an increase in global risk aversion.

**Some members pointed out that, in light of the**
greater uncertainty over financial stability,

expectations on the monetary policy stances of
several advanced economies, including the United
States, exhibited volatility. **One member indicated**
that, previously, during February and early March,
these expectations had risen due to increased
concerns about inflation. He/she pointed out that, in
the case of the Federal Reserve, analysts and
markets had incorporated an increase of 50 basis
points for the March decision. He/she added that,
subsequently, indeed, given the risks to financial
stability, such expectations were abruptly adjusted
downwards. He/she noted that markets and analysts
even considered the possibility of a pause for the
Federal Reserve's March decision.

**Most** **members** **highlighted** **that,** **despite**

**concerns** **about** **financial** **stability,** **several**

**central banks in advanced economies continued**
**raising their reference rates. All members stated**


**that, at its March meeting, the Federal Reserve**
**raised the target range for the federal funds rate**
**by 25 basis points. Most members highlighted**
**that this central bank anticipated that a further**
**increase might be necessary.** **Some members**
pointed out that the monetary policy statement
mentioned that events in the banking sector are likely
to lead to tighter credit conditions, which will
influence the evolution of economic activity,
employment, and inflation. One member highlighted
that this central bank’s communication suggests that
the hiking cycle is approaching its final stage.
**Another member underlined that its chairman stated**
that no cuts are foreseen in 2023. **Most members**
**noted that markets expect a less restrictive**
**policy stance for this year than that anticipated**
**by the Federal Reserve. One member pointed out**
that this disparity could represent a risk. **Another**
member warned that the divergence between market
expectations and central bank communication is a
current global phenomenon.

**Some** members highlighted that monetary

authorities, such as the European Central Bank and
the Federal Reserve, stated that the appropriate tool
to fight inflation is the reference rate, while liquidity
facilities and other tools are appropriate to deal with
financial stability problems. Regarding this subject,
**most members agreed that monetary policy**
**should indeed focus on pursuing low and stable**
**inflation, while financial stability should be**
**achieved through other tools. Some members**
argued that it is not possible to address both
inflationary and financial stability problems using the
same tool. **One member acknowledged that the**
insolvency of some US banks poses challenges to
monetary policy. However, he/she pointed out that it
would be wrong to use the reference rate to mitigate
financial risks at the cost of fighting inflation. He/she
considered it essential to communicate that the
central banks’ priority is price stability. **Another**
member stated that financial stability, like price
stability, is a public good that is essential for the
wellbeing of society. He/she noted that the
appropriate tools to achieve financial stability are: a)
macroprudential supervision and regulation focused
on containing the accumulation of vulnerabilities; b)
timely identification of risk factors; c) coordination
among financial authorities; and d) liquidity facilities
that financial institutions can access during stress
episodes. One member considered that disruptions
to financial stability require caution in diagnosing and
monitoring the problem, as well as in determining the
required policy response.

**_Economic Activity in Mexico_**

**Most members pointed out that the Mexican**
**economy continued increasing, although at a**


-----

**moderate pace. One member mentioned that it has**
shown resilience in light of a complex external
environment. **Some** members stated that

heterogeneity among sectors persists. One member
added that, in January, seasonally adjusted Global
Economic Activity Indicator (IGAE, for its acronym in
Spanish) figures reflected a monthly fall in primary
activities, while tertiary activities rebounded and
secondary ones remained unchanged. **Another**
member indicated that the economy is expected to
continue growing moderately. **Some members**
mentioned that slack conditions continue narrowing.
**One member noted that the output gap is currently**
not statistically different from zero. Another member
stated that the economy’s cyclical position remains
at a level similar to that at the end of 2022.

**Some members mentioned that industrial production**
stagnated at the beginning of the year. **Some**
members noted that construction registered a
decline during the same period. One member added
that, although this sector had reactivated to some
extent in December, it partially reversed such
progress in January, and thus, from a medium-term
perspective, it seems stagnant. He/she added that
only the administration's major public infrastructure
projects have driven forward the sector. Meanwhile,
**another member noted a certain reactivation of**
manufacturing production and electricity generation.
He/she stated that the manufacturing sector
excluding the transportation equipment subsector
expanded, while the rest of manufacturing registered
a contraction. He/she added that the transportation
equipment subsector is still below its pre-pandemic
levels. **Some** members indicated that the

manufacturing subsectors most integrated to global
production chains register greater dynamism, while
those that are more domestically linked have
exhibited sluggishness. As for the services sector,
they pointed out that recently six of its nine
subsectors have continued growing. However, **one**
member stated that commercial activities, which had
led growth in this sector, have somewhat

decelerated.

**On the demand side, most members highlighted**
**the expansion of private consumption at the end**
**of last year. They underlined the improvement in**
**the consumption of services.** **Some members**
pointed out that timely indicators, such as consumer
confidence, the wage bill and remittances, suggest
that this dynamic continued during the first months of
2023. However, **one** member noted that

consumption of non-durable goods has stagnated in
its latest readings, while that of semi-durables and
durables has contracted, mitigating the shift in
consumption patterns observed since the pandemic.
**Regarding** **investment,** **most** **members**

**highlighted that it continues improving. Some**


members noted that this is being supported by the
machinery and equipment component. However,
**one member warned that investment is still behind**
its peak levels of mid-2018, although it is close to its
pre-pandemic levels. **Another member mentioned**
that investment in non-residential construction
continues trending upwards and is above its
February 2020 level, while residential construction
has stagnated and is still below that level. **One**
member stated that ensuring the conditions for the
country to take full advantage of the reconfiguration
of global production chains would give a greater
boost to domestic production, helping to counteract
the anticipated cyclical weakness in external
demand. Regarding exports, some members noted
that during the January-February period,

manufacturing exports exhibited some weakness.
**One member noted that external demand has shown**
less dynamism and that the largest trade deficit on
record for a January-February period was observed.

**All members agreed that the labor market**
**remains strong. Most members pointed out that**
**conditions in this market are showing signs of**
**tightening.** **They** **noted** **that** **the** **labor**

**participation rate continued increasing, while**
**unemployment remained at low levels. Some**
members stated that the unemployment rates are at
historic lows. **One member noted that employment**
has increased at a faster pace than the labor
participation rate. **Another member warned of a**
shortage of skilled labor in some regions of the
country.

**Most members highlighted the relatively high**
**magnitude of wage revisions. One member**
pointed out that contractual wage revisions in private
companies reached levels of 8.6%. He/she indicated
that the annual wage growth of IMSS-insured
workers has remained at levels above 11%. He/she
added that the increase in the minimum wage
explains a growing fraction of the increase in the
IMSS-insured workers’ average base salary.

However, another member stated that wages do not
seem to show an atypical behavior considering the
evolution of their traditional determinants, such as
inflation, labor market dynamics, and productivity
growth. He/she also considered that the observed
increase in wages rather obeys a recovery of real
wages, which are barely 1.8% above what was
registered in the last quarter of 2019.

**_Inflation in Mexico_**

**All members considered that the inflation**
**outlook** **remains** **complex** **and** **uncertain,**

**although** **they** **acknowledged** **that** **some**

**pressures are easing. Most members pointed out**
**that external pressures have diminished. One**


-----

member recalled that in order to solve Mexico's
inflationary problem external pressures must ease,
although he/she underlined that this is not a sufficient
condition. **Some members mentioned that, at this**
point, domestic pressures are regarded as a
challenge, especially those affecting services prices.

**Most members noted that annual headline**
**inflation has decreased due to the evolution of**
**the non-core component, while core inflation has**
**adjusted downwards gradually. Some members**
recalled that annual headline inflation had been
declining since September 2022. Most members
**mentioned that during the first fortnight of**
**March, headline and core inflation registered**
**7.12% and 8.15%, respectively.**

**Most members pointed out that core inflation**
**continues showing persistence and remains at**
**high levels. One member indicated that, although**
the core component has not yet shown a clear
downward inflection point, last November it

interrupted its upward trend and its figures have
been in line with expectations. **Another** member
stated that estimates in which the most recent
monthly variations of this component are weighted,
suggest that said component is close to following a
downward trend. He/she added that supercore
inflation as well as indicators more related to supply
factors may have already reached their inflection
point. **One member pointed out that inflation more**
related to wages decreased at the margin. He/she
mentioned that, within this indicator, six of the 36 CPI
items that comprise it contributed with nearly 63% of
its annual variation in the first fortnight of March,
while the contribution of the remaining 30 items
registered a marginal decrease. Therefore, he/she
considered that the increase registered in this index
has not been generalized. **Another** member
indicated that there has been an improvement in
producer prices, and therefore there is a lower passthrough of cost-related pressures to consumer
prices.

**All members mentioned that merchandise**
**inflation continued decreasing. Most members**
**highlighted, in particular, the reduction in food**
**merchandise inflation. Some members considered**
that the seasonally adjusted monthly variations of
merchandise prices are already showing a clear
downward trend. **Some members noted the**
reduction in the percentage of food merchandise
items with double-digit seasonally adjusted

annualized monthly variations. One member pointed
out that, for the first time since the beginning of last
year, the percentage of such food merchandise
items showing annualized monthly price variations
above 10% is below 50%, while that of non-food
merchandise continues decreasing, and currently


stands at around 13.6%. Regarding food

merchandise components, **another** member

underlined the lower annual variations in the prices
of corn, wheat, and dairy products.

**Most members highlighted the upward trend in**
**annual services inflation. One member pointed out**
that, although the acceleration of services inflation is
not excessive, the annual variation of this index is
consolidating at high levels. **Some members noted**
that inflation of services other than housing and
education increased again during the first fortnight of
March. **One member pointed out that, considering**
seasonally adjusted monthly variations, a certain
stabilization is observed in education and housing
inflation, but inflation of the rest of services continues
trending upwards. **Another member noted that the**
price increases in some services could be one-off
adjustments, as in the case of domestic services,
higher education or other personal care services, but
pointed out that it is necessary to remain vigilant,
especially regarding inflation of services other than
housing and education, because these increases are
taking place in an environment where inflation has
remained at elevated levels for two years. **Most**
**members highlighted that the prices of various**
**services have increased significantly due to the**
**high cost of their inputs.** **Some members added**
the increased labor costs. They mentioned the
minimum wage and one member added the higher
vacation benefits. **Another member noted that**
recent service inflation figures also reflect the
mitigation of the change in consumption patterns
generated by the containment of the health
emergency and the subsequent reopening of the
economy. He/she pointed out that part of the
behavior of this component is due to the recovery in
the sector and reflects price increases that were
probably postponed at the time due to weak demand.
In this regard, he/she pointed out that services
activity recently reached its pre-pandemic levels.

**Most members mentioned that in the first**
**fortnight of March, non-core inflation adjusted**
**downwards, reaching 4.15%. They indicated that**
**such reduction was due to decreases in its**
**agricultural and livestock products and energy**
**components.**

**Some members mentioned that, according to**
surveys, inflation expectations for 2023 and 2024
increased again. However, **some** members

considered that short-term expectations have
somewhat stabilized. One member pointed out that
those for the next 12 months continued decreasing.
**Most members mentioned that longer-term**
**expectations** **remained** **relatively** **stable.**

However, **one member warned that inflation**
expectations for all terms remain elevated and above


-----

the central bank’s target. Regarding inflation
expectations drawn from market instruments,
**another member highlighted that breakeven inflation**
remains at high levels.

**Most members mentioned that Banco de**
**México's forecasts for headline and core**
**inflation were revised marginally. They noted**
**that inflation is still projected to converge to the**
**target in the fourth quarter of 2024. One member**
pointed out that only for the first and second quarters
of 2023 headline inflation forecasts were revised
downwards and those corresponding to the core
component were revised upwards. Another member
noted that non-core inflation has been below
forecasts. One member noted that forecasts over the
planning horizon consider the gradual fading of the
effects of the pandemic and the military conflict
shocks, as well as the monetary policy actions that
have been implemented.

**Most members stated that, looking ahead,**
**inflationary pressures are expected to continue**
**decreasing. One member added that the reduction**
in merchandise inflation will become more noticeable
and that services inflation will likely stabilize. He/she
pointed out that the mitigation that has been
observed in the global shocks that have affected
some services prices will eventually be reflected in
this component. He/she stated that, although
international food prices have been decreasing for
some months, only until March their annual
variations became negative. In this context, he/she
considered that, looking ahead, a more noticeable
reduction in food merchandise and food services
inflation could be observed. He/she stated that these
two components accounted for 64% of the most
recent inflation figure.

**With respect to upward risks to inflation, most**
**members mentioned the persistence of its core**
**component at high levels. Some** members noted
the possibility of greater cost-related pressures. One
member stated that insecurity continues affecting the
high distribution costs. He/she considered that the
narrowing slack conditions have made inflation more
susceptible to new supply- and demand-related
shocks. Some members pointed out the inflationary
risk generated by the tight labor market. However,
**some members highlighted that, according to Banco**
de México estimates, a wage-price spiral is not being
observed. One member added that the nearshoring
phenomenon could increase the existing pressures
in the real estate market. Another member pointed
out that the turmoil in financial markets caused by the
failure of some US banks could be a source of
additional volatility in the foreign exchange market,
which could represent a risk for inflation. **One**
member added the possibility of pressures on energy


or agriculture and livestock product prices. In this
regard, another member stated that the forecasted
inflation trajectories should be taken cautiously,
because the non-core component, which is not
susceptible to monetary policy actions, is assumed
to behave favorably and below its historical average.
As for downside risks, **one member pointed to a**
greater-than-anticipated slowdown of the world
economy. Most members considered that the
**balance of risks for the trajectory of inflation**
**within the forecast horizon remains biased to the**
**upside.**

**_Macrofinancial environment_**

**Most members pointed out that domestic**
**financial markets registered high volatility, in**
**view of the recent increase in global risk**
**aversion** **derived** **from** **the** **described**

**developments in international banking systems.**
**One member mentioned the negative behavior of**
these markets. However, **another indicated that**
markets have operated in an orderly manner despite
the observed volatility. Most members pointed out
**that the stock market registered falls. Some**
members underlined the reduction in the value of the
financial sector stocks. One member added the fall
in those of the consumer discretionary sector.

**Most members indicated that, after having**
**appreciated,** **the** **Mexican** **peso** **registered**

**volatility over the last weeks in response to the**
**referred** **increase** **in** **risk** **aversion.** **Some**

members pointed out that, in view of increased risk
aversion, the Mexican peso reversed part of the
appreciation registered during the year. **One**
member stated that the exchange rate adjustment
occurred through a reduction in long positions and
an increased demand for currency hedging in light of
the risk of a greater depreciation, which were
partially offset by increased positions on short- and
medium-term government securities. **Another**

member pointed out that the Mexican peso has
accumulated an appreciation of over 6% during
2023. **One member mentioned that since the**
beginning of the restrictive cycle, the bilateral real
exchange rate with the United States has

appreciated around 7%, while the multilateral tradeweighted one has appreciated around 15%, which
could be reflecting tighter monetary conditions.
**Another member stated that during this period the**
nominal exchange rate reached levels unseen since
2017. He/she highlighted that, from a longer-term
perspective, the national currency keeps standing
out among the currencies of emerging economies.
**One member noted that foreign exchange market**


-----

trading conditions have recently deteriorated.
However, **another member noted that these**
remained stable for most of the period. He/she
added that, during this episode of volatility, no
pressures were observed on either the pesodenominated funding market or the US dollardenominated one. He/she underlined that the factors
that have caused the Mexican peso to appreciate
prevail, and therefore, in the absence of new risks,
the peso is anticipated to exhibit more stability.

**Most members pointed out that, since the**
**previous monetary policy decision, interest rates**
**on government securities in Mexico registered**
**generalized increases. One member stated that,**
initially, with the 50-basis point increase in the
reference rate of the February meeting, the yield
curve adjusted significantly upwards. He/she added
that, subsequently, said curve has adjusted slightly
downwards, in line with the developments in fixedincome markets in the United States. **Another**
member pointed out that interest rates in Mexico
remain above the levels registered in the previous
policy decision. **One member stated that interest**
rates exhibited increases of 67 basis points in the
short term and of 52 basis points in the long term.
**Some members indicated that default risk premia**
increased. **One member mentioned that, despite**
this, capital inflows to the fixed-income market
continued.

**All members noted that developments in the US**
**and European banking systems have had a**
**limited impact on the domestic financial system.**
**Most** **members** **highlighted** **that** **banking**

**institutions in Mexico do not have direct credit or**
**debt exposure to the affected foreign entities.**
**They mentioned that Mexican banks exceed**
**regulatory** **requirements** **of** **liquidity** **and**

**capitalization. One member underlined that, in**
Mexico, unlike in the United States, all banks,
regardless of their size, must comply with said
requirements. Another member pointed out that the
macroprudential policies implemented in Mexico
over the last two decades have so far allowed the
Mexican financial system to be sufficiently resilient to
avoid contagions as well as to contain any signs of
instability. Notwithstanding, he/she underlined that
there will not be a complacent stance in the face of
potential risks. **One member added that the risk of**
potential losses for banks and brokerage firms due
to interest rate increases has decreased. He/she
mentioned that, although no liquidity problems are
foreseen in the Mexican banking system, a


temporary increase in the cost of financing cannot be
ruled out.

**All members highlighted that, looking ahead,**
**Banco de México will remain attentive to the**
**developments in international financial markets**
**and to any likely impact on the domestic financial**
**system.** **One** member underlined that, due to its
sound macroeconomic fundamentals, the Mexican
economy is currently in a resilient position, given the
challenging economic environment that all

economies are facing. He/she mentioned that the
Mexican economy is in better conditions than in the
past to face the risks associated with an external
juncture characterized by tight financial conditions
derived from the monetary restriction cycle at the
global level, as well as the challenges associated
with the stability of the international financial system,
which could lead to an even greater tightening of
global financial conditions.

**Some members indicated that the performing credit**
of commercial banks to firms and households has
continued to expand, especially credit for

consumption. **One member also underlined the**
increase in mortgage lending. **Another member**
pointed out that delinquency rates are at low and
stable levels. **One member stated that asset**
holdings, both by households and firms, continue to
shift towards longer maturity ones, reflecting the
higher yields offered by these instruments.

**_Monetary policy_**

**The Governing Board evaluated the magnitude**
**and diversity of the inflationary shocks and its**
**determinants, along with the evolution of**
**medium- and long-term inflation expectations**
**and the price formation process. It considered**
**the challenges stemming from the ongoing**
**tightening of global financial conditions, the**
**environment of uncertainty, the persistence of**
**accumulated inflationary pressures and the**
**possibility of greater effects on inflation, as well**
**as the monetary policy stance already attained in**
**this hiking cycle. Based on the above, and with**
**the presence of all its members, the Board**
**decided unanimously to raise the target for the**
**overnight interbank interest rate by 25 basis**
**points to 11.25%. With this action, it slows the**
**pace of interest rate increases and the monetary**
**policy stance adjusts to the trajectory required**
**for inflation to converge to its 3% target within**
**the forecast horizon.**


-----

**The Board will thoroughly monitor inflationary**
**pressures as well as all factors that have an**
**incidence on the foreseen path for inflation and**
**its expectations. The latter, in order to set a**
**policy rate that is consistent at all times with**
**both the orderly and sustained convergence of**
**headline inflation to the 3% target within the time**
**frame in which monetary policy operates as well**
**as with an adequate adjustment of the economy**
**and** **financial** **markets.** **For** **its** **upcoming**

**decision, the Board will take into account the**
**inflation outlook, considering the monetary**
**policy stance already attained.**

**One** **member argued that, considering all the above,**
in this meeting a 25-basis point increase is
appropriate, given: a) the inflation outlook; and b) the
monetary policy stance already attained. Regarding
the first element, he/she reiterated that assessing the
inflation outlook overall involves analyzing the
observed and expected behavior of inflation as well
as its determinants. In this regard, he/she considered
that this outlook, despite remaining complex, is less
adverse than that observed during most of 2022.
He/she pointed out that, since the previous monetary
policy decision, in view of the evolution of the noncore component, the observed behavior of headline
inflation has turned out lower than anticipated.
He/she added that the performance of core inflation
has been in line with forecasts. He/she underlined
that, looking ahead, the expected trajectory of
inflation is similar to that already anticipated during
the previous monetary policy decision. He/she noted
that, so far, no significant effects of the US and Swiss
banking problems on the outlook for domestic
inflation are perceived, although he/she

acknowledged that the Board must remain vigilant
over this issue. He/she underlined that, at the
margin, a deterioration of inflation dynamics is not
perceived, although he/she emphasized that they
remain complex. He/she stated that this reinforces
the alternative of a rate increase for this policy
decision of lesser magnitude than that of February’s,
as mentioned in the previous policy statement.
Regarding the second element, he/she restated that
during this inflationary period Banco de México has
acted in a timely and forceful manner. He/she
pointed out that the reference rate has accumulated
a 700-basis point increase and that, during the
second half of 2022, a restrictive policy stance was
attained, as required by the inflationary environment.
Hence, he/she considered important to give
relevance to the policy stance attained. This,
considering that, to face a complex inflationary
environment such as the present one, the central


bank currently has an even more solid and robust
stance than during the previous monetary policy
decision. He/she argued that, considering the
features of the inflation outlook mentioned above, the
policy stance can be strengthened in lesser
magnitude than as in the February meeting.

**Another** **member considered that, despite the**
positive performance of inflation, domestic pressures
persist, mainly in the core component and with an
upward dynamic in the services sector. He/she listed
three sources of domestic pressures: i) growth of
consumption exceeding the expansion of economic
activity; ii) increased cost-related pressures

stemming from the labor market; and iii) high inflation
expectations. In this environment, he/she deemed it
necessary to strengthen the monetary policy stance,
although at a slower pace, considering the restrictive
level attained. He/she noted that the main risk
continues being that inflation does not decrease at
the pace necessary to achieve convergence within
the planning horizon. He/she underlined that the
policy statement should: i) acknowledge that,
although there are signs of moderation in inflationary
pressures and inflation is in line with forecasts, both
inflation and its expectations are above target; ii)
emphasize that the restrictive stance must be
strengthened to bring core inflation down at the
required pace and that, in the face of increasing
domestic pressures, the trajectory of the services
component will be key for the upcoming decisions;
and iii) underline that the Mexican banking system is
sound and acknowledge that turmoil in international
financial markets could pose a greater challenge for
monetary policymaking. Regarding forward

guidance, he/she pointed out that the environment of
high uncertainty calls for a cautious approach and
favors a flexible policy stance. He/she pointed out
that, based on current prospects, the reference to
future increases may be omitted, emphasizing that
monetary policy decisions will depend on the
evolution of inflation determinants, the trajectories of
inflation forecasted throughout the planning horizon,
and on inflation expectations. He/she added that it
should be pointed out that the monetary policy
stance is expected to remain restrictive over the
entire referred horizon. He/she also reflected on the
urgent need to comprehensively assess the central
bank communication policy. He/she highlighted the
significant progress of recent years, from disclosing
the Board members vote and publishing the updated
forecasts for each monetary policy decision, to
including the forward guidance in the central bank
policy statements and publishing the full version of
each of the member’s interventions three years after


-----

the policy decision. He/she stated that all of the
above points in the right direction of greater
transparency and accountability. He/she

emphasized that communication is as important as
monetary policy decisions on the reference rate, and
that both elements constitute a tool to attain an
effective transmission of monetary policy. In his/her
opinion, the fact that, for the second time in 18
months, last February's decision took by surprise all
private sector analysts cannot go unnoticed. He/she
considered that this should lead to an evaluation of
the central bank communication policy, its

implementation, and the results achieved, in order to
move towards a communication strategy that places
institutional messages at its heart. He/she argued
that said strategy should define the role of the Board
members in transmitting institutional messages, and
provide specific rules that, while allowing diverse
opinions to be shared, set the basis on which
monetary policy effectiveness is maintained as the
primary goal.

**One** **member pointed out that, for this monetary**
policy decision, it is possible to continue with the
monetary tightening as planned. He/she stated that
the current context provides an opportunity to slow
down the pace of reference rate increases and to
consider the possibility of reaching the terminal rate
of the current hiking cycle. He/she underlined that
since the last monetary policy decision the inflation
outlook improved at the margin, mainly due to lower
external pressures, which is expected to lead to the
materialization of a downward inflation trajectory. In
this regard, he/she pointed out that different
pressures on inflation justify implementing a
restrictive monetary policy stance for a certain
period. However, he/she sustained that it is time to
focus on tackling domestic-related pressures,
especially on services prices. He/she listed the
factors that, in his/her opinion, will be key to
determine the terminal interest rate: i) that inflation
draws closer to its historical average, as in recent
readings; ii) that core inflation consolidates a
decreasing trend in its merchandise component and
services inflation is contained; iii) that short- and
medium-term expectations are more stable and
gradually approach the target; iv) that the uncertainty
associated with the balance of risks for inflation
decreases, as it has done marginally; v) that
incoming data validate the expected trajectory for
inflation and that its forecast undergoes marginal
revisions; and vi) that the restrictive level that has
been attained is consistent with the complex nature
of the current inflation phenomenon. He/she
highlighted that the latter is possibly the most


important factor. He/she estimated that during the
upcoming monetary policy decision it will be
determined whether the evolution of data allows to
confirm the level of 11.25% as the terminal rate or if
an additional adjustment is required. He/she stated
that, once said level has been attained, during the
next phase of the monetary cycle, the interest rate
will need to remain fixed for a period of time enough
to consolidate the convergence of inflation to the
target. He/she considered that, during such phase, a
restrictive monetary policy stance should be
maintained with an ex-ante real interest rate of
around 7%, considering that the reduction in
expected inflation is reflected in increases in the exante real interest rate. He/she stated that Banco de
Mexico’s communication must be as explicit as
possible, avoiding an insufficiently clear forward
guidance; for this reason, he/she pointed out that the
monetary policy statement should justify the decision
clearly, as well as the future intentions, specifying
that these do not represent a fixed commitment and
that they are subject to incoming data. Finally,
he/she underlined that it is necessary to convey that,
with the proposed adjustment, the hiking cycle would
be close to ending, depending on the evolution of
incoming data.

**Another member pointed out that headline inflation**
has decreased slowly and that the core component
has shown greater persistence. With the proposed
increase, he/she considered that the expected
trajectory of inflation, as well as the associated
balance of risks, are consistent with slowing the pace
of interest rate increases. He/she highlighted three
elements to consider for the conduct of monetary
policy. First, he/she mentioned that the level of the
monetary policy stance attained is historically high
and that the ex-ante real interest rate is about to be
almost twice the upper bound of the neutral range,
which he/she estimated will be proportional to the
observed inflation gap. He/she pointed out that said
gap is anticipated to continue narrowing, while the
ex-ante real interest rate is foreseen to increase
insofar as inflation expectations ease. He/she stated
that these expectations in the past have declined at
a slower pace than the decrease in inflation, and that
therefore it is reasonable to expect the real interest
rate increase to not be excessive, although sufficient
to maintain a significantly restrictive policy stance.
He/she noted that, despite the recent episode of
volatility, the real exchange rate continues acting
restrictively on the economy, and thus overall
monetary conditions have reached a level that
supports the convergence of inflation. Second,
he/she indicated that the monetary policy stance


-----

impacts the economy gradually. He/she reminded
that the ex-ante real interest rate exceeded its range
estimated as neutral six months ago, so monetary
restriction can be expected to begin showing its
effects more clearly during the second half of the
year and reach them fully during 2024. Therefore,
he/she pointed out the need to act cautiously so that
the restrictive policy stance does not end up having
an impact at times when the inflationary gap is not
significant. Third, he/she underlined that effective
central bank communication contributes to reduce
some of these lags. He/she considered it relevant for
communication to contribute to a better

understanding of the central bank's reaction function
for the rest of the year, in order to reduce market
uncertainty over the interest rate’s expected
trajectory, so that the latter is consistent with the
central bank’s forecasts. He/she concluded that it is
convenient to outline that, in the current conditions
and in the absence of additional and significantly
adverse shocks, the policy stance attained will allow
to maintain inflation expectations anchored, will
avoid second-round effects on price formation, and
will be adequate for inflation to converge to the target
within the forecast horizon, consistent with the
constitutional mandate.

**One** **member considered a 25-basis point increase**
in the reference rate appropriate, given that,
although core inflation remains high, inflationary
pressures have shown signs of mitigation, which are
anticipated to be more noticeable over the following
months. Likewise, he/she indicated that the degree
of policy restraint already attained must be
considered. He/she pointed out that, with this
adjustment, the reference rate will have accumulated
a 725-basis point increase, bringing the real shortterm interest rate to a clearly restrictive level of
approximately 6.5%. He/she stated that the

monetary restriction has been reflected in different
indicators, such as shorter-term inflation

expectations, which have stabilized, and longer-term
inflation expectations, which have remained

anchored. He/she added that, given the tighter
financial conditions, in view of the monetary
tightening in Mexico and in other countries, the
adjustment in the short-term real interest rate has
been transmitted along the yield curve of real interest
rates. Additionally, he/she highlighted the real
exchange rate appreciation that has been observed
since the start of the hiking cycle, and mentioned that
this could be reflecting tighter monetary conditions.
He/she also underlined three additional elements to
consider in this monetary policy decision. First, that
monetary policy operates with a lag and some of the
transmission channels, such as the exchange rate
and inflation expectations, act at a greater speed.


He/she added that, since last September, the exante real interest rate has been above the upper limit
of the neutral range, and therefore the impact of
monetary tightening will be more noticeable over the
next quarters. Second, he/she noted that the ex-ante
real interest rate will continue increasing insofar as
inflation expectations decrease. Third, he/she
pointed that, in addition to the reference rate,
communication also acts as a policy tool and it can
continue strengthening the actions that have already
been implemented. He/she concluded that the
proposed policy stance will have the necessary
strength for inflation to continue converging to the
target. He/she indicated that monetary policy actions
should prevent this convergence from being
compromised and should foster an orderly

adjustment of the economy and financial markets, in
accordance with the constitutional mandate. He/she
stated that the proposed adjustment would

consolidate the monetary policy stance and provide
room to evaluate the effects of the significant
reference rate increase, so that, in the absence of
new shocks, looking ahead it would be convenient to
maintain the monetary policy stance that would be
attained in this decision.

**3. MONETARY POLICY DECISION**

The Governing Board evaluated the magnitude and
diversity of the inflationary shocks and its

determinants, along with the evolution of mediumand long-term inflation expectations and the price
formation process. It considered the challenges
stemming from the ongoing tightening of global
financial conditions, the environment of uncertainty,
the persistence of accumulated inflationary

pressures and the possibility of greater effects on
inflation, as well as the monetary policy stance
already attained in this hiking cycle. Based on the
above, and with the presence of all its members, the
Board decided unanimously to raise the target for the
overnight interbank interest rate by 25 basis points
to 11.25%. With this action, it slows the pace of
interest rate increases and the monetary policy
stance adjusts to the trajectory required for inflation
to converge to its 3% target within the forecast
horizon.

The Board will thoroughly monitor inflationary
pressures as well as all factors that have an
incidence on the foreseen path for inflation and its
expectations. The latter, in order to set a policy rate
that is consistent at all times with both the orderly
and sustained convergence of headline inflation to
the 3% target within the time frame in which
monetary policy operates as well as with an
adequate adjustment of the economy and financial
markets. For its upcoming decision, the Board will


-----

take into account the inflation outlook, considering
the monetary policy stance already attained.

**4. VOTING**

Victoria Rodríguez, Galia Borja, Irene Espinosa,
Jonathan Heath, and Omar Mejía voted in favor of
increasing the target for the overnight interbank
interest rate by 25 basis points to 11.25%.

**5. DISSENTING OPINIONS / VOTES**

**Dissenting opinion on the monetary policy**
**statement. Irene Espinosa.**

Communication is a fundamental pillar of monetary
policy. In recent years, our central bank has
introduced changes and made significant progress in
this field. Nevertheless, these have been mainly


implemented on a case-by-case basis, according to
circumstances, and, on occasions, without

previously discussed guidelines. Such is the case of
forward guidance. Its purpose is to aid in the
formation of expectations aligned to the long-term
view of monetary policy, which is conditional on
available information, to enable an orderly

adjustment of financial markets. However, the
forward guidance proposed in this policy statement
is limited only to the upcoming decision and omits
communicating that we anticipate that the monetary
policy stance must remain restrictive for 2 years in
order to achieve convergence to the 3% exact target.
This reinforces a very short-term view, inevitably
partial and incomplete, that does not fulfill the
purpose of contributing to the formation of
expectations for the horizon in which monetary policy
operates. For this reason, I reiterate the urgent need
to evaluate our communication policy.


-----

**ANNEX**

The information in this Annex was prepared for this
meeting by the staff of Banco de México’s
Directorate General of Economic Research and
Directorate General of Central Bank Operations. It
does not necessarily reflect the considerations of the
members of the Governing Board as to the monetary
policy decision.

**A.1. External conditions**

**A.1.1. World economic activity**

Available information suggests that world economic
activity recovered during the first quarter of 2023
relative to the fourth quarter of 2022. This would be
driven by higher growth in some major economies,
the continuing strength of their labor markets, an
improvement in business and consumer confidence,
lower pressures on energy prices, and the lifting of
mobility restrictions in China. Purchasing Managers'
Indices suggest a short-term improvement in both
services and manufacturing (Chart 1). Global growth
forecasts, however, continue suggesting a

deceleration of world economic activity in 2023,
compared to 2022, and a recovery in 2024. Between
February and March, analysts' global growth
forecasts for 2023 were revised slightly upwards and
remained unchanged for 2024. Among the risks to
the world economy the following stand out: persistent
inflationary pressures, the worsening geopolitical
tensions, tighter financial and monetary conditions,
and challenges to financial stability. The latter
challenges have been caused by turbulence in
international financial markets over the last weeks in
light of the events in the US and European banking
systems, although financial authorities have

implemented measures such as increasing deposit
insurance and liquidity provision to maintain
confidence in the financial system.

1 Expressed as a seasonally adjusted annualized quarterly rate,
the change in US GDP was 2.7% in the fourth quarter of 2022.


s.a./ Seasonally adjusted figures.
1/ The index varies between 0 and 100 points. A reading above 50 points
is considered an overall increase compared to the previous month and
below 50 points an overall decrease.
Note: The figures in the chart correspond to the minimum level of the
indicator.
Source: IHS Markit.

In the United States, available indicators suggest
that Gross Domestic Product (GDP) would have
grown in the first quarter of 2023 at a slower pace
than at the seasonally adjusted quarterly rate of
0.7% registered during the fourth quarter of 2022
(Chart 2).[1 ]During the first quarter of 2023, economic
activity would have been sustained mainly by private
consumption, which has shown strength due to the
soundness of its labor market and the savings
accumulated during the pandemic. Government
spending and, to a lesser extent, nonresidential
investment, would also contribute to GDP growth.
The positive contribution of the aforementioned
factors is expected to be partially offset by the
evolution of the change in inventories and residential
investment.

After expanding by 0.3% in January, US industrial
production stagnated in February. This reflected a
fall in mining, which was offset by a recovery in
electricity and gas generation and a moderate
growth in the manufacturing sector. Within the latter,
the growth in the subsector of computers and
electronic products stood out. In contrast, production
of vehicles and auto parts fell. Purchasing Managers'
Indices suggest that the manufacturing sector will
continue showing weakness, in response to a
sluggish domestic and external demand.

11


**Chart 1**

**Global: Purchasing Managers’ Index:**

**Production Component**

Diffusion index, s. a.[1/]


60

58

56

54

52

50

48

46

44

42

40

J

2017


2023


-----

**Chart 2**

**US Real GDP and Components**

Quarterly percentage rate and contribution in

percentage points, s. a.

3.0 Private consumption expenditures

Residential investment

2.5 Nonresidential investment

Change in private inventories

2.0 Net exportsGovernment consumption expenditures

Total

1.5

1.0

0.5

0.0

-0.5

-1.0

-1.5

-2.0

I II III IV I II III IV I

2021 2022 2023

s.a./ Seasonally adjusted figures.
Note: Components in the shaded area show the March Blue Chip forecasts,
while the pink diamond shows the GDPNow forecast.
Source: BEA, The Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta and Blue Chip.

The US labor market continued showing signs of
tightness. The non-farm payroll registered a higherthan-anticipated creation of 311,000 new jobs in
February 2023. The main increases were in services
related to leisure and accommodation, commerce,
government and health care. The unemployment
rate remains low, despite having risen from 3.4% in
January to 3.6% in February. This has occurred in a
context in which the labor participation rate has been
gradually increasing. Initial claims for unemployment
insurance stood at 191,000 in the week ending
March 18. Some wage indicators continued growing
at a high rate.

In the euro area, available indicators suggest that
economic activity exhibited a lack of dynamism
during the first quarter of 2023, after GDP registered
zero growth during the fourth quarter of 2022.[2]
Economic activity would continue to be affected by
the high uncertainty surrounding the military conflict
in Ukraine, the weakening of external demand, and
tightening financial conditions. However, other
factors are expected to stimulate the economy,
including a further improvement in supply conditions
and the recovery in consumer and business
confidence, as well as a strong labor market, and
easing pressures on energy prices. Unemployment
remained unchanged at 6.7% in January.

Purchasing Managers' Indices suggest a

stabilization of manufacturing activity and a recovery

2 Expressed as a seasonally adjusted annualized quarterly rate,
the change in euro area GDP was -0.1% in the fourth quarter of
2022.


in services.

Economic activity in a large number of major
emerging economies is expected to have recovered
during the first quarter of 2023, although with some
heterogeneity. In Emerging Asia, most economies
are expected to have registered a recovery. In the
particular case of China, economic activity is
expected to have grown moderately during the first
quarter in light of the lifting of mobility restrictions in
that country, after being stagnant during the fourth
quarter of 2022. In Emerging Europe, most
economies would be registering a recovery during
the first quarter. In Latin America, economic activity
is expected to have deteriorated in some cases and
in others to have registered moderate growth.

International commodity prices overall trended
downwards since Mexico’s previous monetary policy
decision. During the second half of February, oil
prices declined due to persistent concerns about
lower world growth. This trend was partially reversed
by the third week of February in a context of supply
constraints, due to lower Russian oil exports and the
agreement of the Organization of the Petroleum
Exporting Countries and allied countries (OPEC+) to
maintain the production cuts of two million barrels
agreed last year. Starting on the second week of
March, prices fell again due to expectations of further
interest rate increases by the major central banks,
led by the strength of certain economic indicators
and concerns about the adverse effects these
increases could have on demand, to which risks
associated with the banking sector in the United
States and Europe were added. However, in recent
days this decline appears to have somewhat
reversed as the aforementioned concerns have
moderated. Meanwhile, natural gas reference prices
in Europe trended downwards in response to
relatively high inventory levels and forecasts of
warmer temperatures. In the United States, natural
gas prices declined during most of February due to
a larger inventory accumulation. These prices
subsequently increased due to higher exports of
natural gas and lower temperature forecasts. Grain
prices, in general, decreased in light of historically
high production levels in countries such as Brazil.
The renewal of the Black Sea security corridor
agreement also contributed to such decrease.
Finally, most industrial metal prices declined at the
beginning of the period due to risks of a global
recession and a lower outlook for Chinese demand,

12


-----

although such decline partially reversed during the
second half of March.

**A.1.2. Monetary policy and international financial**
**markets**

Global inflation remains at high levels, although
headline inflation continued decreasing in a large
number of economies. The core component showed
persistence. The decline in headline inflation in
several major advanced economies (Chart 3) was
mainly associated with a moderation in energy
inflation. However, in some cases, the decline in
inflation was smaller than anticipated, while in others
it increased in recent readings. The core component
increased in several of these economies, among
them the euro area, Japan, and the United Kingdom.

In the United States, annual headline inflation as
measured by the consumer price index declined from
6.4% in January to 6.0% in February. This reflected
a fall in energy, food and, to a lesser extent, in core
inflation. The annual variation of the latter went from
5.6 to 5.5% during the same period, mainly as a
result of a lower inflation in merchandise prices,
which was partially offset by an increase in services
prices. Annual headline inflation of the personal
consumption expenditures index decreased from 5.3
to 5.0% from January to February.

Analysts' short-term inflation forecasts for most of
the main advanced economies remained at high
levels, although they foresee a decline in 2023 from
the levels registered in 2022. Longer-term inflation
expectations drawn from financial instruments
remained relatively stable for these economies.


**Chart 3**

**Selected Advanced Economies:**

**Headline Inflation**

Annual percentage change

12
11 United States PCE 1/
10 United States CPI

9 Japan
8

Euro area

7
6 United Kingdom
5 Canada
4
3
2
1
0

-1 February
-2 January
-3
-4

2019 2020 2021 2022 2023

1/ The personal consumption expenditure deflator is used.
Source: Bureau of Economic Analysis, Bureau of Labor Statistics, Eurostat,
Bank of Japan, The UK Office for National Statistics and Statistics Canada.

According to most recent readings, in a large number
of major emerging economies headline inflation
declined or stabilized as a reflection of the lower
prices of food and energy and, in some cases, of the
decline in core inflation.

Due to strong labor markets and inflation’s
persistence at high levels, during most of the
reporting period, monetary policy expectations
drawn from financial instruments anticipated further
interest rate increases and that said rates would
remain high for a longer period in most of the major
advanced economies. However, recent banking
sector problems in some advanced economies and
concerns associated with financial stability

moderated expectations of reference rate increases
drawn from financial instruments and even already
anticipate cuts in some economies towards the end
of the year (Chart 4).

In this environment, since Mexico’s previous
monetary policy decision, the central banks of most
of the main advanced economies continued
tightening their monetary policy stances. The US
Federal Reserve, the European Central Bank, the
Reserve Bank of Australia and the Swiss National
Bank maintained the pace of interest rate increases,
while the central banks of Sweden, New Zealand and
the United Kingdom reduced it in their latest
decision. Some central banks, such as those of
South Korea and Canada, paused their hiking
cycles, although they are expected to maintain their
interest rates at high levels for some time.
Meanwhile, the Bank of Japan left its short and longterm interest rates unchanged, as well as its

13


-----

guidance on yield curve control. Regarding their
asset purchase programs, most central banks in this
group of economies continued to gradually reduce
their securities’ holdings. The central banks of
countries that have faced problems in the banking
sector have taken different measures such as
increasing deposit insurance and liquidity provision
to maintain confidence in the financial system.

**Chart 4**

**Reference Rates and Trajectories**

**Implied in OIS Curves[1/]**

Percent


7.0%

6.0%

5.0%

4.0%

3.0%

2.0%

1.0%

0.0%


**― US Federal Reserve 2/**
**― Bank of England**
**― Bank of Japan**

**― European Central Bank deposit rate**
**― OIS implicit trajectory 29 mar 2023**
**--- OIS implicit trajectory 08 mar 2023**


End of
2024


End of
2022


End of
2023

|% % % %|― European Ce ― OIS implicit t --- OIS implicit t OIS implicit t|ntral Bank depo rajectory 29 mar rajectory 08 mar rajectory 09 feb|sit rate 2023 2023 2023|Col5|Col6|Col7|ts|Col9|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|%|||||||||
||||||||||
|%|||||||||


-1.0%

2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 2024


collaboration with the Treasury Department and
the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation
(FDIC), took decisive measures to protect the US
economy and strengthen public confidence in the
banking system and that, with the support of the
Treasury, the Bank Term Funding Program was
created, which, together with the discount
window, is effectively meeting the unusual
funding needs that some banks have faced,
making it clear that there is sufficient liquidity
available in the system. He added that they are
prepared to use all their tools as needed. He also
stated that prior to the recent financial events, it
appeared that the Committee would need to
increase the federal funds rate more than
previously expected in the December projections.
However, he added that the tightening of credit
conditions that is likely to result from the recent
events would work in the same direction as an
interest rate increase, although it is not yet
possible to anticipate its magnitude. He noted
that it is too early to determine the extent of the
effects of such tightening, and therefore too early
to state how monetary policy should respond. He
pointed out that the possibility of making a pause
in its hiking cycle was considered. He added that
they do not consider to use different tools to
conduct monetary policy, underlining that the
reference rate works and that banks have been
able to manage the interest rate increases.
Regarding its balance sheet, the Federal Reserve
reiterated that it will continue to reduce its
securities holdings according to its previously
announced plans. At the press conference, when
questioned about the recent expansion of the
balance sheet by increasing the use of some
facilities, the US Federal Reserve chairman
assured that this expansion will be temporary and
is intended to provide liquidity to the banking
system and not to change the monetary policy
stance. The expected path for the federal funds
rate implied by financial instruments was revised
upwards for most of the reporting period in light of
persistently high inflation and a strong labor
market. However, given the uncertainty

associated with the failure of certain banks in the
United States around the second week of March,
the reference rate trajectory drawn from financial
instruments was revised significantly downwards.
Based on the latest available information, the
highest level of the interest rate during 2023 is
expected to be 4.9%, before declining to 4.5% for
the end of 2023 and to 3.3% for the end of 2024.
This contrasts with the FOMC March forecasts,
which left its expectation for the federal funds rate
by the end of 2023 unchanged at 5.1% and

14


1/ OIS: Fixed floating interest rate swap where the fixed interest rate is
associated with the effective overnight reference rate.
2/ For the observed reference rate of the US, the average interest rate of
the target range of the federal funds rate (4.75% - 5.00%) is used.
Source: Banco de México with data from Bloomberg.

Among the recent monetary policy decisions of major
advanced economies, the following stand out:

i) The US Federal Reserve maintained its pace of

reference rate increases in 25 basis points (bps)
at its March meeting. It set the target range for the
federal funds rate between 4.75 and 5.00%. The
Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) also
pointed out that additional policy tightening may
be appropriate in order to achieve a monetary
policy stance that is sufficiently restrictive to bring
inflation down to its 2% target. Regarding the
financial environment, the Committee noted that
the US banking system is sound and resilient. It
added that recent developments are likely to lead
to tighter credit conditions for households and
firms, affecting economic activity and inflation,
although the extent of these effects is uncertain.
It reiterated that, in determining the future
increases in the target range, it will take into
account the cumulative tightening of monetary
policy, the lags with which monetary policy affects
economic activity and inflation, as well as the
economic and financial developments. During a
press conference, the chairman of that institution
highlighted that the US Federal Reserve, in


-----

revised upwards its expectation for the end of
2024 from 4.1 to 4.3%. At the press conference,
the chairman of the US Federal Reserve ruled out
several times the possibility of cuts in the
reference rate this year. In this context, the
median of the FOMC growth forecasts was
revised from 0.5 to 0.4% for the end of 2023, from
1.6 to 1.2% for 2024 and from 1.8 to 1.9% for
2025. The median of unemployment projections
was revised downwards for the end of 2023 and
upwards for 2025. Meanwhile, headline inflation
projections were revised from 3.1 to 3.3% for the
end of 2023, while those for 2024 and 2025
remained unchanged at 2.5 and 2.1%,

respectively. Regarding core inflation, the median
projection was 3.6% for the end of 2023, 2.6% for
2024, and 2.1% for 2025. The chairman of that
institution stated that a significant number of
board members anticipated that there would be
some tightening in credit conditions, and that this
would have the same effects as their policy, and
that they were therefore incorporating this into
their forecasts.

ii) The European Central Bank (ECB) raised its

reference rate by 50 bps at its March meeting.
Thus, it set its refinancing, key lending and key
deposit rates at 3.50, 3.75 and 3.00%,
respectively. In contrast to its previous decisions,
the Governing Council did not provide specific
guidance on the path of its interest rates. On the
contrary, it indicated that the high level of
uncertainty reinforces the importance of an
approach dependent on incoming data for policy
rate decisions, which will be determined by the
assessment of the inflation outlook in light of new
economic and financial data, the dynamics of
core inflation, and the strength of monetary policy
transmission. It added that the Council closely
monitors tensions in financial markets and stands
ready to respond as necessary to preserve price
and financial stability. It pointed out that the
banking sector in the euro area is resilient, with
strong liquidity and capital positions, and that the
ECB’s policy toolkit is fully equipped to provide
liquidity to the financial system if required and to
preserve the smooth transmission of monetary
policy. The president of said institution said that
there is no opportunity cost between price
stability and financial stability and that they will
address each with their respective policy tool.
The institution's vice president added that the
increase in interest rates is positive in terms of
European banks' margins and that, in terms of
profitability, this improvement more than offsets
potential losses in fixed income portfolios.


Regarding the normalization of its securities'
holdings, as previously announced, in March it
began reducing its Asset Purchase Program
(APP) securities portfolio at a measured and
predictable pace, as not all principal payments on
maturing securities are being reinvested. He
reiterated that the reduction will be of 15 billion
euros per month, on average, until the end of
June 2023, and that the subsequent pace will be
determined over time.

Since Mexico’s previous monetary policy decision,
some central banks of the main emerging economies
continued raising their reference rates. Others,
including those of Russia, Hungary, Poland, the
Czech Republic, Ukraine, Indonesia, Malaysia,
Brazil and Peru, left their rates unchanged. Some
central banks suggested that keeping their interest
rates at current levels for some time would ensure
that inflation would decline in a sustainable manner
and that future adjustments would depend on
evolving conditions.

In the context described above, since Mexico’s
previous monetary policy decision, international
financial markets became more risk-averse and
financial conditions tightened (Chart 5). Volatility
increased significantly, due to high uncertainty
associated with the failure and financial problems of
some financial institutions in advanced economies
such as the United States and Switzerland.
However, these trends have partially reversed in
recent days. In this context, the stock markets of
most major advanced and emerging economies
registered losses. In foreign exchange markets,
although the US dollar strengthened during most of
the period, it reversed this trend recently. Emerging
market currencies depreciated in general for most of
the period, although some of them have gained
strength recently. Interest rates on short- and longterm government bonds in most of the main
advanced economies were highly volatile, after
increasing significantly at the beginning of the period
and declining considerably following the financial
events described above. In several cases, interest
rates are below the level observed at the time of
Mexico’s previous monetary policy decision (Chart
6). In emerging economies, long-term interest rates
rose in several cases, although with volatility during
the period (Chart 7). Further periods of volatility and
risk aversion cannot be ruled out.

In this context, since Mexico’s previous monetary
policy decision, cumulative net inflows to emerging
economies were registered, although outflows were
observed since the second week of March. For most

15


-----

of the period, flows behaved differently across asset
classes, with cumulative net inflows to equity assets
and outflows from fixed-income assets.

**Chart 5**

**Financial Conditions Indices[1/]**

Units Units


**Chart 7**

**Selected Emerging Economies: Financial**

**Assets Performance as of February 2, 2023**

Percent, basis points

Percent, basis points


103

102

101

100

99

98

97


25

20

15

10

5

0

-5


96

2020 2021 2022 2023

Financial Conditions Index - Global
Financial Conditions Index - United States
Financial Conditions Index for Eurozone 2/
Financial Stress Index 3/


-10


1/ The financial conditions index is constructed considering the effect of five
variables on economic activity: the reference interest rate, the 10-year
government bond, the spread of investment-grade bonds over the
government debt bond with equivalent maturity, the ratio of a stock index
with 10-year average earnings per share, and the trade-weighted exchange
rate.
2/ In the case of the euro area, the spread between the sovereign bonds of
France, Italy, Spain, the Netherlands, Belgium, Austria, Portugal and
Finland over the German 10-year bond is also considered.
3/ Data from the Office of Financial Research, constructed with 33 financial
variables from five categories: credit, equity valuation, financing, safe haven
assets, and volatility. The vertical black line indicates the last calendarized
monetary policy meeting of Banco de México.
Source: Prepared by Banco de México with data from Bloomberg and
Goldman Sachs.

**Chart 6**

**Change in Selected Financial Indicators from**

**February 9, 2023 to March 29, 2023**

Percent; basis points Percentage, basis points


10%

5%


50

25


0%

-5%


0

-25


-10%


-50


Note: An upward adjustment indicates currency appreciation. Interest rates
correspond to swap rates at the specified terms, except for Hungary, where
government securities with 3-year maturities were used as a reference. For
the Philippines, a 2-year swap rate was used, and for Russia, 2-year and
3-year swap rates were used. The latest CDS data for Russia is as of June
1, 2022.
Source: Bloomberg.

**A.2. Current situation of the Mexican economy**

**A.2.1. Mexican markets**

In the international context described above, the
Mexican peso appreciated slightly against the US
dollar in domestic financial markets since Mexico’s
previous monetary policy decision, while interest
rates for both short- and long-term maturities
increased (Chart 8). The environment surrounding
domestic financial markets was affected by risk
aversion and episodes of volatility, including those
resulting from the publication of several Mexican and
US economic indicators, Banco de México’s
reference rate adjustments, the US Federal Reserve
announcement of a more restrictive monetary policy
stance, and the risks to financial stability associated
with the US and European banking systems.

16


1/ DXY: a weighted average estimated by the Intercontinental Exchange
(ICE) of the nominal exchange rate of the main six currencies operated
globally with the following weights: EUR 57.6%, JPY: 13.6%, GBP: 11.9%,
CAD: 9.1%, SEK: 4.2%, and CHF: 3.6%
Source: Bloomberg and ICE.


-----

**Chart 8**

**Mexican Markets’ Performance**

Percent, MXN/USD and index


11.6

11.2

10.8

10.4

10.0

9.6

9.2

8.8

8.4


4.0

3.7


5.8

5.5


19.8

19.5


5.2

4.9


19.2

18.9


4.6

4.3


18.6

18.3


56,000

55,000

54,000

53,000

52,000

51,000

50,000

49,000

48,000


18.0

17.7


M-bond


Inflation-indexed bonds


Range in year Range since previous monetary policy decision 02-Feb-23 23-Mar-23

Source: Prepared by Banco de México.

Since Mexico’s previous monetary policy decision,
the Mexican currency traded in a range of 1.40
pesos, between 17.89 and 19.29 pesos per US
dollar, appreciating 1.60% and reaching its lowest
level since September 2017 (Chart 9). The above
occurred in a context in which trading conditions,
both realized and prospective, deteriorated.


rates of market instruments increased by up to 8 bps
(Chart 11). These movements took place in an
environment in which trading conditions continued
deteriorating and failed to reach the levels observed
prior to the onset of the pandemic.

Regarding expectations for the path of the monetary
policy reference rate, information implicit in the
interest rate swaps curve incorporates an increase
of 23 bps for the March decision (Chart 12). Most
analysts surveyed by Citibanamex anticipate that the
reference rate will be raised by 25 bps in the March
decision, up to a level of 11.25%, while for the end of
2023 they anticipate a rate of 11.50%.

**Chart 10**

**Nominal Yield Curve of Government Securities**

**Percent, basis points**


Range in year Range since previous monetary policy decision 02-Feb-23 23-Mar-23


**Chart 9**

**Mexican Peso Exchange Rate including Moving**

**Averages**

MXN/USD

25.50

Mexican peso

25.00

24.50 100-day moving average

24.00 50-day moving average

23.50

23.00

22.50

22.00

21.50

21.00

20.50

20.00

19.50

19.00

18.50

18.00

17.50

17.00


Trading range over the period


Source: PIP.


Source: Prepared by Banco de México.

Interest rates on government securities increased up
to 67 bps in the short-term nodes, and 52 bps for
longer-term nodes (Chart 10). The yield curve of real
interest rate instruments exhibited increases that
averaged 55 bps. In this context, breakeven inflation
implicit in spreads between nominal and real interest


17


-----

**Chart 11**

**Breakeven Inflation and Inflation Risk**

**Implied in Government Securities’ Yields**

Basis points


6

4


**Chart 13**

**Gross Domestic Product**

Quarterly percentage change, s. a.


600

550


500

450


2

0


400

350


-2

-4


300


-6


II III IV I


II III IV I


II III IV I


II III IV I


II III IV I


II III IV


250


I


20-year average 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022
30-year average s. a. / Seasonally adjusted figures. The chart’s range was adjusted to

200 facilitate its reading.

Source: Mexico’s System on National Accounts (SCNM, for its Spanish

J   M M   J   S    N   J   M   M   J    S   N   J   M

acronym), INEGI.

2021                         2022                     2023

Source: PIP. Regarding external demand, the value of

manufacturing exports decelerated during the
January- February 2023 period, mainly due to the

**Chart 12** behavior of automotive exports (Chart 14). As for

**Interbank Funding Rate Implied in TIIE Swaps** domestic demand, in December 2022, private

Percent consumption continued growing at a moderate pace,

driven by the recovery in the consumption of

12.50 Banxico overnight rate (reference rate) services. Gross fixed investment performed better,

11.50 Implied interest rate in TIIE swaps for 03/27/23 mainly due to the reactivation of construction.

Implied interest rate in TIIE swaps for 02/02/23

10.50

On the production side, in January 2023, the tertiary

9.50

sectors increased (Chart 15), reflecting the good

8.50 performance across most of its components.

7.50 Industrial activity stagnated, due to a contraction in

construction and in manufacturing of transportation

6.50

equipment (Chart 16). In contrast, the rest of the 02/02/2023

5.50 secondary sectors expanded, with growth of 01/02/2023

4.50 manufacturing excluding transportation equipment 31/01/202330/01/2023

standing out. 27/01/2023

3.50 26/01/2023

J  M  M  J  S  N  J M  M  J  S  N  J  M  M  J   S  N 25/01/2023

2021               2022               2023 24/01/2023

Source: Prepared by Banco de México with Bloomberg data.

**A.2.2. Economic activity in Mexico**

At the end of 2022, Mexico’s GDP continued
increasing, although at a slower pace compared to
the first three quarters of 2022 (Chart 13). At the
beginning of 2023, domestic economic activity
continued growing and remained resilient in the face
of a complex external environment.


18


-----

**Chart 14**

**Total Manufacturing Exports**

Indices 2019 = 100, s. a.


**Chart 16**

**Industrial Activity [1/]**

Indices 2019 = 100, s. a.


140

120

100

80

60

40

J

2017


2023


s. a. / Seasonally adjusted series and trend series based on data in nominal
US dollars. The former is represented by a solid line and the latter by a
dotted line. The chart’s range was adjusted to facilitate its reading.
Source: Prepared by Banco de México with data from the Tax
Administration Service (SAT, for its Spanish acronym), the Ministry of the
Economy (SE, for its Spanish acronym), Banco de México, the National
Institute of Statistics and Geography (INEGI, for its Spanish acronym).
Mexico’s Merchandise Trade Balance, and the National System of
Statistical and Geographical Information (SNIEG, for its Spanish acronym),
Information of national interest.

**Chart 15**

**Global Indicator of Economic Activity**

**Indices 2019 = 100, s. a.**

115

110

105

100

95

Total

Secondary activities

90

Tertiary activities 80.2

77.9 January

Primary activities 71.0 January

85

J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J

2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023

s. a. / Seasonally adjusted and trend series. The former is represented by
a solid line and the latter by a dotted line.
Source: Mexico’s System of National Accounts (SCNM, for its Spanish
acronym), INEGI.


120

110

100

90

Total

80

Mining (22.3%)

Manufacturing (49.7%)

70

Construction (23.3%)

Utilities (4.7%) January

60

J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J

2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023


s. a. / Seasonally adjusted and trend series. The former is represented by
a solid line and the latter by a dotted line.
1/ Figures in parenthesis correspond to their share in the total in 2013.
Source: Mexico’s System of National Accounts (SCNM, for its Spanish
acronym), INEGI.

Regarding the cyclical position of the economy, in
the first months of 2023, the point estimate for the
negative output gap is expected to have remained at
a level similar to that observed at the end of 2022
(Chart 17). The labor market remains strong. At the
beginning of 2023, both national and urban
unemployment rates decreased (Chart 18). Based
on seasonally adjusted figures, IMSS-insured jobs
continued trending upwards in February. Finally, in
January 2022, unit labor costs in the manufacturing
sector declined, after having increased for two
consecutive months, reaching a level similar to that
observed throughout 2022 on average (Chart 19).

19


-----

**Chart 17**

**Output Gap Estimates [1/]**

Potential output percentages, s. a.


12

8

4

0

-4

-8

-12

Global Economic Activity Index
(IGAE) 2/

-16

Gross Domestic Product 2/

-20 Q-IV

95% confidence interval 3/ January

-24

J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J

2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023


125

120

115

110

105

100

95

90

85


s. a. / Calculations based on seasonally adjusted figures.
1/ Output gap estimated with a tail-corrected Hodrick-Prescott filter; see
Banco de México (2009), “Inflation Report, April-June 2009”, p.74.
2/ GDP figures up to 4-2022 and IGAE implicit up to December 2022,
consistent with said timely figure.
3/ Output gap confidence interval calculated with a method of unobserved
components.
Source: Prepared by Banco de México with INEGI data.

**Chart 18**

**National and Urban Unemployment Rates**

Percent, s. a.

6.5

Urban unemployment rate

6.0

National unemployment rate

5.5

5.0

4.5

4.0

3.5

3.0

January

2.5

J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J

2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023

s. a. / Seasonally adjusted and trend series. The former is represented by
a solid line and the latter by a dotted line.
Source: Prepared by Banco de México with data from ENOE, ETOE (from
April to June 2020), and ENOE new edition (ENOE[N]) from July to date.


J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J

2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023

s. a. / Seasonally adjusted and trend series. The former is represented by
a solid line and the latter by a dotted line.
1/ Productivity based on hours worked.
Source: Prepared by Banco de México with seasonally adjusted data of the
Monthly Manufacturing Industry Survey and industrial activity indicators of
Mexico’s System of National Accounts (Sistema de Cuentas Nacionales de
_México, SCNM), INEGI._

In January 2023, domestic financing to firms
registered a positive real annual variation for the
seventh consecutive month. Bank credit to firms
continued recovering gradually, showing a positive
real annual variation for the ninth consecutive month.
This occurred in a context in which demand for
corporate credit continued recovering and lending
conditions remained tight compared to those
prevailing at the onset of the pandemic. However,
these conditions have tended to ease for smaller
firms since the second half of 2021. Net mediumand long-term corporate debt issuance in the
domestic market decreased slightly in the first two
months of the year, after having increased
significantly in the fourth quarter of 2022.

As for credit to households, commercial bank
housing portfolio continued growing at the same
pace during the fourth quarter of 2022. Banking
consumer credit continued expanding in real terms
as a result of the dynamism of payroll credit and
credit cards loans. This has taken place in a context
in which household demand for credit overall has
continued to increase. Mortgage lending and
consumer credit conditions remained relatively
stable.

In January 2023, interest rates on bank credit to firms
increased, consistent with the behavior of the
reference rate, reaching levels above those
observed at the end of 2019. Corporate credit
intermediation margins remained at levels below

20


-----

those of February 2020, although they increased for
the second consecutive month for smaller firms in
January 2023. Interest rates on mortgages have
increased since July 2022, after having remained at
levels around their historical lows since August 2020.
In December 2022, credit card interest rates
increased with respect to the level observed in the
third quarter, while those for payroll loans registered
similar levels.

As for portfolio quality, in January 2023, corporate
and housing loan delinquency rates remained stable
with respect to those observed in the previous month
and continued at low levels. Finally, consumer
portfolio delinquency rates increased for the second
consecutive month, although they remained at levels
lower than those registered prior to the onset of the
pandemic.

**A.2.3. Development of inflation and inflation**
**outlook**

Between January and the first fortnight of March
2023, annual headline inflation decreased from 7.91
to 7.12% (Chart 20 and Table 1). This result was
mainly due to the reduction in non-core inflation.
Although core inflation also declined, it remains at
high levels.

**Chart 20**

**Consumer Price Index**

Annual percentage change

14
13 CPI

Core

12

Non-core

11
10

9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0

-1
-2 F1 March
-3

J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J

2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023

Source: Banco de México and INEGI.

Annual core inflation declined from 8.45 to 8.15%
between January and the first fortnight of March
2023. This was due to a decline from 11.00 to
10.26% in annual merchandise inflation (Chart 21),
which continued to reflect the improvement in the
operation of production and supply chains, as well as
the stabilization and certain reduction in the prices of
several production inputs. In this regard, although it
still remains at high levels, annual inflation of food


merchandise continued decreasing from 14.08 to
13.20% during the same period, while that of nonfood merchandise fell from 7.53 to 6.94% (Chart 22).
In contrast, annual services inflation, which rose
significantly in January, continued trending upwards,
increasing from 5.51% in that month to 5.68% in the
first fortnight of March 2023. The prices of this
component have continued to face significant
pressures associated with higher input prices
deriving from previous price increases and rising
labor costs. It is also likely that after the lockdown
and given the higher demand, there could be a
greater cost pass-through effect compared to what
had been observed in earlier stages of the pandemic.
In the same months, annual inflation of services
other than education and housing increased from
7.53 to 7.70%, while that of education rose from 4.48
to 4.88%. Annual housing inflation, which rose
significantly in January, continued increasing from
3.38% in that month to 3.50% in its latest readings.

**Chart 21**

**Merchandise and Services Core Price Sub-index**

Annual percentage change

12

Merchandise

11 Services

10

9

8

7

6

5

4

3

2


1

0

J M S J M S J M S J

2017 2018 2019 2020

Source: Banco de México and INEGI.


M S J

2021


M S J

2022


F1 Mar.

M S J

2023

21

|Chart 20 Consumer Price Index Annual percentage change|Col2|Col3|Col4|
|---|---|---|---|
|CPI Core Non-core||||
||Non-core|||
|||||
|||||
|||||
|||||
|||||
|||||
|||||
|||||
|||||
|||||
|||||
|||||
|||||


-----

**Chart 22**

**Merchandise Core Price Sub-index**

Annual percentage change


16

14

12

10

8

6

4

2

0

J

2017


M S J

2018


M S J

2019


M S J

2020


M S J

2021


M S J

2022


F1 Mar.

M S J

2023


Source: Banco de México and INEGI.

Between January and the first fortnight of March
2023, annual non-core inflation decreased from 6.32
to 4.15% (Chart 23 and Table 1). As for its
components, the annual inflation of both agricultural
and livestock products and energy goods continued
to decline. The annual inflation of agricultural and
livestock products decreased from 9.93 to 8.11%
during the reference period, mainly due to a
reduction from 10.17 to 6.97% in the annual variation
of fruit and vegetable prices. The annual inflation of
energy products decreased from 2.52 to -1.03%, with
the reduction from -10.38 to -17.69% in the annual
variation of L.P. gas prices standing out.

**Chart 23**

**Non-core Price Sub-index**

Annual percentage change

25

20

15

10

5

0

-5

Non-core

-10 Agricultural and livestock products

Energy and government-authorized prices F1 Mar.

-15

J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J

2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023

Source: Banco de México and INEGI.


Regarding inflation expectations drawn from the
survey conducted by Banco de México among
private sector specialists, between January and
February 2023, the medians for headline and core
inflation for the end of 2023 increased from 5.18 to
5.28% and from 5.20 to 5.40%, respectively. The
medians for headline and core inflation expectations
for the end of 2024 increased slightly from 4.00 to
4.07% and from 4.00 to 4.04%, respectively. The
median of headline inflation expectations for the next
four years (medium term) remained at 3.80%, while
that for core inflation went from 3.83 to 3.85%. The
median of headline inflation expectations for the long
term (5 to 8 years) increased slightly from 3.58 to
3.60%, while that for core inflation remained at
3.50%. Finally, compensation for inflation and
inflationary risk rose during most of the reported
period and remains at high levels. Within it,
expectations implied by market instruments

remained stable, while the inflation risk premium
increased. Both remain at high levels.

Headline inflation is still projected to converge to the
3% target in the fourth quarter of 2024. These
projections are subject to risks. On the upside: i)
persistence of core inflation at high levels; ii) foreign
exchange depreciation due to volatility in

international financial markets; iii) greater costrelated pressures, and iv) pressures on energy
prices or on agricultural or livestock product prices.
On the downside: i) a greater-than-anticipated
slowdown of the world economy; ii) a lower passthrough from some cost-related pressures; iii) a
decline in the intensity of the geopolitical conflict or a
better functioning of supply chains; and iv) a largerthan-anticipated effect from the Federal

Government’s measures to fight elevated prices.
The balance of risks for the trajectory of inflation
within the forecast horizon remains biased to the
upside.

22


-----

**Table 1**

**Consumer Price Index and Components**

Annual percentage change

**1st fortnight**

**Item** **January 2023** **February 2023**
**March 2023**

**CPI** **7.91** **7.62** **7.12**

**SubyacenteCore** **8.45** **8.29** **8.15**

**Merchandise** **11.00** **10.65** **10.26**

Food, beverages and tobacco 14.08 13.70 13.20

Non-food merchandise 7.53 7.22 6.94

**Services** **5.51** **5.55** **5.68**

Housing 3.38 3.43 3.50

Education (tuitions) 4.48 4.83 4.88

Other services 7.53 7.51 7.70

**No SubyacenteNon-core** **6.32** **5.65** **4.15**

**Agricultural and livestock products** **9.93** **9.29** **8.11**

Fruits and vegetablesFruits abd vegetables 10.17 8.12 6.97

Livestock productsLivestock 9.73 10.22 9.02

**Energy and government-authorized prices Energéticos y Tarifas Aut. por Gobierno** **3.44** **2.77** **1.05**

Energy productsEnergy 2.52 1.50 -1.03

Government-authorized pricesTarifas Autorizadas por Gobierno 5.70 5.93 6.31

Source: INEGI.


-----

-----

