-----

-----

**FOREWARNING**
This document is provided for the reader’s convenience only.
The translation from the official Spanish version was made
by Banco de México’s staff. Discrepancies may arise
between the original document in Spanish and its English
translation. For this reason, the original Spanish version is
the only official document.


**1. PLACE, DATE AND PARTICIPANTS**

**1.1. Place: Meeting held by virtual means.**

**1.2. Date of Governing Board meeting: September**
27, 2023.

**1.3. Participants:**

- Victoria Rodríguez, Governor.

- Galia Borja, Deputy Governor.

- Irene Espinosa, Deputy Governor.

- Jonathan Heath, Deputy Governor.

- Omar Mejía, Deputy Governor.

- Rogelio Eduardo Ramírez, Secretary of Finance

and Public Credit.

- Eduardo Magallón, Alternate Secretary of the

Governing Board.

Prior to this meeting, preliminary work by Banco de
México’s staff analyzing the economic and financial
environment as well as the developments in inflation
and the determinants and outlook for inflation, was
conducted and presented to the Governing Board
(see Annex).

**2. ANALYSIS AND RATIONALE BEHIND THE**
**GOVERNING BOARD’S VOTING**

**_International environment_**

**Most members indicated that, so far in 2023,**
**global economic activity has registered a higher-**
**than-expected dynamism. However, they noted**
**that economic growth has been heterogeneous**
**across regions. In this regard, they contrasted**
**the resilience of the US economy with the**
**weakening of the euro area and Chinese**
**economies. One member added that some**
emerging economies have slowed down. He/she
mentioned that economic growth in several

economies has not been reflected in a greater
volume of international trade, due to the increase in
trade restrictions in recent years. He/she considered
that this could imply a shift in the sources of growth,
given that domestic and regional determinants are
gaining relevance.


**Some members indicated that prospects for world**
growth imply a higher rate of expansion for 2023 as
compared to previous forecasts. Nevertheless, one
member recalled that a slowdown with respect to the
previous year is still expected. **Another member**
noted that leading indicators continue pointing
towards weakness in manufacturing and, recently, to
a deceleration in the services sector. He/she added
that a moderation in the growth rate is also
anticipated for 2024. In the case of the United States,
**one member pointed out that growth forecasts have**
been revised upwards considerably. Some members
highlighted that the probability of a recession in the
United States as estimated by analysts has
diminished. However, **one member warned that**
strikes in the automotive sector could deteriorate the
sector’s output and affect supply chains negatively.
**In the case of China, most members pointed out**
**that** **growth** **forecasts** **have** **been** **revised**

**downwards. Some members forewarned about the**
fragility of the real estate sector in that country. One
member added that the deterioration of China’s
economic outlook has negatively affected the
projections for other emerging economies with which
it has strong trade links. Meanwhile, **another**
member indicated that growth expectations for the
euro area also decreased. One member mentioned
that the balance of risks for global economic activity
remains biased to the downside as a result of factors
such as a greater-than-expected weakness of the
Chinese economy and the effects of restrictive
monetary policies.

Regarding labor markets, **some** members

highlighted that these remain tight in several
countries. However, one member noted that recent
data point to a possible easing in some economies.
**Another member stated that there are mixed signals**
in the case of the United States. In this regard, one
member mentioned that different indicators in that
country point to a better supply-demand balance.
He/she stated that, since the decline in the number
of vacancies has not been accompanied by higher
unemployment levels, it suggests that it is possible to
maintain certain economic dynamism, consistent
with a soft-landing scenario. He/she added that
nominal wage growth has trended downwards in the
United States, in contrast with the upward trend still
observed in the euro area and in the United Kingdom.
**Another member considered that wage negotiations**
have intensified in some strategic industries, such as
the automotive industry in the United States.

**Most members highlighted that headline inflation**
**continued decreasing in most economies,**
**although it remains at high levels. Some members**

1


-----

indicated that it continues being above the central
banks’ targets in a large number of economies. Most
**members underlined that in some cases headline**
**inflation has slightly rebounded. Some members**
attributed the above to the increase in oil prices.
Nevertheless, **some members noted that the**
international prices of a number of commodities have
decreased. **With regard to core inflation, most**
**members stated that it continues showing**
**resistance to decline. One member emphasized**
that it remains high. Some members pointed out that,
regarding its components, services’ prices are still
subject to significant pressures. **One member**
considered that the slow decline of the core
component generates uncertainty as to inflation’s
pace of convergence to the central banks’ targets.
**Another member stated that, despite the signals**
indicating that monetary policy effects have been
passed on to the labor market and the economy, the
US Federal Reserve and the Bank of England
currently foresee headline inflation converging to
their targets towards the beginning of 2026 and 2025,
respectively.

**Among the risks to world inflation, most**
**members mentioned the possibility of a surge in**
**international commodity prices. One member**
highlighted that the global inflationary outlook has
become more challenging, given that the risks for
inflation’s convergence to the targets have increased
significantly. He/she stated that the above derives
from higher global economic growth expected for
2023, tight labor markets, a greater persistence of
core inflation, and the reversion of non-core inflation,
which had been at historically low levels. **Another**
member underlined that the international experience
proves that the disinflationary process could be nonlinear, given the challenges prevailing in the
inflationary outlook.

**Most members highlighted that, currently,**
**central banks’ actions are heterogeneous across**
**economies.** **One** member added that such

heterogeneity has intensified given the differentiated
evolution across economies. Another member
stated that, insofar as inflation has declined, central
banks’ actions have tended to be more cautious,
taking into consideration in each case the restriction
already achieved, the monetary policy lags, as well
as the specific conditions of each economy. The
**majority pointed out that most central banks of**
**advanced economies left their reference rates**
**unchanged.** However, **one member stated that**
some of them, such as the European Central Bank
and the Central Bank of Norway, raised their
reference rates. **Most members considered that**


**the monetary authorities in advanced economies**
**appear to be near the end of their hiking cycles.**
**They highlighted that said institutions have**
**strengthened the message that reference rates**
**will remain high for an extended period.** **Some**
members added that decreases are no longer
anticipated to take place before the first quarter of
2024. **One member mentioned that additional**
increases cannot be ruled out for the remainder of
2023. With regard to emerging economies, he/she
specified that several central banks opted to keep
their reference rates unchanged. However, **some**
members pointed out that in certain cases they
reduced their reference rate in view of concerns over
the deceleration of economic activity. **One member**
noted the reference rate cuts in Brazil, Chile and
Peru.

**All members mentioned that, in its September**
**policy meeting, the US Federal Reserve left the**
**target** **range** **for** **the** **federal** **funds** **rate**

**unchanged.** **One member added that the chairman**
of that institution explained that subsequent actions
will remain dependent on incoming data and that a
further upward adjustment during the rest of 2023
cannot be ruled out. Likewise, **another member**
noted that, based on the median projection for the
federal funds rate of the members of the Federal
Open Market Committee (FOMC), an additional
increase in said rate is anticipated for the rest of the
year. **One member emphasized that expectations**
drawn from market instruments also imply that an
additional increase at the end of the year is possible.
**Most members highlighted that the median of**
**FOMC projections for the end of 2024 and 2025**
**increased by 50 basis points with respect to the**
**projections made in the June meeting.** **They**
**underlined** **that** **the** **above** **reinforces** **the**

**message that reference rates will remain at high**
**levels for an extended period. One member**
mentioned that, even prior to the Federal Reserve’s
latest monetary policy decision, both analysts and
markets had already been revising upwards their
expectations for the federal funds rate for 2024, given
the economy’s resilience and that inflation is still high
in the United States.

**In this context, most members stated that**
**international** **financial** **markets** **registered**

**volatility, that sovereign interest rates, mostly**
**long-term ones, increased, and that the US dollar**
**registered a generalized appreciation. Some**
members underlined that financial markets have
shown high sensitivity to the release of economic
figures. **One member pointed out that this has**
occurred in response to data reinforcing the

2


-----

expectation of monetary policy rates remaining high
for an extended period. Another member underlined
that financial markets in emerging economies
registered negative dynamics in terms of interest
rates, exchange rates, and stock market indices.
He/she mentioned that inflows to equity assets are
still being observed in these markets, along with
outflows from fixed-income assets.

**_Economic activity in Mexico_**

**The majority noted that following the update of**
**the base year of Mexico’s System of National**
**Accounts, the recovery of the economy after the**
**initial shock of the pandemic has been more**
**dynamic than previously estimated. They added**
**that available information suggests the Mexican**
**economy kept expanding during the third quarter**
**of 2023. In this regard, some members considered**
that the Mexican economy continues showing
resilience. One member pointed out that, with the
expansion in the third quarter of 2023, the Mexican
economy would have grown for eight consecutive
quarters. Despite the above, another member stated
that during the third quarter of the year, economic
activity would have expanded at a slower pace than
during the first half of 2023. One member considered
that the Mexican economy is expected to continue
showing resilience in the complex international
environment and that risks remain balanced. He/she
specified that, on the one hand, a greater
nearshoring towards Mexico could provide a largerthan-expected boost to the Mexican economy. On
the other hand, he/she stated that a significant
slowdown in the US economy cannot be ruled out.

**All members noted that consumption remained**
**dynamic. One member pointed out that it is at**
historic highs. Most members emphasized the
**high** **growth** **in** **services** **consumption.**

Specifically, one member argued that this is largely
explained by the normalization of households’
spending patterns. However, another member noted
that it shows some deceleration. **Most members**
**also underlined the significant growth in the**
**consumption of imported goods. One member**
mentioned that it has been spurred by the exchange
rate appreciation. However, he/she added that
consumption of domestic goods is also expanding.
With regard to the determinants of consumption,
**some** members highlighted that consumer

confidence remains at high levels. One member
stated that the above, along with the wage bill and
remittances, will sustain the dynamism of

consumption for several months. Nevertheless,
**another member considered that, based on leading**


indicators, consumption growth is expected to
moderate somewhat towards the second half of the
year.

**All members underlined that investment growth**
**has received a strong impulse from spending on**
**machinery and equipment as well as from non-**
**residential construction. One member added that**
the latter has benefited from the nearshoring
phenomenon. Regarding external demand, **some**
members noted that automotive exports have
trended upwards during the year. **One member**
mentioned that this has offset the decline in the nonoil non-automotive balance and has allowed a
reduction of the trade deficit with respect to 2022.

**On the production side, considering information**
**as of the second quarter and the beginning of the**
**third one of 2023, most members underlined the**
**heterogeneity in the components of industrial**
**production and of services. One member**
mentioned that, based on timely indicators, over the
last months, secondary and tertiary activities
continued registering positive annual variations,
although they showed some moderation. The
**majority highlighted that industrial production**
**continued expanding in July. They specified that**
**it has been largely supported by civil engineering**
**construction projects associated with the public**
**sector infrastructure projects. Some members**
underlined the sluggishness in manufacturing other
than transport equipment. One member pointed out
that such weakness would be in line with that
observed in US manufacturing. **Some members**
highlighted that transport equipment has offset the
performance of the rest of the manufacturing sector.
As for services, they noted that, from a medium-term
perspective, this sector has shown dynamism after
the economy’s reopening process, while **one**
member mentioned that growth in some of its
segments has moderated.

**Some members indicated that the output gap is in**
positive territory. **One** member added that,

considering the new data for Mexico’s national
accounts, which reflects a faster recovery, and the
greater boost to economic activity that is expected for
2024, the point estimate for the output gap has
become slightly positive in the forecast horizon.
Nevertheless, he/she stated that it is still not
expected to be statistically different from zero.

**All members pointed out that the labor market**
**continues showing strength.** **Most members**
**highlighted** **that** **the** **unemployment** **rate**

**remained at historically low levels. One member**
underlined that the unemployment gap has become

3


-----

more negative since almost a year ago. **Some**
members mentioned that an estimate of the nonoccupied population who is available for employment
has decreased significantly. **One member pointed**
out that this has been particularly noticeable in the
case of women. **Another member added that this**
indicator is also at historically low levels. **Most**
**members highlighted the behavior of the labor**
**force participation rate.** **One member pointed out**
that, based on July data, said rate has continued
increasing. **Another member asserted that it is at**
relatively high levels. **One member noted that both**
labor participation and the underemployment rate are
close to their historic averages. **Some members**
underlined the dynamism of employment. **One**
member emphasized that the creation of formal
employment remains above its historic mean,
although it appears to be decelerating. **Another**
member mentioned that the labor informality rate
remains high.

**Most members stated that annual wage growth**
**remains high. Some members highlighted that**
wages of IMSS-insured workers continue registering
double-digit annual variations. However, **some**
members mentioned that some measures of wage
indicators have been slightly lower at the margin.
**One member considered that this deceleration could**
indicate a moderation in the strength of the labor
market. Meanwhile, **another member argued that**
wage revisions appear to maintain an inertia that is
unlikely to decelerate rapidly, especially if the
minimum wage is raised significantly. He/she warned
that this issue is worsened by the increasingly
noticeable shortages in both skilled and unskilled
labor.

**_Inflation in Mexico_**

**Most members mentioned that, since the last**
**monetary policy decision, headline inflation**
**continued decreasing and registered 4.44% in the**
**first fortnight of September. One member stated**
that this is the lowest level since February 2021.
**Another member noted that, considering the latest**
readings, headline inflation has decreased by 426
basis points since its highest level registered in
August 2022. **Some members indicated that**
progress in the disinflation process has been
reflected in a number of metrics. **One member**
highlighted the following: i) a reduction in the share
of CPI items with annualized monthly rates higher
than 10%, which shifted from figures above 40% in
2022 down to 11.3% in the latest readings; ii) the
frequency of price revisions, which, after having been
at levels above their historical average in 2022, have


been more in line with these averages in 2023; and
iii) a significant fall in seasonally adjusted and
annualized monthly price changes. Despite the
important progress in the disinflationary process,
**some members forewarned that headline inflation is**
still at high levels.

**Most members acknowledged that the non-core**
**component has contributed the most to the**
**decline in headline inflation. In this regard,** **one**
member emphasized that it has been good fortune,
because the prices of this component do not respond
to the monetary policy actions, and that it is highly
likely that an upward trend of these prices will be
observed. He/she added that, for that reason, it will
be necessary to pay greater attention to the
dynamics of the core component. **In that sense,**
**most members pointed out that the downward**
**incidence of the core component on headline**
**inflation has increased in recent months. One**
member mentioned that, at the margin, the fall in
headline inflation is explained by the reduction in its
core component, given that non-core inflation started
to increase. **Another member pointed out that the**
rates of reduction are heterogeneous among the
various components of inflation.

**Regarding core inflation, most members stated**
**that, after the latest monetary policy meeting, it**
**continued decreasing and registered 5.78% in the**
**first fortnight of September. Some members**
highlighted that, considering the latest readings, this
component has decreased by 273 basis points since
it reached its highest level of 8.51% in November
2022. They noted that such decline shows the
progress in the disinflation process. **One member**
underlined that the percentage of the CPI items in the
core consumption basket with annualized monthly
rates above 10% has decreased significantly with
respect to the figures registered in 2022. He/she
added that the seasonally adjusted and annualized
monthly rate of this component has decreased after
having averaged 8.35% in 2022, so that it averaged
4.48% in the last three months.

**Despite its decrease, most members emphasized**
**that core inflation still remains at high levels. In**
**addition,** **they** **highlighted** **that** **it** **shows**

**persistence. In this regard, one member underlined**
that the seasonally adjusted and annualized monthly
inflation has not managed to remain consistently
below the upper limit of the variability interval and
appears to begin reversing the downward trend it had
been showing during this year. Some members
argued that internal factors, such as the dynamism of
domestic demand, have contributed to the

4


-----

persistence of core inflation. One member mentioned
that the strength of the labor market has also
contributed to said persistence.

**Most members pointed out that merchandise**
**inflation has decreased more significantly than**
**services inflation.** **One member stated that it has**
recently declined from 7.82% in July 2023 to 6.35%
in the first fortnight of September. Another member
underlined that seasonally adjusted and annualized
monthly changes of merchandise prices have
decreased considerably in recent months. He/she
added that the share of CPI items within the
merchandise basket registering variations below or
equal to 3% shifted from 18% at the beginning of the
year to 40% in the latest figures. Regarding the
components of merchandise inflation, **some**

members stated that, in its latest readings, the
annual variation of food merchandise prices
decreased to 7.73%, while that of non-food
merchandise prices declined to 4.74%. **Some**
members argued that the easing of the shocks
resulting from the pandemic and the geopolitical
conflict in Ukraine, such as the normalization of
supply chains and the fall in the international
references of some commodities, has contributed to
the decline in merchandise inflation. **One member**
added that the exchange rate appreciation has
contributed to the above process, as it has eased
pressures on imported goods’ prices, including
intermediate and final goods. He/she stated that
services inflation has also declined, but at a more
gradual pace. He/she pointed out that it has recently
decreased, from 5.24% in July to 5.08% in the first
fortnight of September. Another member

characterized this reduction as barely noticeable.
**Some members mentioned that the recent readings**
in services have turned out above projections.

**Most members agreed that the gradual reduction**
**in core inflation mainly reflects the persistent**
**behavior of services inflation. They argued that**
**the pass-through of higher costs stemming from**
**the pandemic and the military conflict in Ukraine**
**to** **services** **prices** **has** **been** **slow** **and**

**characterized by lags. They explained that this**
**has been due to the fact that the demand for**
**services has been recovering gradually, after**
**having contracted significantly at the beginning**
**of the pandemic in the face of weak economic**
**activity, the lockdown, and the change in**
**households’** **consumption** **patterns.** **Some**

members stated that price increases in food and
energy products, among others, have exerted
pressure on services’ operating costs. One member
added that these costs also increased due to the


implementation of sanitary measures, the adoption of
technology to facilitate remote work, and the increase
in real estate rental prices, among other factors.
**Some members noted that, contrary to this described**
behavior of services, in the case of merchandise, the
cost pass-through was faster given the higher
demand registered since the beginning of the
pandemic. **Most members considered that the**
**recovery in the demand for services is allowing a**
**greater pass-through of accumulated costs,**
**which would explain the persistence exhibited by**
**this component. One member stated that the**
dynamism of both the economy and the labor market
is also contributing to the gradual decline in services
inflation. However, he/she mentioned that, in his/her
opinion, the resilience of economic activity explains
the slow rate of decrease of this component,
although not necessarily its high levels. He/she
highlighted that this distinction is relevant for the
conduction of monetary policy. Regarding the
change in household consumption patterns, he/she
pointed out that, according to the National Survey of
Household Income and Expenditure (ENIGH, for its
acronym in Spanish), the fraction of spending
allocated to leisure and education decreased
significantly between 2018 and 2020, and that by
2022 it had not yet fully recovered, and thus a
normalization of these patters has probably still been
observed during 2023. He/she acknowledged that
there could be permanent changes in consumption
patterns that are still difficult to identify. As a
reflection of these factors, **some** members

highlighted the case of educational services, whose
biweekly inflation in the first half of September was
the highest for an equivalent fortnight since 2008.

**Most members noted that non-core inflation**
**remained at particularly low levels, registering**
**0.48% during the first fortnight of September.**
**However,** **they pointed out that it rebounded**
**slightly as compared to previous readings.** **One**
member mentioned that this was due to increases in
the annual variations of fruit and vegetable prices, as
well as energy prices, particularly LP gas. He/she
stated that these increases are largely attributed to
the base effects that had already been anticipated.

**Most members noted that longer-term inflation**
**expectations remained relatively stable at levels**
**above target.** **One member pointed out that they**
remain above their historical average. He/she added
that, at the margin, inflation expectations for the end
of 2023 slightly increased, while those for the end of
2024 slightly decreased. **Another** member

underlined that, although the medians of

expectations for all different horizons registered

5


-----

limited adjustments, improvements continued to be
observed in the distribution of short-term

expectations, as the share of analysts expecting a
lower inflation increased. Regarding expectations
drawn from market instruments, **one member**
indicated that, since the last monetary policy
decision, breakeven inflation increased. He/she
added that this could imply higher inflation
expectations for the short term, as well as a higher
inflation risk premium.

**Most members pointed out that forecasts for**
**headline and core inflation have been revised**
**upwards reflecting a more gradual decline than**
**previously foreseen. All members mentioned that**
**inflation is now projected to converge to the**
**target in the second quarter of 2025. Most**
**members highlighted that the adjustment in**
**forecasts is primarily due to the expectation of a**
**greater persistence in the services component,**
**due to the accumulation of costs that have not**
**yet been fully passed on to consumer prices.**
**Some members noted that the forecasts consider a**
more resilient economic activity. One member added
that pressures on core inflation are accompanied by
the effects of higher economic growth, and an
expansionary fiscal framework for 2024 not foreseen
in previous projections.

**All members considered that the inflationary**
**outlook is still complex.** **One member stated that it**
cannot be ruled out that the effects of the shocks may
dissipate more slowly than expected and that some
inflation components may show fluctuations that
interrupt or delay their downward trajectory. **All**
**members agreed that the balance of risks for the**
**foreseen trajectory of inflation within the forecast**
**horizon remains biased to the upside.** **Some**
members mentioned that, in their opinion, said
balance has deteriorated since the last monetary
policy decision. **One** member argued that,

considering the new forecasted trajectory, the
balance of risks for inflation has not deteriorated.

**Among upside risks to inflation, all members**
**highlighted** **the** **persistence** **of** **the** **core**

**component at high levels. One member stated that**
the decline in this component could moderate once
the base effects dissipate. He/she added that
services prices could continue to be subject to
pressures from cumulative costs. He/she noted that
the favorable downward effects associated with the
behavior of merchandise prices could be wearing off.
**Some members highlighted the risk of exchange rate**
depreciations in light of international financial
volatility events. **One member pointed out that**


periods of more severe exchange rate volatility than
those observed recently cannot be ruled out, with
greater and more lasting effects on the exchange
rate, which could particularly affect merchandise
prices. **Another member argued that not only**
external factors but also internal ones could exert
pressure on the Mexican peso. **Some members**
stated that the expansion of the fiscal deficit for 2024
could represent additional inflationary pressures.
**One member highlighted some challenges ahead for**
public finances associated with: i) the fiscal
adjustment required to achieve consolidation in
2025; ii) the rigidity of the expenditure structure; iii)
the expectation of lower world growth in 2025; and iv)
the reduction of fiscal space to increase spending on
infrastructure. He/she argued that the latter is key to
increase potential growth and take advantage of the
nearshoring process. In addition, he/she stated that
Pemex's situation is a cause of concern for the
sustainability of public finances due to its

dependence on federal resources.

**Some members added as an upside risk to inflation**
the possibility of greater cost-related pressures. They
considered that those from the labor market could be
aggravated by the wage policy. One member pointed
out that insecurity could also affect indirectly firms’
operating costs. Some members noted the risk that
the economy’s resilience leads to a more gradual
reduction in inflation than expected. In this regard,
**one member mentioned the increasing domestic**
demand pressures. **Another member cautioned**
about higher global economic growth being an
external factor that could also affect inflation
dynamics in Mexico. **Some members forewarned**
about the risk of pressures on energy or agricultural
and livestock product prices due to geopolitical or
climate-related events. One member highlighted the
possibility of the increase in non-core inflation
leading it to converge to levels similar to its historical
values. He/she added that given the prevailing risks,
medium and long-term inflation expectations could
rebound. **Another member stated that there is the**
risk of inflation stagnating above the variability range
in 2024, given the increasing domestic pressures.

**_Macrofinancial environment_**

Regarding financing in the economy, **one member**
noted that total financing maintained a moderate
pace of growth. **Some members pointed out that**
domestic financing also continued growing. One
member stated that foreign financing decreased.
**Most members mentioned that credit from**
**commercial banks continued expanding. In**
**particular, they highlighted the increase in credit**

6


-----

**to firms. Some members noted the increase in**
consumer credit. **Some members stated that the**
dynamism of credit reflects the labor market’s
strength. **One member mentioned that delinquency**
rates are at low and stable levels, although a
marginal increase has been observed recently in
credit card and payroll loans.

**Most members stated that, since the last**
**meeting, the Mexican peso traded in a wide**
**range, exhibited volatility, and depreciated**
**somewhat. They highlighted that this behavior**
**was mainly due to global factors, in particular, to**
**the expectation of a greater monetary tightening**
**by the main central banks of advanced**
**economies, such as the Federal Reserve. In this**
regard, **one member noted that the volatility and**
depreciation of the Mexican peso were mainly
associated with the generalized appreciation of the
US dollar. Most members pointed out that trading
**conditions in the foreign exchange market**
**remained orderly.**

**Some** members asserted that, despite the

depreciation, the Mexican peso remained stronger
than during the first months of the year. **Some**
members highlighted that the Mexican peso has
shown resilience, due to the solid macroeconomic
fundamentals and the monetary policy actions. **As**
**for the behavior of the exchange rate, most**
**members mentioned the announcement of the**
**Foreign Exchange Commission regarding the**
**reduction in the foreign exchange hedging**
**program. They stated that, although the currency**
**depreciated and registered volatility after the**
**announcement, the reaction was brief. One**
member added that analysts and traders reacted
favorably to this announcement.

**Most members noted that interest rates on**
**government securities, mainly medium and long-**
**term ones, increased, in line with the higher**
**interest rates observed worldwide.** **One member**
highlighted that liquidity conditions in this market
have not yet reached pre-pandemic levels. Another
member pointed out that sovereign risk premia
continued fluctuating within a narrow range, with
recent increases mainly related to global factors.
**One member noted that the stock market performed**
negatively, mainly due to the communications sector.
**Another member noted that both markets as well as**
analysts are assigning a greater probability to the
possibility that there are no changes to the reference
rate until the beginning of 2024, and that likewise,
expectations for interest rate cuts throughout the
horizon have moderated.


**_Monetary policy_**

**The Governing Board evaluated the magnitude**
**and diversity of the inflationary shocks and their**
**determinants, along with the evolution of**
**medium- and long-term inflation expectations**
**and the price formation process. It considered**
**that, although progress in the disinflation**
**process has been made, the outlook is still very**
**complex. Based on the above, and taking into**
**account the monetary policy stance already**
**attained and the persistence of the shocks that**
**the Mexican economy is facing, with the**
**presence of all its members, the Board decided**
**unanimously to maintain the target for the**
**overnight interbank interest rate at 11.25%. With**
**this decision, the monetary policy stance**
**remains in the trajectory required for inflation to**
**converge to its 3% target within the forecast**
**horizon.**

**The Board will thoroughly monitor inflationary**
**pressures as well as all factors that have an**
**incidence on the foreseen path for inflation and**
**its expectations. It estimates that the inflationary**
**outlook will be complicated and uncertain**
**throughout the entire forecast horizon, with**
**upward risks. Thus, in order to achieve an orderly**
**and sustained convergence of headline inflation**
**to the 3% target, it considers that it will be**
**necessary to maintain the reference rate at its**
**current level for an extended period. The central**
**bank reaffirms its commitment with its primary**
**mandate and the need to continue its efforts to**
**consolidate an environment of low and stable**
**inflation.**

**One** **member argued that the monetary policy**
actions implemented, together with the dissipation of
shocks, allowed the disinflation process to begin and
advance in recent months. This occurred after the
multiple deep and generalized shocks the world has
undergone. He/she stated that monetary policy is
operating through all its transmission channels.
He/she underlined the role of the expectations and
exchange rate channels. He/she pointed out that
longer-term inflation expectations have remained
stable and the Mexican peso has shown resilience,
which has contributed to ease pressures on prices.
He/she warned that, although inflation is decreasing,
it is doing it from high levels and in an environment in
which upward risks prevail. He/she mentioned that
under these conditions, a prudent conduction of
monetary policy has implied taking time to allow the
achieved monetary stance to continue operating and
evaluating the development of the inflationary

7


-----

outlook. He/she pointed out that under this cautious
approach it is essential to analyze the information
that is accumulating on the dynamics of shocks and
their effects. He/she added that this is required to
avoid reference rate cuts that are premature or
implemented faster than necessary and,

consequently, that could jeopardize the downward
trajectory of inflation. Taking into account the above,
he/she considered that the reference rate should
remain at its current level for an extended period.
He/she reflected on the fact that, although inflation
figures are below the highest levels observed in the
past year, they are still above the central bank's
permanent target. He/she highlighted that this
illustrates both the progress that has been made in
disinflation, as well as the tasks that still need to be
addressed. He/she stated that in subsequent
meetings the Governing Board will remain attentive,
as it has been doing, to the evolution of
macroeconomic conditions, considering that the road
ahead is still lengthy and is not exempt from risks.
He/she noted that the more gradual decline in
inflation that is now foreseen could imply that, looking
ahead, the reference rate may need to be lowered
more gradually, once the disinflationary process
allows for such decreases. Finally, he/she reiterated
that the priority when conducting monetary policy
must continue to be lowering inflation and
consolidating an environment of price stability in
Mexico, in line with the central bank's mandate and
for the benefit of the Mexican population.

**Another** **member considered that the outlook for**
inflation has become more complex for the conduct
of monetary policy, because of both a more adverse
external environment and idiosyncratic factors. In this
context, he/she expressed that it is essential to
maintain the level of monetary restriction attained as
long as more information and analyses are available
to evaluate the need to implement additional
adjustments in the monetary policy stance. He/she
stated that the factors supporting the upward revision
in inflation forecasts should be explained, and that
the balance of risks for inflation has deteriorated in
an environment of high uncertainty. He/she added
that in view of the more complex outlook, forward
guidance should highlight that a restrictive stance will
be maintained for a more extended period than the
previously foreseen. He/she reiterated that it is
convenient to maintain the monetary stance in
restrictive territory during the entire forecast horizon.
He/she expressed that the fiscal package could
generate pressures on aggregate demand. He/she
added that if the fiscal consolidation process
contemplated for 2025 is not achieved, given the
challenges that this implies, the consequences for


inflationary dynamics could be even greater for that
year. He/she mentioned that in a scenario of greater
pressures, it will be necessary to maintain the level
of monetary restriction for an even longer period than
that foreseen in the previous meeting and, going
forward, expanding this policy stance could be
required, either actively or passively. He/she added
that the best course of action should be evaluated in
case inflationary pressures materialize, with the aim
to preserve price and financial stability.

**One** **member stated that the current restrictive**
stance should be maintained for an extended period
in order to ensure the convergence of inflation to its
target, which is now foreseen for the second quarter
of 2025. He/she highlighted that the disinflationary
process faces domestic pressures from a tightening
labor market and the dynamism of aggregate
demand, in addition to the still uncertain effects of
fiscal expansion. He/she emphasized that the lack of
synchronization between the expansionary fiscal
policy and a restrictive monetary policy, implies it is
necessary to pay attention to: i) the possibility of
offsetting the likely effects of this stimulus on
aggregate demand; and ii) the possibility that the
fiscal stance lasts longer than anticipated, if the fiscal
balance reduction projected for 2025 is not of the
expected magnitude. He/she considered that the
materialization of these risks could require monetary
restriction for a longer period. He/she added that the
monetary cycle should continue focusing on
domestic pressures, primarily on the core

component, and remain unaffected by changes in the
monetary policy stances of other countries. He/she
pointed out that in order to address the risks to
inflation and allow the restrictive stance to take full
effect, its passive management must continue.
He/she considered that, since the last reference rate
increase, the decline in 12-month inflation

expectations caused the real ex-ante rate to increase
by almost 70 basis points. He/she pointed out that
this passive management should continue until: i)
core inflation improves beyond the marginal
adjustments it has registered; ii) expectations of
headline and core inflation for 2024 consolidate
within the variability interval; and iii) the risk of
economic overheating is mitigated. He/she

considered that forward guidance should highlight
that a restrictive stance will be maintained for an
extended period. He/she indicated that the period in
which the nominal interest rate remains fixed should
last at least for the rest of the year, with the possibility
of extending beyond the first quarter of 2024 if
necessary. He/she expressed that the monetary
policy statement should maintain the categorization
of such period as "extended" and even "not yet

8


-----

defined”, in order to contribute to the expectation that
it is still not possible to accurately forecast the date
of the beginning of reference rate cuts. He/she added
that it should also be communicated that the period
to reach a neutral stance is still beyond the forecast
horizon. He/she concluded by stating that the
increasing domestic risks call for strictly adhering to
the primary mandate and, therefore, to a much more
restrictive tone in communication.

**Another member stated that the disinflationary**
process is still complex. He/she noted that various
metrics point to a favorable downward trajectory for
inflation, while different measures of inflation
expectations continue improving. However, he/she
mentioned that inflation’s behavior over the forecast
horizon still faces significant challenges. He/she
pointed out that the forecasts had been adjusted
upwards for six quarters, and convergence had been
postponed for two. He/she mentioned that such
revisions were attributable mainly to a worsening of
the expected determinants of inflation, for which
there are various sources of uncertainty that maintain
the balance of risks biased to the upside. He/she
highlighted that the dynamism of economic activity
implies challenges for the monetary policy

transmission mechanisms, given a highly dynamic
labor market supporting the growth of credit and
consumption, in addition to the normalization of
expenditure patterns which has fostered a new
adjustment of relative prices between merchandise
and services, starting at high levels. Likewise, he/she
pointed out that services prices are showing a larger
pass-through of accumulated cost-related shocks,
due to the greater demand they face, and that in
those sectors in which costs have already
decreased, market structures have facilitated the
continuation of price increases. For this reason,
he/she considered that, given the current

environment of high uncertainty, the monetary policy
stance should remain restrictive for an extended
period in order to continue fostering conditions for
inflation to return to its target. He/she pointed out that
the real ex-ante short-term interest rate has
continued to increase, that the real ex-post rate of
new credit to firms could reach historically high
levels, and that the real exchange rate continues
working in favor of lower inflation. He/she considered
that monetary conditions are at a sufficiently
restrictive level, but that they require time to be
adequately transmitted to the economy. He/she
mentioned that while last year's environment of
uncertainty required a risk management approach
and forceful decision making, the current uncertainty
is more associated with the speed at which inflation
will converge to its target. He/she indicated that the


monetary policy approach should remain prudent,
cautious and gradual. He/she added that

communication should highlight the need for
certainty on the observed and expected determinants
of inflation, in order to consolidate a trajectory for
inflation towards its target, and comply with the
central bank’s constitutional mandate.

**One** **member argued that, despite the advances in**
the disinflationary process, convergence has

become slower and the main challenge continues to
be the persistence of core inflation, especially that of
services. In this regard, he/she highlighted that, given
the weakness of demand that they faced, the passthrough of the increase in costs to services prices
has been lower than for merchandise. Thus, some
items of the services sector continue recovering from
the effects of the changes in the consumption
patterns, on top of which the dynamism of the labor
market has also contributed to its persistence.
Likewise, he/she emphasized the relevance of
having communicated a prolonged pause and of
continuing to be cautious with the stance that has
been achieved, given the prevalence of the
challenges in the inflationary front. In this regard,
he/she highlighted that, on the one hand, the real
ex-ante short-term interest rate is close to 350 basis
points above the upper limit of the neutral range and,
since September 2022, it has been in restrictive
territory. He/she added that communication has been
an important complementary tool that, without being
too explicit, has allowed to convey the Governing
Board’s view of the inflation outlook to the markets.
He/she pointed out that, under these two axes, the
monetary policy stance is expected to continue
operating through its different channels. He/she
stated that monetary restriction has favored a
recomposition in the holding of assets towards those
of longer terms. He/she added that the Mexican peso
has appreciated around 24% in real terms since the
beginning of the hiking cycle. He/she pointed out
that, although the nominal reference rate has
remained unchanged since last May, there have
been no reductions in long-term interest rates or an
easing of financial conditions. He/she considered
that this indicates that communication has

contributed to avoid a premature easing of monetary
conditions. He/she expressed that all of the above
has helped inflation expectations to remain anchored
and the adverse effects on their distribution to show
improvements. Thus, in this period of pause, the real
ex-ante interest rate has increased, and this passive
tightening also allows to handle the various risks that
prevail. He/she considered that, given the risks to
inflation, it is pertinent to reaffirm that the reference
rate will remain at its current level for an extended

9


-----

period. He/she stated that, in this way, the monetary
policy stance will continue contributing to the
disinflationary process consistent with the primary
mandate of price stability.

**3. MONETARY POLICY DECISION**

The Governing Board evaluated the magnitude and
diversity of the inflationary shocks and their
determinants, along with the evolution of mediumand long-term inflation expectations and the price
formation process. It considered that, although
progress in the disinflation process has been made,
the outlook is still very complex. Based on the above,
and taking into account the monetary policy stance
already attained and the persistence of the shocks
that the Mexican economy is facing, with the
presence of all its members, the Board decided
unanimously to maintain the target for the overnight
interbank interest rate at 11.25%. With this decision,
the monetary policy stance remains in the trajectory
required for inflation to converge to its 3% target
within the forecast horizon.

.


The Board will thoroughly monitor inflationary
pressures as well as all factors that have an
incidence on the foreseen path for inflation and its
expectations. It estimates that the inflationary outlook
will be complicated and uncertain throughout the
entire forecast horizon, with upward risks. Thus, in
order to achieve an orderly and sustained
convergence of headline inflation to the 3% target, it
considers that it will be necessary to maintain the
reference rate at its current level for an extended
period. The central bank reaffirms its commitment
with its primary mandate and the need to continue its
efforts to consolidate an environment of low and
stable inflation.

**4. VOTING**

Victoria Rodríguez, Galia Borja, Irene Espinosa,
Jonathan Heath, and Omar Mejía voted in favor of
maintaining the target for the overnight interbank
interest rate at 11.25%

10


-----

**ANNEX**

The information in this Annex was prepared for this
meeting by the staff of Banco de México’s
Directorate General of Economic Research and
Directorate General of Central Bank Operations. It
does not necessarily reflect the considerations of the
members of the Governing Board as to the monetary
policy decision.

**A.1. External conditions**

**A.1.1. World economic activity**

Available indicators suggest that during the third
quarter of 2023 global economic activity would have
expanded at a slightly faster pace than in the
previous quarter and above the rate anticipated at
the beginning of this quarter. However, the different
economies are expected to perform

heterogeneously. Growth prospects for the United
States have been revised upwards for the third
quarter, while those for China have been revised
downwards. Purchasing Managers' Indices point to
a slowdown in services, mainly in advanced
economies, and to a weakness in global

manufacturing activity during the third quarter (Chart
1). Among global risks, the following stand out:
persistence of inflationary pressures, intensification
of geopolitical tensions, tighter financial conditions,
and to a lesser extent, challenges to financial
stability.

In the United States, Gross Domestic Product (GDP)
is expected to have expanded during the third
quarter, at a faster pace than the 0.5% seasonally
adjusted quarterly rate registered during the second
quarter.[1] Available indicators suggest that growth in
the third quarter would have been mainly driven by
private consumption, residential and non-residential
investment, net exports, and inventory accumulation
(Chart 2).

1 Expressed as a seasonally adjusted annualized quarterly rate,
the change in US GDP was 2.1% in the second quarter of 2023.


**Chart 1**

**Global: Purchasing Managers’ Index:**

**Production Component**

Diffusion index, s. a.[1/ ]

60

58

56

54

52

50

Manufacturing

48 Manufacturing (excl. China)

46 Services

Services (excl. China)

44 32.5

24.8

42 23.7

20.7 August

40

J J J J J J J J J J J J J J

2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023

s.a./ Seasonally adjusted figures.
1/ The index varies between 0 and 100 points. A reading above 50 points
is considered an overall increase compared to the previous month and
below 50 points an overall decrease.
Note: The figures in the chart correspond to the respective minimum levels
of each indicator.
Source: IHS Markit.

**Chart 2**

**US Real GDP and Components**

Quarterly percentage rate and contribution

in percentage points, s. a.

3.0 Private consumption expenditures

Residential investment

2.5 Nonresidential investment

Change in private inventories

2.0 Net exportsGovernment consumption expenditures

Total

1.5

1.0

0.5

0.0

-0.5

-1.0

-1.5

-2.0

I II III IV I II III IV I II III

2021 2022 2023

s. a./ Seasonally adjusted figures.
Note: The shaded area refers to the Atlanta Fed's GDPNow forecasts as of
September 27.
Source: BEA and Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta.

11


-----

US industrial production expanded at a seasonally
adjusted monthly rate of 0.4% in August, after having
increased by 0.7% in July. The increase in August
reflected progress in all of its components, with the
1.4% growth in mining production standing out.
Manufacturing activity increased 0.1% as a result of
growth in non-durable and durable goods.

Purchasing Managers' Indices suggest that activity
in the services sector slowed down and that
manufacturing production remained somewhat

sluggish.

The US labor market has remained tight, although
some indicators have shown signs of moderation.
The non-farm payroll continued expanding, albeit at
a more moderate pace, from 201 thousand new jobs
on average per month during the second quarter to
172 thousand new jobs on average per month in July
and August. In recent months, new job creation
figures have been subject to statistical revisions after
their first release that have consistently modified the
data to the downside. The vacancy rate remained at
high levels, albeit with marginal declines in recent
months. Initial claims for unemployment insurance
remained at low levels. The unemployment rate rose
from 3.5% in July to 3.8% in August.

In the euro area, economic activity is expected to
have remained weak during the third quarter of 2023,
after having grown at a seasonally adjusted quarterly
rate of 0.1% in each of the previous two quarters.[2]
The sluggish performance expected for the third
quarter would be associated with a lower external
demand, tighter domestic financial conditions, and
lower residential and business investment. The
services sector, which had been showing resilience,
has lost dynamism. In July, the unemployment rate
remained at the previous month’s level of 6.4%.

Economic activity in major emerging economies is
expected to have expanded during the third quarter
of 2023. However, there are differences in the pace
of quarterly growth between countries. In Europe and
Emerging Asia, some countries are expected to be
more dynamic, while others are expected to
decelerate. In the case of China, although higher
growth is expected during the third quarter compared
to the previous one, this expectation has been
revised downwards. In Latin America, economic
activity is expected to have continued growing in
most countries, except for Argentina and Brazil,

2 Expressed as a seasonally adjusted annualized quarterly rate,
the change in euro area GDP was 0.5% in the second quarter and
0.3% in the first quarter of 2023.


which are foreseen to have contracted and
stagnated, respectively.

International commodity prices registered a mixed
behavior since Mexico's previous monetary policy
decision. Crude oil reference prices continued
trending upwards during most of the period. This was
largely due to the extension of voluntary production
cuts in Saudi Arabia and Russia until the end of the
year and the fall in inventories in the United States.
At the end of September, crude oil prices reached
their highest levels so far in 2023. Meanwhile, natural
gas reference prices in Europe exhibited high
variability due to the risk of lower imports from
Australia as a result of strikes by the oil industry
workers in that country, as well as possible warmer
temperatures for the end of the year. In the United
States, natural gas reference prices decreased due
to the expectation of lower demand for the upcoming
winter. Grain prices fell overall due to an increase in
wheat supply from Russia and prospects for higher
corn production in the United States. Finally,
industrial metals exhibited a mixed behavior,
registering price increases between the end of
August and the beginning of September. This was
due to prospects of an expansion of the construction
sector in emerging economies. Afterwards, prices
fell in response to reports about the Chinese
economy’s weakness.

**A.1.2. Monetary policy and international financial**
**markets**

Headline inflation continued decreasing in most
economies, although it remains at elevated levels. In
most cases it continues being above the respective
central banks' targets. Core inflation continues
showing a resistance to decline.

In some advanced economies headline inflation
rebounded slightly in its most recent reading (Chart
3). This was associated, in several cases, with
greater pressures on energy prices. In turn, in most
advanced economies, core inflation declined in its
latest reading. Nevertheless, it has decreased at a
slower pace than headline inflation. The gradual
decline in core inflation has been partly associated
with pressures on services prices. In the United
States, annual headline inflation, measured by the
consumer price index, increased from 3.2% in July
to 3.7% in August, and still remains above the 2%
inflation target. This result reflected a lower annual

12


-----

deflation in energy prices that was partially offset by
a decline in both food inflation and core inflation. The
annual variation of core inflation went from 4.7 to
4.3% during the same period, as a result of a decline
in the inflation of goods and, to a lesser extent, of
services. US headline inflation measured by the
personal consumption expenditures price index
increased in annual terms from 3.0% in June to 3.3%
in July. Annual core inflation went from 4.1 to 4.2%
during the same period.

**Chart 3**

**Selected Advanced Economies:**

**Headline Inflation**

Annual percentage change

12

United States PCE 1/

10 United States CPI

Japan

8 Euro area

United Kingdom

6

Canada

4

2

August

July

0

-2

J J J J J J J J J

2019 2020 2021 2022 2023

1/ The personal consumption expenditures price index is used.
Source: Bureau of Economic Analysis, Bureau of Labor Statistics, Eurostat,
Bank of Japan, The UK Office for National Statistics and Statistics Canada.

Analysts' short-term inflation forecasts for most
major advanced economies remained relatively
stable. Although these forecasts continued

anticipating a moderation of headline inflation in
2023 from its levels in 2022, it would continue being
above their central banks' targets. Longer-term
inflation expectations for these economies derived
from financial instruments showed relative stability
with respect to the levels registered at the beginning
of August.

In a large number of emerging economies, annual
headline inflation decreased. However, in some of
these economies, particularly in the Asian region,
inflation rebounded in its latest reading. In most of
them, inflation remains above their respective central
banks' targets. In other cases, such as Brazil, South
Africa, Thailand, Indonesia and China, annual
headline inflation was within the central banks’
variability interval or even below its point target. In
the particular case of China, annual headline inflation
remained at levels close to 0%. In most of the major
emerging economies, core inflation gradually
decreased.


In this environment, since Mexico's previous
monetary policy decision, the central banks of the
main advanced and emerging economies have
made heterogeneous adjustments to their monetary
policy reference rates, depending on the evolution of
inflation and other economic indicators, which, in
turn, have exhibited differences across countries.
Regarding future adjustments, several central banks
highlighted that these will depend on the evolution of
relevant data and on the inflationary outlook.

Most central banks in the major advanced
economies left their reference rates unchanged
during the period since Banco de México's last
decision. Moreover, several central banks expect
them to remain at high levels for an extended period.
In some cases, the decision to keep interest rates
unchanged was announced after a series of
consecutive hikes. As for their asset purchase
programs, most central banks in this group of
economies continued to gradually reduce their
securities' holdings. Regarding expectations on the
monetary policy rate, based on the latest available
information for most of the major advanced
economies, interest rates implicit in interest rate
swap curves (OIS) are expected to remain at high
levels for the rest of 2023 and during 2024.
Expectations for the reference rate for the end of
2024 were revised slightly upwards, especially for
the United States (Chart 4).

**Chart 4**

**Reference Rates and Trajectories**

**Implied in OIS Curves[1/]**

Percent

76 **――― Bank of Japan US Federal Reserve 2/ Bank of England** End of 2022 End of 2023 End of 2024

**― European Central Bank deposit rate**
**― OIS implicit trajectory Sep 25, 2023**

5 **--- OIS implicit trajectory Aug 10, 2023**

4

3

2

1

Forecasts

0

-1

2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 2024

1/ OIS: Fixed floating interest rate swap where the fixed interest rate is
associated with the effective overnight reference rate.
2/ For the observed reference rate of the US, the average interest rate of
the target range of the federal funds rate (5.00%- 5.25%) is used.
Source: Banco de México with data from Bloomberg.

Regarding recent monetary policy decisions in the
United States and the euro area, the following stand
out:

13


-----

i) The US Federal Reserve left the target range for
the federal funds rate unchanged at its
September meeting, after raising it by 25 basis
points (bps) in July. The target range thus
remained between 5.25 and 5.50%. The Fed also
continued to reduce the size of its balance sheet.
It reiterated that it will continue evaluating
incoming information and that, in order to
determine the degree of additional tightening that
might be appropriate, it will take into account the
cumulative tightening of monetary policy, the lags
with which it affects economic activity and
inflation, as well as economic and financial
developments. The chairman of that institution
stated that he considers the current monetary
policy stance to be restrictive and that it exerts
downward pressure on economic activity,

employment, and inflation. He also added that the
economy is facing adverse effects from the
tightening of credit conditions for households and
businesses. He noted that, given the previous
tightening, they would proceed with caution. He
also stated that the Federal Reserve is prepared
to raise rates further if appropriate and that it
intends to keep monetary policy at a restrictive
level until there is confidence that inflation is
declining in a sustained manner towards its
target. Regarding adjustments to the Federal
Open Market Committee (FOMC) forecasts,
between June and September the median of the
annual growth rate was revised upwards from 1.0
to 2.1% for the fourth quarter of 2023 and from
1.1 to 1.5% for the fourth quarter of 2024, while
remaining unchanged at 1.8% for the same
period of 2025. Headline inflation forecasts
increased from 3.2 to 3.3% for the end of 2023,
remained at 2.5% for the end of 2024, and were
adjusted from 2.1 to 2.2% for the end of 2025. As
for core inflation, the median was modified
downwards from 3.9 to 3.7% for the end of 2023,
left unchanged at 2.6% for the end of 2024, and
increased from 2.2 to 2.3% for the same period of
2025. The Committee did not change its
expectation of 5.6% for the federal funds rate for
the end of 2023. However, the expected level of
the federal funds rate for the end of 2024
increased from 4.6 to 5.1%, and for the end of
2025, from 3.4 to 3.9%. This is relatively
consistent with expectations drawn from financial
instruments. Based on the latest available
information, these anticipate that the reference
rate will be raised up to around 5.6% during the
first quarter of 2024, and then decrease to levels
close to 5.0% by the end of that same year.


ii) The European Central Bank (ECB) maintained

the pace of its reference rate hikes by announcing
an increase of 25 bps in September. Its
refinancing, key lending and key deposit rates
thus stood at 4.50, 4.75 and 4.00%, respectively.
In this regard, its Governing Council considers
that interest rates have reached levels that, if
maintained for a sufficiently long period, will
contribute substantially to the timely return of
inflation to its target. It also reiterated that its
future decisions will ensure that the ECB's
monetary policy rates are set at sufficiently
restrictive levels for as long as necessary. It again
stated that it will continue using a data-dependent
approach to determine the appropriate level and
duration of monetary tightening. The president of
that institution indicated that she cannot affirm
that interest rates are currently at peak.

Since Mexico's last monetary policy decision, in the
main emerging economies, most central banks left
their interest rates unchanged. However,

considering the specific economic circumstances in
these countries, some of them announced cuts, such
as the central banks of Brazil, Chile, Peru, Poland,
and China. The latter kept its interest rates
unchanged in its most recent decision and
subsequently reduced its reserve requirements to
provide more liquidity to the economy. Meanwhile,
the central banks of Russia, Thailand and Turkey
continued raising their interest rates.

In this environment, international financial markets
registered some increase in volatility and a tightening
of financial conditions in August (Chart 5). This
behavior was in response to concerns about the
fiscal position in the United States and the
expectation of a tighter monetary stance for a longer
period, among other factors. Thus, sovereign debt
interest rates rose globally, especially longer-term
ones (Chart 6 and Chart 7). Stock markets in both
advanced and emerging economies showed, in
general, some losses. In the foreign exchange
markets, the US dollar registered a generalized
appreciation in the period being reported. Since
Mexico's last monetary policy decision, the

currencies of most of the major emerging economies
depreciated against the US dollar. Cumulative net
capital inflows to emerging economies were
observed during the period. However, these flows
exhibited a differentiated behavior among asset
classes, with cumulative net inflows to equity assets
and outflows from fixed-income assets.

14


-----

**Chart 5**

**Financial Conditions Indices[1/]**

Units


**Chart 7**

**Selected Emerging Economies: Financial**
**Assets Performance as of August 4, 2023**

Percent, basis points Percent, basis points


103

102

101

100


Financial Conditions Index - Global
Financial Conditions Index - United States
Financial Conditions Index for Euro area 2/

Source: Prepared by Banco de México with data from Bloomberg and
Goldman Sachs.
1/ The financial conditions index is constructed considering the effect of five
variables on economic activity: the reference interest rate, the 10-year
government bond, the spread of investment-grade bonds over the
government debt bond with equivalent maturity, the ratio of a stock index
with 10-year average earnings per share, and the trade-weighted exchange
rate.
2/ In the case of the euro area, the spread between the sovereign bonds of
France, Italy, Spain, the Netherlands, Belgium, Austria, Portugal and
Finland over the German 10-year bond is also considered. The vertical
black line indicates the last calendarized monetary policy meeting of Banco
de México.


**Chart 6**

**Change in Selected Financial Indicators**

**from August 10 to September 25, 2023**

Percent; basis pointsPercentage, basis points


8.0%

6.0%


90

60


4.0%

2.0%


0.0%

-2.0%


30

0


-4.0%

-6.0%


-30

-60


-8.0%


-90


1/ DXY: a weighted average estimated by the Intercontinental Exchange
(ICE) of the nominal exchange rate of the main six currencies operated
globally with the following weights: EUR 57.6%, JPY: 13.6%, GBP: 11.9%,
CAD: 9.1%, SEK: 4.2%, and CHF: 3.6%.
Source: Bloomberg and ICE.


Note: An upward adjustment indicates currency appreciation. Interest rates
correspond to swap rates at the specified terms, except for Hungary, where
government securities with 3-year maturities were used as a reference. For
the Philippines, a 2-year swap rate was used, and for Russia, 2-year and
3-year swap rates were used. The latest CDS data for Russia is as of June
1, 2022.
Source: Bloomberg.

**A.2. Current situation of the Mexican economy**

**A.2.1. Mexican markets**

In the international context described above, since
Mexico's last monetary policy decision, the Mexican
peso has registered volatility and depreciated slightly
against the US dollar. Interest rates on government
securities, mainly those of medium and long terms,
increased (Chart 8).

In greater detail, the Mexican peso traded in a range
of 1 peso and 2 cents, between 16.69 and 17.71
pesos per US dollar since the last monetary policy
decision. During the period, it depreciated by 1.40%
(Chart 9), in a context in which trading conditions
were stable for most of the period.

15


-----

**Chart 8**

**Mexican Markets’ Performance**

Percent, MXN/USD and index


11.6

11.2

10.8

10.4

10.0

9.6

9.2

8.8

8.4


19.6

19.1


**Chart 10**

**Nominal Yield Curve of Government Securities**

Percent, basis points

12.00 90

80

11.50

70

11.00 60

50

10.50

40

10.00

30

9.50 20

10

9.00

0

8.50 -10

August-4th 2023
September-22nd 2023
Change (August-4th 2023 to September-22nd 2023)

Trading range over the period


18.6

18.1


17.6

17.1


16.6


56,000

55,000

54,000

53,000

52,000

51,000

50,000

49,000

48,000


M-bond


6.4

6.1

5.8

5.5

5.2

4.9

4.6

4.3

4.0

3.7

Inflation-indexed bonds


Range in 2023 Range since previous monetary policy Jun16,2023 Aug04,2023

decision

Source: Prepared by Banco de México.


Source: PIP.

**Chart 11**

**Breakeven Inflation and Inflation Risk**

**Implied in Government Securities’ Yields**

Basis points


Range in 2023 Range since previous monetary policy Jun16,2023 Aug04,2023


**Chart 9**

**Mexican Peso Exchange Rate**

MXN/USD


26

Mexican peso

25 100-day moving average

24 50-day moving average

23

22

21

20

19

18

17

16

J F M A M J J A S O N D J F M A M J J A S O N D J F M A M J J A S O N D J F M A M J J A S

2020 2021 2022 2023

Source: Prepared by Banco de México.

Interest rates on government securities registered
negative dynamics, with increases of between 70
and 83 bps in the medium and long-term nodes,
while increases of up to 30 bps in short term ones
(Chart 10). The yield curve of real rate instruments
exhibited generalized increases of up to 67 bps. In
this context, breakeven inflation implicit in spreads
between nominal and real rates of market
instruments registered increases in all terms (Chart
11). These movements occurred in an environment
in which trading conditions slightly deteriorated.


600

550


Fuente: PIP.

Regarding expectations for the path of the monetary
policy reference rate, information implicit in the
interest rate swap curve does not incorporate any
adjustment for the September decision and includes
a first cut of 25 bps between February and March
2024 (Chart 12). Most analysts surveyed by
Citibanamex anticipate that the interest rate will
remain unchanged in the September decision and
then continue at the same level for the rest of 2023.

16


500

450


400

350


300

250


2021                   2022                  2023


-----

**Chart 12**

**Interbank Funding Rate Implied in TIIE Swaps**

PercentPercent

12.50


5

4

3

2

1

0

-1

-2


**Chart 13**

**Gross Domestic Product**

Quarterly percentage change, s. a.


3.50

J A  J   O   J   A  J   O   J  A   J   O  J   A   J   O

2021           2022          2023          2024

Note: Shaded areas represent the range since the last monetary policy
decision.
Source: Prepared by Banco de México with Bloomberg data.

**A.2.2. Economic activity in Mexico**

During the second quarter, economic activity in
Mexico continued showing resilience, growing at a
similar pace to that of the previous quarter (Chart
13). Although available information for the third
quarter is limited, productive activity is expected to
have continued expanding during said quarter.

Regarding the evolution of domestic demand, at the
end of the second quarter, private consumption
continued trending upwards due to the dynamism of
consumption of imported goods and the continued
growth in the consumption of services. Gross fixed
investment increased significantly as a result of
considerable improvements in spending on imported
machinery and equipment and, to a larger extent, in
non-residential construction. As for external

demand, in the period of July-August, the value of
manufacturing exports grew as a result of a rebound
in automotive exports (Chart 14).


-3 10/08/2023

09/08/2023

-4 08/08/2023

-19.2207/08/2023 Q-II

-5

I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV I04/08/2023 II III IV I II III IV I II

2017 2018 2019 2020 03/08/20232021 2022 2023

s. a. / Seasonally adjusted figures. The chart’s range was adjusted to 01/08/2023
facilitate its reading. 31/07/2023
Source: Mexico’s System on National Accounts (SCNM, for its Spanish
acronym), INEGI.

|Col1|Col2|
|---|---|
|10.50 9.50 8.50 7.50 6.50 5.50 4.50|Banxico overnight rate (reference rate) Implied interest rate in TIIE swaps for 09/22/23|
||Implied interest rate in TIIE swaps for 04/08/23|


s. a. / Seasonally adjusted series and trend series based on data in nominal
US dollars. The former is represented by a solid line and the latter by a
dotted line. The chart’s range was adjusted to facilitate its reading.
Source: Prepared by Banco de México with data from the Tax
Administration Service (SAT, for its Spanish acronym), the Ministry of the
Economy (SE, for its Spanish acronym), Banco de México, the National
Institute of Statistics and Geography (INEGI, for its Spanish acronym).
Mexico’s Merchandise Trade Balance, and the National System of
Statistical and Geographical Information (SNIEG, for its Spanish acronym),
Information of national interest.

On the production side, economic activity remained
resilient at the beginning of the third quarter (Chart
15). Particularly, industrial activity grew mainly as a
result of the favorable evolution of construction
(Chart 16). Transportation equipment manufacturing
increased, although the aggregate for the rest of
manufacturing continued showing weakness.

Services decreased slightly at the margin, although
they remained at elevated levels.

17


**Chart 14**

**Manufacturing Exports**
Indices 2019 = 100, s. a.


160

140


120

100


80

60


40

J

2017


A J A


-----

**Chart 15**

**Global Indicator of Economic Activity**

Indices 2019 = 100, s. a.

115

Total

Secondary activities

110

Tertiary activities

Primary activities

105

100

95

90

78.1

76.1 June
70.2 July

85

J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J

2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023

s. a. / Seasonally adjusted and trend series. The former is represented by
a solid line and the latter by a dotted line. The range of the chart was
narrowed to facilitate reading.
Source: Mexico’s System of National Accounts (SCNM, for its Spanish
acronym), INEGI.

**Chart 16**

**Industrial Activity [1/]**

Indices 2019 = 100, s. a.

125

115

105

95

85 Total

Mining (12%)

75

Manufacturing (63%)

Construction (19%)

65

Utilities (6%)

July

55

J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J

2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023

s. a. / Seasonally adjusted and trend series. The former is represented by
a solid line and the latter by a dotted line.
1/ Figures in parenthesis correspond to their share in the total in 2018.
Source: Mexico’s System of National Accounts (SCNM, for its Spanish
acronym), INEGI.

Regarding the cyclical position of the economy, the
point estimate of the output gap during the second
quarter of 2023 was close to zero (Chart 17). The
labor market continued exhibiting strength. In July,
both national and urban unemployment rates
remained at low levels (Chart 18). With seasonally
adjusted figures, in August, the creation of IMSSinsured jobs continued trending upwards. Finally, in
July, unit labor costs in the manufacturing sector
decreased for two consecutive months, although
they remained at relatively high levels (Chart 19).


J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J

2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023

s. a. / Calculations based on seasonally adjusted figures.
1/ Output gap estimated with a tail-corrected Hodrick-Prescott filter; see
Banco de México (2009), “Inflation Report, April-June 2009”, p.74
2/ GDP figures up to Q2-2023 and IGAE up to July 2023
3/ Output gap confidence interval calculated with a method of unobserved
components.
Source: Prepared by Banco de México with INEGI data.

**Chart 18**

**National and Urban Unemployment Rates**

Percent, s. a.

6.5

6.0

5.5

5.0

4.5

4.0

3.5

3.0

Urban unemployment rate

2.5

National unemployment rate
July

2.0

J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J

2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023

s. a. / Seasonally adjusted and trend series. The former is represented by
a solid line and the latter by a dotted line.
Source: Prepared by Banco de México with data from ENOE, ETOE (from
April to June 2020), and ENOE new edition (ENOE[N]) from July to date.

18


12

8

4

0

-4

-8

-12

-16

-20

-24


**Chart 17**

**Output Gap Estimates[1/]**

Percent of potential output, s. a

Global Economic Activity
Index (IGAE) 2/

Gross Domestic Product 2/

Q-II
95% confidence interval 3/ July


-----

125

Unit labor costs 142.8

120

Productivity

115

110

105

100

95

90

July

85

J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J

2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023

s. a. / Seasonally adjusted and trend series. The former is represented by
a solid line and the latter by a dotted line. The range of the chart was
narrowed to make it easier to read.
1/ Productivity based on hours worked.
Source: Prepared by Banco de México with seasonally adjusted data of the
Monthly Manufacturing Industry Survey and industrial activity indicators of
Mexico’s System of National Accounts (Sistema de Cuentas Nacionales de
México, SCNM), INEGI.

In July 2023, domestic financing to the private sector
continued to expand. Within it, bank lending to firms
rebounded, bringing its annual growth rate back to a
level similar to that observed at the beginning of the
year (Chart 20). As for lending to households, the
bank housing portfolio continued registering an
expansion, which has accelerated in recent months.
Likewise, bank consumer credit continued growing
at high rates, in line with the resilience of economic
activity and the strength of the labor market.


**Chart 20**

**Performing Credit from Commercial Banks**

**to the Non-financial Private Sector**

Real annual percentage change

15

10

5

0

-5

Consumption

-10 Mortgage 1/

2/

Non-financial private firms

-15

July

-20

J J J J J J J J J J J J J J

2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023

1/ Adjusted to account for the withdrawal from and the incorporation of
non-bank financial intermediaries to the credit statistics.
2/ Adjusted for valuation effects due to movements in the exchange rate.
Source: Banco de México.

As for the cost of financing, interest rates on bank
lending to firms remained stable in July 2023.
Corporate credit intermediation margins continued to
be generally lower than those observed prior to the
pandemic. Interest rates on mortgages did not
register significant changes with respect to June, and
continued being at levels similar to pre-pandemic
ones. Within consumer credit, credit card interest
rates have been adjusting to changes in the
reference rate, to a greater extent than what was
observed until June 2022. Lastly, interest rates on
payroll loans have remained relatively stable since
August 2021.

As for portfolio quality, corporate and mortgage
delinquency rates remained stable in July 2023 with
respect to those observed in June, and thus
continued at low levels. Finally, consumer portfolio
delinquency rates increased for the third consecutive
month, although they remain below pre-pandemic
levels.

**A.2.3. Development of inflation and inflation**
**outlook**

Between July and the first half of September 2023,
annual headline inflation decreased from 4.79 to
4.44%. This result reflected the reduction in core
inflation, which more than offset the increase in noncore inflation (Chart 21 and Table 1).

19


-----

**Chart 21**

**Consumer Price Index**

Annual percentage change


**Chart 23**

**Merchandise Core Price Subindex**

Annual percentage change


M S J

2019


14
13
12
11
10

9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0

-1
-2
-3

J

2017


M S J

2018


M S J

2019


M S J

2020


M S J

2021


M S J

2022


M S J

2023


M S J

2018


M S


16

14

12

10

8

6

4

2

0

J

2017


F1 Sep.


M S J

2020


M S J

2021


M S J

2022


M S J

2023


M S


Source: INEGI.

Annual core inflation decreased from 6.64 to 5.78%
between July and the first fortnight of September
2023. Within it, both merchandise and services
inflation decreased (Chart 22). In the former case, it
went from 7.82 to 6.35%, due to a decrease from
9.79 to 7.73% in the annual inflation of food
merchandises and from 5.54 to 4.74% in that of nonfood merchandises (Chart 23). As for services, their
annual inflation decreased from 5.24 to 5.08% during
the same period, influenced by the lower annual
inflation of services other than education, which went
from 5.27 to 4.92%. In contrast, annual inflation of
education services rose from 4.92 to 6.58%.

**Chart 22**

**Merchandise and Services Core Price Subindex**

Annual percentage change

12

Merchandise

11 Services

10

9

8

7

6

5

4

3

2

1

F1 Sep.

0

J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S

2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023

Source: INEGI.


-10

-15

J

2017


Source: INEGI.

After registering -0.67% in July 2023, annual noncore inflation increased in the first fortnight of
September 2023, although it remained at atypically
low levels, laying at 0.48% in said fortnight (Chart 24
and Table 1). This performance was mainly
associated with an increase from -7.82 to -5.30% in
the annual inflation of energy, as a result of the
higher annual variation of L.P. gas prices, which,
although remaining negative, rose from -34.87 to
-28.18%. The increase in annual non-core inflation
during the referred period was also influenced by an
increase from 3.16 to 3.57% in the annual inflation of
livestock and agricultural products, which was driven
by the higher annual variations in the prices of fruits
and vegetables and of livestock products.

**Chart 24**

**Non-core Price Sub-index**

Annual percentage change

25

20

15

10

5

0

-5


Non-core
Agricultural and livestock products
Energy and government-authorized prices F1 Sep.


M S J

2019


M S J

2018


M S J

2020


M S J

2021


M S J

2022


M S J

2023


M S


Source: INEGI.

Regarding inflation expectations drawn from the
survey conducted by Banco de México among
private sector specialists, between July and August

20


-----

2023 the median for headline inflation at the end of
2023 increased from 4.60 to 4.66%, while that for the
core component laid at 5.21% after registering
5.20% in July. The median for headline inflation
expectations for the end of 2024 changed from 4.03
to 4.00%, while that for the core component went
from 4.13 to 4.12%. The median of headline inflation
expectations for the next four years remained at
3.80%, while that for the core component adjusted
from 3.80 to 3.79%. The median of headline inflation
expectations for the long term (5 to 8 years)
decreased from 3.60 to 3.53%, while that for the core
component remained unchanged at 3.60%. Finally,
compensation for inflation and inflationary risk
increased since the previous monetary policy
decision. Regarding its components, the inflation risk
premium was adjusted upwards and expectations
implied by market instruments rose slightly.

Inflation is projected to converge to the 3% target in
the second quarter of 2025. This projection is subject


to risks. On the upside: i) persistence of core inflation
at high levels given the magnitude, extent, and
duration of the shocks that have been experienced
and have pushed it to high levels; ii) foreign
exchange depreciation due to volatility in

international financial markets; iii) greater costrelated pressures that could be passed onto
consumer prices; iv) that the economy’s resilience
contributes to a more gradual decline in inflation than
foreseen, and v) pressures on energy prices or on
agricultural and livestock product prices. On the
downside: i) a greater-than-anticipated slowdown of
the world economy; ii) a lower pass-through effect
from some cost-related pressures, and iii) that the
exchange rate appreciation contributes more than
anticipated to mitigate some pressures on inflation.
The balance of risks for the trajectory of inflation
within the forecast horizon remains biased to the
upside.


**Table 1**

**Consumer Price Index and Components**

Annual percentage change

**1st fortnight Sep.**

**Item** **July 2023** **August 2023**
**2023**

**CPI** **4.79** **4.64** **4.44**

**SubyacenteCore** **6.64** **6.08** **5.78**

**Merchandise** **7.82** **6.86** **6.35**

Food, beverages and tobacco 9.79 8.44 7.73

Non-food merchandise 5.54 5.03 4.74

**Services** **5.24** **5.15** **5.08**

Housing 3.66 3.59 3.58

Education (tuitions) 4.92 5.49 6.58

Other services 6.61 6.38 6.03

**No SubyacenteNon-core** **-0.67** **0.37** **0.48**

**Agricultural and livestock products** **3.16** **3.94** **3.57**

Fruits and vegetablesFruits abd vegetables 7.14 8.15 6.98

Livestock productsLivestock 0.00 0.47 0.70

**Energy and government-authorized prices Energéticos y Tarifas Aut. por Gobierno** **-3.90** **-2.68** **-2.20**

Energy productsEnergy -7.82 -5.99 -5.30

Government-authorized pricesTarifas Autorizadas por Gobierno 5.51 5.24 5.13

Source:INEGI.

21


-----

-----

