-----

-----

**FOREWARNING**
This document is provided for the reader’s convenience only.
The translation from the official Spanish version was made by
Banco de México’s staff. Discrepancies may arise between
the original document in Spanish and its English translation.
For this reason, the original Spanish version is the only official
document.


**1. PLACE, DATE AND PARTICIPANTS**

**1.1. Place: Meeting held by virtual means.**

**1.2. Date of Governing Board meeting: December**
14, 2022.

**1.3. Participants:**

Victoria Rodríguez, Governor.
Galia Borja, Deputy Governor.
Irene Espinosa, Deputy Governor.
Gerardo Esquivel, Deputy Governor.
Jonathan Heath, Deputy Governor.
Rogelio Eduardo Ramírez, Secretary of Finance and
Public Credit.
Gabriel Yorio, Undersecretary of Finance and Public
Credit.
Elías Villanueva, Secretary of the Governing Board.

Prior to this meeting, preliminary work by Banco de
México’s staff analyzing the economic and financial
environment as well as the developments in inflation
and the determinants and outlook for inflation, was
conducted and presented to the Governing Board
(see Annex).

**2. ANALYSIS AND RATIONALE BEHIND THE**
**GOVERNING BOARD’S VOTING**

**_International environment_**

**Most members mentioned that global economic**
**activity recovered moderately during the third**
**quarter of the year. One member pointed out that**
this was mainly due to the rebound in the US
economy and the reopening of activities in China.
However, **some members pointed out that timely**
indicators of activity at a global level are in their
contraction range. Some members warned that there
are signs of disturbances in international trade. Most
**members highlighted the weakening of certain**
**European economies. Some members noted that,**
in the United States, several indicators have
deteriorated. They also highlighted the impact of the
rebound in the number of infections on the Chinese
economy. **Regarding** **labor** **markets,** **most**

**members stated that, in advanced economies,**


**they continued to perform favorably. One member**
noted that US job vacancies have trended
downwards without this resulting in a higher
unemployment rate. However, **another member**
pointed out that despite significant wage revisions,
the high levels of inflation continue eroding real
income.

**Most members mentioned that global growth**
**forecasts for 2023 continued deteriorating, due**
**partly** **to** **tighter** **financial** **conditions** **and**

**geopolitical tensions. Some members pointed out**
that the downward revisions were particularly
observed in advanced economies. **Among risks to**
**the global economy, most members highlighted**
**those associated with the pandemic, the**
**persistence** **of** **inflationary** **pressures,** **the**

**intensification of geopolitical tensions, and**
**tighter monetary and financial conditions. Some**
members stated that the probability of a global
recession in the coming year remains high. However,
**one member noted that it is expected to be mild and**
short-lived. **Another member mentioned that the**
possibility of a significant weakening in global
economic activity is latent and uncertainty over
whether prevailing conditions will lead to a recession
persists. **One member considered that the balance**
of risks for world economic activity remains biased to
the downside, especially for systemically important
economies.

**All members highlighted that headline inflation**
**decreased in several economies due to lower**
**pressures on food and energy prices. Most**
**members stated that in some countries the**
**inflationary peak may have already been reached.**
**They pointed out that, in the United States,**
**headline inflation continued decreasing. They**
**noted that pressures on commodity prices and**
**supply chain disruptions have shown signs of**
**easing. One member highlighted that the prices of**
oil, grains and industrial metals are currently lower
than those at the beginning of the military conflict.
He/she added that some indicators related to supply
chains have already returned to their pre-pandemic
levels. He/she added that this has led to a significant
decrease in producer price inflation in advanced and
emerging economies, which is already beginning to
have a favorable impact on headline inflation, and is
expected to eventually do so on core inflation.
**Nevertheless, most members warned that world**
**inflation remains at elevated levels and above the**
**central banks' targets. They highlighted that the**
**core component continued increasing in several**
**economies. Some members stated that this was**
due to the performance of the services component.

1


-----

**Most members stated that a large number of**
**central banks continued raising their reference**
**rates, although some of them are expected to**
**start moderating the pace of their increases.**
**They considered that certain economies are**
**close to ending their hiking cycle, or have already**
**concluded it. One member stated that the implied**
interest rate trajectory for the next two years for
several economies has been adjusted downwards.
**Another member noted the heterogeneity among the**
expected interest rate trajectories of emerging
economies, although he/she noted that most of them
imply reference rates above the neutral range. One
member added that, in some cases, downward
adjustments are expected starting in the first quarter
of 2023, and also noted that Mexico is one of the few
economies where upward adjustments in the
reference rate are still foreseen in the coming
months. He/she considered that, in other countries,
continuing to raise reference rates is justified, as
inflation is still increasing and has been affected by
accelerated economic growth. Meanwhile, **some**
members mentioned that reference rates are
expected to remain at high levels for an extended
period. **One member stated that this would be**
necessary to ensure the convergence of inflation to
the target, which is likely to be postponed until 2024,
although this scenario is still subject to a high level of
uncertainty.

**All members highlighted that the Federal Reserve**
**raised the federal funds rate by 50 basis points at**
**its last meeting. Most members noted that said**
**institution slowed the pace of interest rate hikes.**
**They** **added** **that** **it** **anticipated** **additional**

**increases. Some members mentioned that there is**
still uncertainty about the terminal interest rate and
the possible start of an easing cycle.

**Most members mentioned that international**
**financial conditions remained tight. However,**
**they noted that medium and long-term interest**
**rates** **have** **recently** **declined,** **which** **they**

**attributed to prospects of a moderation in the**
**Federal Reserve's monetary tightening. Some**
members stated that prospects of a sharper
economic slowdown also contributed to the above.
**One member considered that the reduction in longer-**
term interest rates in the United States was due to its
favorable inflation figures. **Most** **members**

**highlighted that stock market indices registered**
**gains. They added that the US dollar depreciated.**
**One member pointed out that it cannot be ruled out**
that this currency strengthens given the deterioration
in international financial conditions. He/she

mentioned that emerging economies continue


experiencing outflows in fixed income assets and
inflows in equities. Another member highlighted the
prevailing vulnerabilities and risks for the global
financial system given the outlook of tight financial
conditions and the high levels of indebtedness.
He/she pointed out that, especially in emerging
economies, a disorderly adjustment of financial
markets could affect their macroeconomic

fundamentals and thus deteriorate the inflationary
context they are facing.

**_Economic activity in Mexico_**

**Most members pointed out that, with data as of**
**the third quarter, economic activity in Mexico has**
**already reached its pre-pandemic levels. They**
**stated that growth was driven mainly by the**
**services sector. One member highlighted that this**
sector was mainly supported by wholesale and retail
trade, while the sectors most affected by social
distancing have shown a slower recovery. **Some**
members noted that the primary sector also
registered a favorable performance. **Meanwhile,**
**most members noted that the industrial sector**
**has stagnated somewhat in recent months.**
However, some members noted a slight recovery in
October. **Most** **members** **stated** **that** **the**

**construction sector has shown sluggishness.**
**Some members noted that the manufacturing sector**
has weakened, which contrasts with its previous
dynamism. One member added that mining as well
as the electricity, water and gas sector have also
exhibited a fragile performance. **Most members**
**stated that economic activity is expected to have**
**continued recovering during the fourth quarter,**
**although at a slower pace. Some members pointed**
out that this moderation is due to the adverse
external environment.

**On the demand side, most members underlined**
**that consumption continued trending upwards**
**driven** **by** **the** **favorable** **performance** **of**

**consumption of services. One member contrasted**
the growth in consumption of non-durable goods with
the decline in consumption of durable and semidurable goods. **Another member warned that**
forward-looking indicators for this variable show
mixed signals about its future behavior. He/she
added that retail sales and the real wage bill appear
to be stagnant. Meanwhile, one member noted that
the consumer confidence indicator rebounded
slightly in November, although it is still below its prepandemic level. He/she added that remittances are
still high and have accumulated 30 consecutive
months of increases.

2


-----

**Most members highlighted that investment**
**shows a lack of dynamism. In particular, they**
**noted the weak performance of construction.**
**One member added that investment in transportation**
equipment is at levels below those observed prior to
the pandemic. Some members noted the reduction
at the margin in the machinery and equipment
component. In this regard, one member pointed out
that a clear recovery in investment could foster
growth and offset the foreseen weakness in external
demand. He/she stated that it would be important to
create the conditions for the country to take
advantage as much as possible of the

reconfiguration of some global production chains,
which could also ease some inflationary pressures by
increasing the country's productive capacity.

**Regarding external demand, most members**
**pointed out that exports continued trending**
**upwards. Some members noted that manufacturing**
exports continue driving the aggregate demand’s
dynamism. Nevertheless, **one** member stated that
some items show an incipient slowdown. **Another**
member noted that shipments to the United States
slowed at the margin. One member pointed out that
the growth of non-automotive manufacturing exports
moderated recently. **Another member mentioned**
that imports registered a certain lack of dynamism.

**Most members agreed that the labor market**
**continues recovering. Some members stated that**
it has tightened further. **One member stated that it**
does not exhibit slack conditions. Most members
**noted that unemployment rates remain at low**
**levels.** **Some** members added that labor

participation rates are at levels similar to prepandemic ones. **Some members noted that**
employment growth has coincided with stagnation in
labor participation. **One member expressed his/her**
concern about the interruption of the upward trend of
women's participation in the labor market, which, in
his/her opinion, represents one of the main scars of
the pandemic. **Another member highlighted that,**
although formal employment remained on a positive
trajectory in November, average income and the real
wage bill decreased at the margin. **One member**
pointed out that different sectors registered nominal
wage increases, although he/she noted that real
wage growth was moderate and, in some cases,
negative. Another member warned that the increase
in the minimum wage, as well as wage negotiations
in other sectors, could weaken employment,
especially in a scenario of lower economic activity.

**Most members pointed out that slack conditions**
**in the economy are expected to continue**
**diminishing. However,** **one member stated that**


there is still a significant amount of slack given that
during the third quarter GDP remained considerably
below its long-term trend trajectory. **Another**
member warned about measurement problems in
calculating potential GDP.

**_Inflation in Mexico_**

**All members highlighted that headline inflation**
**continued decreasing in November to 7.80%, due**
**to a reduction in its non-core component. Some**
members pointed out that it has been below the
central bank's forecasts. **One member highlighted**
that in the last three months it has also been below
analysts' expectations. Another member mentioned
that, in November, the monthly inflation rate was
below its historical average for the first time since
December 2021, and therefore, in his/her opinion,
pressures at the margin seem to have started to
ease. He/she pointed out that, with this figure,
inflationary pressures have been trending

downwards for five consecutive months. However,
**some members noted that other central trend**
measures of price changes continue trending
upwards, with no sign of reaching an inflection point.
**One member pointed out that the decline in annual**
headline inflation is the result of a specific group of
components and it is not yet generalized, which
implies a challenging outlook. However, he/she
added that, at the margin, extreme upward variations
in some components of headline inflation have
started to moderate.

**All members mentioned that core inflation**
**maintained its upward trend, reaching 8.51% in**
**November. Some members pointed out that this**
level had not been reached since August 2000.
**Some members stated that this upward trend has**
continued for 24 consecutive months. However,
**some members highlighted that the latest core**
inflation readings have been below analysts'
expectations. **One member added that it was close**
to Banco de México's forecast and that it has
moderated marginally. Another member pointed out
that core inflation still reflects the effects of the
cumulative shocks from the pandemic and the
military conflict, which have been deeper and longer
lasting than estimated. **One member expressed**
concern about estimates of the persistence of core
inflation being at their highest levels since 2010.

**Regarding the components of core inflation, all**
**members** **highlighted** **the** **increase** **in**

**merchandise inflation, especially that of food**
**merchandise. One** member pointed out that the
latter continued being the main source of pressure on
prices and registered the highest monthly increase

3


-----

for the month of November since 2008. **Another**
member expressed his/her concern about the
dynamics of food merchandise and food services,
given that these components affect the most
vulnerable population to a larger extent. **Some**
members highlighted the increase in non-food
merchandise inflation registered in November. **One**
member highlighted the favorable effect of the "Buen
_Fin" discount sales campaign during the second_
fortnight of November. Another member pointed out
that even after eliminating the seasonal effect, the
annualized rate of this component is above 6%. One
member stated that a substantial improvement in the
behavior of merchandise prices led to a reduction in
the core component's pressures at the margin,
relative to its historical average. **Some members**
pointed out that the seasonally adjusted and
annualized monthly variations of food and non-food
merchandise prices have exhibited greater stability,
which led to a smaller number of CPI items
registering variations higher than 10%. **Meanwhile,**
**most members mentioned that services inflation**
**also increased in November.**

**All members highlighted the reduction in non-**
**core inflation. Regarding its components, they**
**emphasized the decline in energy inflation, as**
**well as in that of some agricultural and livestock**
**products. One member pointed out that the**
favorable performance of these components was due
to the correction observed in their international
references. Another member stated that the annual
inflation of this component has been decreasing for
three consecutive months. He/she added that the
monthly rate of this item remains substantially below
its historical average. One member mentioned that
the monthly variation in November was the sixth
lowest for a corresponding month since 1982.

**All members agreed that some of the global**
**shocks that have affected inflation have shown**
**signs of easing. Most members highlighted the**
**moderation** **of** **supply-related** **inflationary**

**pressures. One member stated that a necessary**
condition to reduce the inflationary wave is that
global pressures come to an end. In this regard,
he/she highlighted the reduction of inflation in the
United States and other countries. Another member
pointed out that, in this context, Mexico stands out
from other emerging economies for its relatively
lower levels of inflation, especially in the energy and
services components and, less markedly, in food and
other goods. **One member indicated that, despite**
signs of improvement, some prices remain elevated,
and that the lagged effects of past increases could
be exerting pressure on production costs. **Another**


member pointed out that the decline in international
energy prices will not be fully reflected in Mexico
because of the mechanics of the fiscal incentive on
gasoline prices.

**Some members mentioned that in the last seven**
months, producer prices have declined. **One**
member pointed out that producer price inflation has
a lagged impact on core inflation. **Another member**
noted signs of relief in the five reductions exhibited
by the latest readings of industrial sector

intermediate goods’ prices. **Some** members

mentioned that there are domestic pressures that are
reflected in core inflation dynamics. They highlighted
that supercore inflation continued trending upwards.
**One member stated that this could reflect pressures**
due to lower slack conditions. He/she warned that the
prices of non-tradable goods could be affected by the
increase in the prices of tradable goods. **Another**
member pointed out that the persistence of inflation
expectations at high levels shows that observed
inflation has acquired an inertia that cannot be
explained exclusively by external pressures. He/she
added that it is necessary to acknowledge the
presence of signs of domestic inflationary pressures,
and therefore greater attention should be paid to their
measurement and surveillance.

**Most members highlighted the decline in short-**
**term inflation expectations. All members noted**
**that medium-term expectations remained stable,**
**although above the target.** However, **some**
members mentioned that, although expectations for
the next four years remain at high levels, these seem
to be affected by those for 2023 and 2024, given that
if implied expectations for the following 3 to 4 years
are estimated, they lay at 3.5%. **One member**
pointed out that this suggests that there are no signs
of a possible unanchoring. All members noted that
**long-term** **expectations** **did** **not** **show**

**considerable changes either, although they**
**remained at levels above the target. One member**
added that their distribution has started to

concentrate at around 3.6%. **Another member**
warned that, although the deterioration of mediumand long-term expectations has decreased, both
could remain at the upper range of the variability
interval. One member mentioned that both mediumand long-term expectations continued at historically
high levels. With respect to expectations drawn from
market instruments, **another member pointed out**
that long-term expectations remained stable at a
level of 3.27%. **One member stated that the**
breakeven inflation rate is at levels below those
observed in the previous monetary policy decision.

4


-----

However, **another member mentioned that the**
current levels are still high.

**Most members pointed out that forecasts for**
**headline inflation were revised downwards for**
**the first two quarters of the horizon, and then**
**marginally upwards until the fourth quarter of**
**2023, due to a slight increase in the trajectory for**
**core inflation. Some members stated that inflation**
would be close to reaching its peak. **One member**
noted that this responds to the fact that various global
price indicators have trended downwards. **Some**
members pointed out that inflation is foreseen to
continue trending downwards over the following
quarters. One member mentioned that the absence
of demand-related pressures stemming from an
expansionary fiscal policy will favor a faster
convergence of inflation to its target. **Another**
member pointed out that the trajectories reflect the
monetary policy that has been implemented and the
prevision that the effects of the pandemic and the
military conflict on inflation will dissipate gradually.
However, he/she added that, although the

inflationary shocks are anticipated to moderate, there
is no certainty as to the pace at which they could
dissipate.

**Among upward risks to inflation, most members**
**highlighted greater cost-related pressures. One**
member pointed out the persistence of core inflation
at high levels and external inflationary pressures
associated with the pandemic and the military
conflict. **Another member highlighted possible**
demand-related pressures given the higher growth
prospects, as well as pressures caused by the avian
flu outbreak and weather-related factors. **Most**
**members mentioned that the minimum wage**
**increase for 2023 could affect the inflation**
**forecast.** For this reason, **some members warned**
that the central bank should remain vigilant. **One**
member stated that the announced increase in the
minimum wage is considerable and that, at the
margin, it could affect inflation, given that the fraction
linked to it within the wage distribution of IMSSinsured workers has practically doubled over the last
three years. He/she added that, despite the above,
increases to the minimum wage do not seem to have
contaminated the dynamics of the rest of wages.
**Another member pointed out that annual wage**
variations and contractual revisions are not

compatible with changes in productivity and that
there is a risk that businesses could transfer their
higher costs onto consumers. He/she indicated that
minimum wage increases seem to be affecting wage
negotiations in other sectors of the labor market.
He/she added that labor cost pressures seem to


derive not only from the incomplete recovery of labor
participation, but also from the strong recovery of
employment. **One member noted that statistical**
estimates consider wage dynamics as the factor
exerting the most pressure on inflation during 2022.
He/she underlined the pressures that could result
from the recently approved increase in the number of
paid vacation days.

Regarding downward risks, **another member**

mentioned the lower inflationary pressures that could
derive from a greater deceleration of the world
economy and a better functioning of supply chains.
**Most members pointed out that, although some**
**shocks have shown signs of subsiding, the**
**balance of risks remains biased to the upside.**
**One member stated that, in his/her opinion, it shows**
a slight improvement. **Another member considered**
that there are elements which indicate that this
balance has started to be distributed closer around
Banco de México’s central forecast.

**_Macrofinancial environment_**

**Most members stated that the Mexican peso**
**continued showing resilience, although with**
**some volatility. Some members highlighted its**
recent depreciation against the US dollar. **One**
member stated that the trading conditions of the
currency in terms of its depth and volume have
continued improving and exhibited levels close to
pre-pandemic ones. Nevertheless, another member
indicated that the Mexican peso exchange rate
benefitted from expectations of a less restrictive
monetary policy by the Federal Reserve. **One**
member added that Mexico’s solid fiscal and external
account balances, in addition to the historic inflow of
remittances, have also strengthened the peso.

**Most members highlighted that medium- and**
**long-term interest rates decreased significantly.**
**One member underlined that the above has also**
been observed in the yield curve of real interest rate
instruments and that government debt market
conditions have performed favorably. Meanwhile,
**another member pointed out that the sovereign risk**
premium has decreased once again. **Some**

members acknowledged that the stock market
declined marginally. One member specified that this
was due to contractions in the financial and
telecommunication sectors.

**Some members noted that the positive performance**
of financial markets is associated with the

preservation of solid macroeconomic fundamentals,
such as sound public finances and external accounts
at reasonable levels. One member pointed out that,

5


-----

as compared to other emerging economies, Mexican
bonds are attractive due to their high yields, better
accessibility and market infrastructure, and low risk
of default. He/she added that this has already been
reflected in a gradual reduction in the spread of
Mexican long-term bonds relative to Treasury bonds,
which incorporates expectations that Banco de
México will eventually reduce its interest rate spread
relative to that of the Federal Reserve. Nonetheless,
he/she argued that the macroeconomic and financial
environment overall faces risks, given the high level
reached by both local and external interest rates.
He/she indicated that it is necessary to remain
vigilant to possible vulnerabilities across certain
sectors and segments of the Mexican financial
system. Another member acknowledged that, if the
Federal Reserve decides to maintain its reference
rate at high levels for a longer time than currently
anticipated by markets, it could surprise financial
markets and affect both interest rates and the
Mexican peso.

**Some members agreed that commercial bank credit**
to firms continued expanding, although its recovery
has been gradual. However, one member mentioned
that, although this type of credit has improved
somewhat in its monthly variations, this has not been
sufficient for it to return to pre-pandemic levels nor
reach a level consistent with its long-term trend.
He/she stated that something similar occurs with
consumer credit. Nevertheless, **some members**
underlined that this segment has continued growing,
as well as credit to households in general. **One**
member highlighted the increase in mortgage credit.
**Another member stated that commercial banks’**
aggregate delinquency rate remains at relatively low
levels. **One member noted that, considering the**
adjustment in interest rates, the sources of financial
resources have recently exhibited a reconfiguration
in households’ asset holdings, since they are opting
for acquiring long-term instruments and reducing
their liquid assets.

**_Monetary policy_**

**The Governing Board evaluated the magnitude**
**and diversity of the shocks that have affected**
**inflation and its determinants, along with the**
**evolution of medium- and long-term inflation**
**expectations and the price formation process. It**
**considered the challenges for monetary policy**
**stemming from the tightening of global financial**
**conditions, the environment of uncertainty, the**
**inflationary pressures accumulated as a result of**
**the pandemic and the geopolitical conflict, the**
**possibility of greater effects on inflation, and the**


**monetary policy stance already attained in this**
**hiking cycle. Based on these considerations, the**
**Governing Board decided by majority to raise the**
**target for the overnight interbank interest rate by**
**50 basis points to 10.50%. With this action, the**
**monetary policy stance adjusts to the trajectory**
**required for inflation to converge to its 3% target**
**within the forecast horizon.**

**The Board will thoroughly monitor inflationary**
**pressures as well as all factors that have an**
**incidence on the foreseen path for inflation and**
**its expectations. This, in order to set a policy rate**
**that is consistent at all times with both the**
**orderly and sustained convergence of headline**
**inflation and with an adequate adjustment of the**
**economy and financial markets. The Board**
**considers that it will still be necessary to raise**
**the reference rate in its next monetary policy**
**meeting. Subsequently, it will assess if the**
**reference rate needs to be further adjusted as**
**well as the pace of adjustment based on the**
**prevailing conditions.**

**One** **member** reflected on monetary policy

implementation during the current period of

inflationary pressures, to assess the approach to be
followed in the future. He/she mentioned that during
2021 and most of 2022, despite an uncertain
environment, there was no doubt as to the need to
attain a restrictive monetary policy stance. He/she
pointed out that more forceful measures were
adopted as compared to those historically

implemented by Banco de México, highlighting the
last four 75 basis points increases. He/she stated
that, through these actions, the ex-ante real interest
rate reached levels above the interval estimated as
neutral, and that the nominal reference rate reached
a level above observed inflation, placing it at a clearly
restrictive level. He/she argued that a delicate
balance is being confronted. On the one hand,
he/she mentioned the signs of improvement in the
inflationary environment, such as the decline in
headline inflation and the fact that it has recently
been lower than expected. On the other hand, he/she
warned that core inflation continues increasing and
that the balance of risks remains biased to the
upside. He/she added that, with the proposed rate
increase, the upward adjustments would shift from 75
basis points to one of 50 basis points, acknowledging
the signs of improvement in the inflationary outlook,
as well as the cumulative increase in the reference
rate during this hiking cycle, whereas continuing to
raise the reference rate implies that the environment
remains complex and that Banco de México will not
be forbearing. He/she considered that, just as in the

6


-----

two previous years, it is difficult to assign probabilities
to how different shocks may evolve, and therefore a
robust monetary policy is required, suitable under
different scenarios. He/she considered that the 50basis-point upward adjustment proposed during this
meeting would be a robust action, as it would place
the central bank in an adequate position to adjust the
pace of increases in whichever direction is required,
considering that abrupt changes in the magnitude of
reference rate adjustments, although at times are
necessary, could potentially cause financial volatility.
He/she added that the proposed adjustment would
also take into account the importance of gradualness
and data dependence under conditions of

uncertainty. He/she added that, looking ahead, both
caution and flexibility will be required to adjust the
monetary policy stance in line with the scenario that
materializes. He/she concluded that further monetary
policy tightening and the level that the reference rate
reaches will be contingent on incoming data and its
assessment.

**Another** **member stated that the restrictive policy**
stance reached so far justifies a reduction in the pace
of tightening. He/she pointed out that Banco de
México’s inflation forecasts were adjusted

marginally, and thus inflation is expected to be close
to reaching its peak. However, he/she indicated that
the observed pressures that drove inflation to
maximum levels in over two decades have been
more generalized and persistent than anticipated.
He/she indicated that, although the narrative to
explain the price dynamics in Mexico has focused on
external price-related shocks, such as those related
to disruptions in global supply chains and the military
conflict in Ukraine, it should also be acknowledged
that signals of domestic inflationary pressures are
becoming increasingly more evident, mainly those
related to consumption. This is evidenced by the fact
that, whereas economic activity is barely reaching its
pre-pandemic levels, different aggregate

consumption indicators are already clearly above
those of the reference period. He/she pointed out
that, despite the cumulative monetary adjustment of
600 basis points, headline and core inflation remain
at very high levels, indicating that the restrictive
monetary policy stance will need to be maintained for
a longer period, in order to avoid inflation
expectations from becoming unanchored and to
guarantee the convergence of inflation to its target in
the planning horizon. He/she added that the complex
and uncertain environment requires maintaining a
cautious and firm monetary policy. He/she stated that
there is now a greater risk that inflation will decline
faster in the United States than in Mexico. He/she
argued that this could imply larger increases in


Banco de México’s reference rate for a longer-thanforeseen period. He/she pointed out that it is
essential that the monetary policy statement
maintains a firm language and explicitly mentions
that a reduction in the pace of upward adjustments
does not imply the beginning of an easing cycle.
He/she added that, on the contrary, it must
communicate that, based on available information, it
is still considered necessary to maintain a restrictive
monetary policy stance over the planning horizon,
and until a decreasing and sustained trajectory of
inflation is observed and inflation expectations return
to levels close to the 3% target. He/she pointed out
that the monetary policy statement must continue
mentioning that the reference rate will continue
increasing and that the magnitude of upward
adjustments will be determined based on available
information. He/she stated that far from limiting the
room for maneuver in the next monetary policy
decisions, such language would contribute to
monetary policy’s effectiveness and, therefore,
minimize the costs of the disinflationary adjustment.

**One** **member considered that raising the policy rate**
is appropriate in order to prevent second-round
effects in the price formation process and the
unanchoring of inflation expectations. However,
he/she added that, although in the current context a
restrictive monetary policy stance is required, it is
necessary to reduce the pace of upward adjustments
significantly and consider the risks to economic
activity and financial stability of implementing an
excessively restrictive monetary policy. He/she
warned that, in an emerging economy such as
Mexico’s, the materialization of such risks could
affect the price formation process through a more
depreciated exchange rate and a deterioration of
macroeconomic fundamentals and of productive
capacity. He/she stated that the ex-ante real interest
rate is unequivocally in restrictive territory. He/she
added that it should be taken into account that, given
the lag with which monetary policy operates, insofar
as inflation expectations decrease, the level of
monetary tightening is anticipated to continue
increasing automatically as long as monetary easing
does not begin. He/she mentioned that, considering
the limits of a restrictive monetary policy to control
inflation, the level of monetary tightening that has
already been reached and the signs of inflationary
pressures easing both globally and locally, there is
no need to raise the interest rate much further.
He/she highlighted that Mexico is one of the few
emerging economies where further increases in the
monetary policy rate are being considered. He/she
stated that it is surprising that more increases are
anticipated, considering that: i) inflation has

7


-----

remained contained as compared to other

economies; ii) inflation has already started to decline;
and iii) domestic inflationary pressures are minimal
given that economic activity has not grown at an
accelerated pace and has just returned to its prepandemic levels. He/she highlighted that, from an
international perspective, and based on a domestic
risk-management approach, raising the reference
rate much further is not required. He/she sustained
that, looking ahead, it will be necessary to act with
caution depending on the evolution of the economy.

**Another member considered it appropriate to slow**
the pace of upward adjustments as the terminal
interest rate of this cycle is closer. He/she noted that
it is possible considering: i) the level of monetary
tightening that has already been reached; ii) that it is
likely that inflation has already reached its peak; iii)
that the balance of risks for the trajectory of inflation
has slightly improved; iv) that the deterioration of
inflation expectations appears to be decreasing; and
v) that the anticipated trajectory for inflation has
remained stable for the short term. He/she stated that
the reduction in the pace of upward adjustments
should not be interpreted as monetary easing, but
rather as the implementation of less extreme and
aggressive, but still firm, adjustments in view of the
considerable challenges and mixed signals of relief
and deterioration that must be cautiously considered.
In this regard, he/she indicated that the 50-basis
point increases in previous tightening episodes have
been considered as forceful. Thus, he/she argued
that further raises are required, given that: i) the core
component that responds more to monetary policy
remains to the upside; ii) inflation expectations
remain high and with the risk of stabilizing at the
upper limit of the target range; and iii) domestic
pressures which could complicate the convergence
of inflation prevail. He/she warned that cyclical
conditions, rather than justifying less monetary
tightening, should be considered as an element of
caution. He/she mentioned that the monetary policy
stance reached a degree of tightening that is
consistent with the inflationary challenge, and that,
looking ahead, an ex-ante real interest rate of around
6% should be gradually reached. He/she indicated
that said gradualness will depend on: i) core inflation
following a clear downward trend; ii) inflation
expectations showing less deterioration, with a lower
dispersion, and with a correction of its current upside
bias; iii) a consolidation of the expected trajectory for
inflation and without it presenting significant
adjustments, which would strengthen the central
bank’s credibility given the consistent errors in the
forecast in the recent past; and iv) the room for
maneuver offered by the global monetary conditions.


He/she pointed out that the weighting of these
factors, based on incoming data, will define the
reaction function. He/she stated that a 600-basispoint interest rate spread has been maintained
between Mexico and the United States, due to the
synchronization of the inflationary cycles, and not
due to a mechanical relationship. He/she pointed out
that the monetary policy stance in both countries has
responded to a similar behavior of inflation. He/she
added that monetary policy synchronization should
continue as long as the trajectories of inflation are
similar and there is no certainty as to the levels of the
terminal interest rates. He/she stated that sound
macroeconomic fundamentals could allow a

marginal reduction of the spread in case the
inflationary cycles diverge. He/she pointed out that
forward guidance should be communicated in a
decisive manner and should highlight that the
attained terminal rate will be maintained for some,
still uncertain, amount of time. He/she underlined
that, for this reason, it is necessary to be cautious in
determining it. He/she added that neither a monetary
easing is to be anticipated over the next months nor
that the attained monetary tightening will prevail over
the entire horizon in which monetary policy operates.

**One member mentioned that there are elements**
suggesting that the balance of risks for inflation,
despite remaining biased to the upside, has started
to be distributed closer around Banco de México’s
central forecast. Among these factors he/she
mentioned that: i) inflation has begun registering
declining pressures, although it remains at high
levels and the core component shows a worrying
persistence to the upside; ii) inflation figures have
reached levels below those anticipated by

specialists, whose expectations have started to
decline; iii) the central bank inflation forecasts have
been revised marginally and indicate that inflation will
continue declining over the following quarters.
He/she added that the factors mentioned should be
considered in determining the reaction function,
taking into account the lag with which monetary
policy operates. He/she stated that, for this reason,
the pace of rate adjustments should be of a smaller
magnitude. He/she added that, if the distribution of
12-month inflation expectations is considered, the
corresponding distribution of the ex-ante real interest
rate is, entirely in a restrictive territory. He/she
argued that the above indicates that the monetary
policy stance has consolidated at a sufficiently high
level, even under the most pessimistic scenarios.
He/she underlined that, with the suggested upward
adjustment, the reference rate would continue
increasing, despite having already exceeded both
observed and expected inflation levels, which would

8


-----

send a signal of the central bank’s commitment to
guaranteeing the convergence of inflation in
accordance with its forecasts. He/he added that the
Mexican economy is highly integrated both financially
and economically with the rest of the world, and
operates under a flexible exchange rate regime, and
that for this reason maintaining a fixed relative
monetary policy stance could lead to keeping
Mexico’s price formation process dependent on
external factors. Therefore, he/she highlighted that
Banco de México’s decisions should be consistent
with reaching an absolute monetary policy stance
that would contribute to the convergence of inflation
to its target, regardless of the relative monetary
policy stance that this implies. He/she stated that,
looking ahead, the ex-ante real interest rate is likely
to continue increasing, while, at the same time, a
greater tightening derived from the real exchange
rate might be observed; and that, therefore,
monetary conditions as a whole will remain tight for
some time. He/she indicated that, in the future,
adjustments to the reference rate will have to be
calibrated with caution, considering the monetary
policy stance that has already been reached, its
transmission mechanisms, and the lags with which
monetary policy operates.

**3. MONETARY POLICY DECISION**

The Governing Board evaluated the magnitude and
diversity of the shocks that have affected inflation
and its determinants, along with the evolution of
medium- and long-term inflation expectations and the
price formation process. It considered the challenges
for monetary policy stemming from the ongoing
tightening of global financial conditions, the

environment of uncertainty, the inflationary

pressures accumulated as a result of the pandemic
and the geopolitical conflict, the possibility of greater
effects on inflation, and the monetary policy stance
already attained in this hiking cycle. Based on these
considerations, the Board decided by majority to
raise the target for the overnight interbank interest
rate by 50 percentage points to 10.50%. With this
action, the monetary policy stance adjusts to the
trajectory required for inflation to converge to its 3%
target within the forecast horizon.

The Board will thoroughly monitor inflationary
pressures as well as all factors that have an
incidence on the foreseen path for inflation and its


expectations. This, in order to set a policy rate that is
consistent at all times, with both the orderly and
sustained convergence of headline inflation to the
3% target within the time frame in which monetary
policy operates as well as with an adequate
adjustment of the economy and financial markets.
The Board considers it will still be necessary to raise
the reference rate in its next monetary policy
meeting. Subsequently, it will assess if the reference
rate needs to be further adjusted as well as the pace
of adjustments based on the prevailing conditions.

**4. VOTING**

Victoria Rodríguez, Galia Borja, Irene Espinosa, and
Jonathan Heath voted in favor of increasing the
target for the overnight interbank interest rate by 50
basis points to 10.50%. Gerardo Esquivel voted in
favor of increasing the target for the overnight
interbank interest rate by 25 basis points to 10.25%.

**5. DISSENTING OPINION / VOTE**

**Vote. Gerardo Esquivel.**

The current ex-ante real interest rate is clearly at a
restrictive level. Moreover, given the lag under which
monetary policy operates, as inflation expectations
start decreasing, the restrictive level is foreseen to
increase even further. The restrictive policy stance
already attained, together with easing inflationary
pressures, suggests that further raising the reference
rate is unnecessary. The decline in global inflationary
pressures is evident. At the local level, inflation
dynamics have also started to ease: there are less
pressures at the margin, headline inflation reached
its peak in August, and producer price inflation has
rapidly decreased. The latter will eventually have an
incidence on core inflation. Several emerging
economies have concluded their hiking cycles or at
about to end them with marginal upward

adjustments. Mexico is one of the few economies
that has still not concluded such cycle. In countries
with high levels of inflation or inflation that has been
affected by demand-related factors, it would be
justified to continue with said policy. However, that is
not Mexico’s case. For this reason, I believe a 25basis point increase is appropriate. What is now
needed is to allow the already attained restrictive
policy stance to operate.

9


-----

**ANNEX**

The information in this Annex was prepared for this
meeting by the staff of Banco de México’s Directorate
General of Economic Research and Directorate
General of Central Bank Operations. It does not
necessarily reflect the considerations of the

members of the Governing Board as to the monetary
policy decision.

**A.1. External conditions**

**A.1.1. World economic activity**

World economic activity recovered slightly during the
third quarter of 2022. Available information, however,
points to a slowdown during the fourth quarter, as a
result of tightening global financial conditions and the
adverse economic effects generated by Russia’s
invasion of Ukraine. Forward-looking indicators such
as Purchasing Managers' Indices point to a
deterioration of various sectors of the global
economy and trade in the short term (Chart 1). In this
context, the outlook for 2023 continued deteriorating.
Among the most important risks to the global
economy are the persistence of inflationary

pressures, tighter financial and monetary conditions,
worsening geopolitical tensions, and those

associated with the pandemic.

In the United States, available indicators suggest that
during the fourth quarter of 2022, Gross Domestic
Product (GDP) moderated its pace of growth (Chart
2), after having grown at a seasonally adjusted
quarterly rate of 0.7% during the third quarter.[1]
During the fourth quarter, economic activity would
have been driven by personal consumption, business
investment, and government spending. This would
have been partially offset by the negative

contributions of net exports and residential

investment.

In October, industrial production in the United States
contracted at a seasonally adjusted monthly rate of
0.1%. This fall reflected a decline in electricity and
gas generation as well as in mining production.
Meanwhile, manufacturing activity continued growing
at a moderate pace. Nevertheless, forward-looking
indicators, such as the Purchasing Managers'
Indices, point to a deterioration in this sector. This
weakening would be associated with the slowdown

1 Expressed as a seasonally adjusted annualized quarterly rate,
the change in US GDP in the third quarter was 2.9%.


in domestic and external demand and with lower
business confidence.

**Chart 1**

**Global: Purchasing Managers’ Index:**

**Production Component**

Diffusion index, s. a.

60

58

56

54

52

50

Manufacturing

48 Manufacturing (excl. China)

46 Services

Services (excl. China)

44 32.5 39.2

24.8 33.0

42 23.7 35.1

20.7 32.2 November

40

J J J J J J J J J J J J

2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022

s. a. / Seasonally adjusted figures.
Source: IHS Markit.

**Chart 2**

**US Real GDP and Components**

Quarterly percentage rate and contribution in

percentage points, s. a.

3.0 Private consumption expenditures

2.5 Residential investment

Nonresidential investment

2.0 Change in private inventories

Net exports

1.5 Government consumption expenditures

Total

1.0

0.5

0.0

-0.5

-1.0

-1.5

-2.0

I II III IV I II III IV

2021 2022

a. e./ Seasonally adjusted figures.
Note: The shaded area refers to forecasts of GDPNow for December 2022.
Source: BEA and Blue Chip.

The US labor market continued showing signs of
tightening. The non-farm payroll reflected the
creation of 263 thousand new jobs in November. This
figure was higher than that anticipated by analysts'
forecasts. The unemployment rate remained at 3.7%
in that same month and wage growth continued at
elevated levels. Initial claims for unemployment

|Manufacturing Manufacturing (excl. China) Services Services (excl. China) 32.5 39.2 24.8 33.0 23.7 35.1 20.7 32.2 November J J J J J J J J J J J J 17 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 / Seasonally adjusted figures. rce: IHS Markit. Chart 2 US Real GDP and Components Quarterly percentage rate and contribution in percentage points, s. a. Private consumption expenditures Residential investment Nonresidential investment Change in private inventories Net exports Government consumption expenditures Total I II III IV I II III IV 2021 2022|Col2|Col3|
|---|---|---|
||I II III IV 2021|I II III IV 2022|


-----

insurance remained at relatively stable levels at the
beginning of December in relation to those at the
beginning of November.

In the euro area, available indicators suggest a
contraction in economic activity during the fourth
quarter, after the expansion at a seasonally adjusted
quarterly rate of 0.3% observed during the previous
quarter.[2 ] The decline in economic activity would
mainly reflect the effects of the military conflict in
Ukraine, especially through high gas prices and low
levels of consumer and business confidence.
Tightening financial conditions and a weakening in
global demand have also contributed to the
deterioration of economic activity. The

unemployment rate decreased from 6.6% in
September to 6.5% in October. Purchasing

Managers' Indices point to a deterioration in
manufacturing and services activity in the short term.

In the main emerging economies, available indicators
suggest a heterogeneous performance across
countries and regions during the fourth quarter of
2022. In Latin America, the economies are expected
to grow at a moderate pace, while some of them are
anticipated to contract. In Emerging Europe, most
economies are expected to contract, mainly
reflecting the adverse effects of the military conflict
between Russia and Ukraine. In Emerging Asia, the
major economies are expected to slow down. In
China, timely indicators point to a moderation in
economic activity early in the fourth quarter due to
restrictions to contain the high number of COVID-19
infections. Although some of these restrictions have
recently loosened, there is uncertainty about the
evolution of the pandemic and its impact on
economic activity in that country.

International commodity prices have registered a
mixed behavior with episodes of volatility since
Mexico’s previous monetary policy decision. In
particular, oil prices trended downwards during most
of the reporting period due to concerns about the
adverse effects that the increase in the number of
COVID-19 infections in China could have on the
demand for fuel, as well as the G7 agreement on a
maximum price for Russian oil traded by sea.
Throughout the period, oil prices exhibited volatility
due to factors related to expectations of a higher
global demand derived from the easing of certain
mobility restrictions in some major cities in China.
Meanwhile, natural gas reference prices in Europe
and the United States generally trended upwards

2 Expressed as a seasonally adjusted annualized quarterly rate,
the change in euro area GDP was 1.3% in the third quarter of
2022.


during most of the analyzed period, partly in
anticipation of lower temperatures in both regions.
However, in the first half of December, prices in the
United States registered episodes of volatility due to
various changes in temperature forecasts for the
winter and uncertainty regarding the reopening of
one of the most important natural gas exporting
plants in the United States. Meanwhile, most grain
prices trended downwards. This was due to the
mobility restrictions in China that prevailed during
most of the period and the extension of the Black Sea
security corridor agreement for grain exports. Finally,
the lower demand for industrial metals exerted a
downward pressure on industrial metal prices during
most of November. Prices rebounded in early
December due to better prospects of Chinese
demand as some restrictions to contain COVID-19
were relaxed.

**A.1.2. Monetary policy and international financial**
**markets**

World inflation remains high, due to persistent
pressures across a broad range of items’ prices.
Headline inflation, on the contrary, declined in
several economies due to lower pressures on food
and energy prices. The easing of supply chain
disruptions also contributed to the decline in inflation.

In several advanced economies, annual headline
inflation has slightly decreased, largely as a result of
a decline in energy inflation (Chart 3). Nevertheless,
headline inflation remains significantly above their
central banks' targets. Core inflation also remains at
high levels, although it has recently declined or
remained unchanged in some of these economies,
due to a lower inflation of goods. In the United States,
annual inflation measured by the consumer price
index decreased from 7.7 to 7.1% between October
and November, while core inflation went from 6.3 to
6.0% during the same period. Analysts' forecasts for
inflation in the main advanced economies remained
at high levels for the short term, while for 2023 they
foresee a moderation. Meanwhile, longer-term
inflation expectations for these economies derived
from financial instruments generally exhibited limited
adjustments.

In most of the main emerging economies, annual
headline inflation declined in its latest readings, partly
reflecting a moderation in energy inflation, and, in
some cases, food inflation. In most countries,
however, core inflation continued increasing.


-----

Inflation remains at high levels and far above their
central banks’ targets.

**Chart 3**

**Selected Advanced Economies:**

**Headline Inflation**

Annual percentage change


7.0%

6.0%

5.0%

4.0%

3.0%

2.0%

1.0%

0.0%


**― US Federal Reserve 2/**
**― Bank of England**
**― Bank of Japan**

**― European Central Bank deposit rate**
**― OIS implicit trajectory Dec.14,2022**
**--- OIS implicit trajectory Nov.4, 2022**


**Chart 4**

**Reference Rates and Trajectories**

**Implied in OIS Curves[1/]**

Percent


End of
2024


End of
2022


End of
2023


12
11
10

9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0

|Col1|― OIS implicit trajectory Dec.14,2022|re|Col4|Col5|Col6|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|% % % %|--- OIS implicit trajectory Nov.4, 2022|casts||||
|%||||||
|||||||


-1 October

November

-2

November

-3 November
-4

2005 2009 2013 2017 2021

1/ The personal consumption expenditure deflator is used.
2/ Excludes fresh food. This series does not exclude the effect of the
increase in the consumption tax in May 2014 and October 2019 nor the
effect of the free daycare and preschool program in October 2019.
3/ Preliminary figures up to November 2022.
Source: Bureau of Economic Analysis, Bureau of Labor Statistics, Eurostat,
Bank of Japan, Statistics Canada, Office of National Statistics.

In such an environment, a large number of central
banks continued raising their reference rates. Some
mentioned that they would begin to moderate the
pace of adjustments. However, these rates are
foreseen to remain at high levels for an extended
period. In particular, the US Federal Reserve and the
central banks of Sweden and Korea announced
smaller increases than those on previous decisions,
although they maintain that additional increases are
likely to be required in the future. Although the Bank
of Canada raised its interest rate in its most recent
monetary policy decision, it adjusted its forward
guidance, indicating that it will be considering
whether the interest rate should be raised further. In
contrast, the Reserve Bank of New Zealand
accelerated its pace of upward adjustments. For
most major advanced economies, expectations
drawn from financial instruments foresee a level of
interest rates at the end of 2023 close to that
previously expected. These expectations foresee
that interest rates will remain high for an extended
period and suggest that, in some cases, they will start
declining by the end of 2023 or in 2024 (Chart 4). As
for their asset purchase programs, most central
banks in this group of economies continued to
gradually reduce their securities’ holdings.


1/ OIS: Fixed floating interest rate swap where the fixed interest rate is
associated to the effective overnight reference rate.
2/ For the observed reference rate of the US, the average interest rate of
the target range of the federal funds rate (4.25% - 4.50%) is used.
Source: Banco de México with data from Bloomberg,

Delving into the Federal Reserve's most recent
decision, the Federal Open Market Committee
(FOMC) raised the target range for the federal funds
rate by 50 bps, to between 4.25 and 4.50%, after
having increased it by 75 basis points four
consecutive times. Regarding its balance sheet, the
Committee reiterated that it will continue reducing its
securities’ holdings. It also anticipated that additional
increases in the target range will be appropriate in
order to achieve a monetary policy stance that is
sufficiently restrictive to return inflation to the 2%
target. It stated that, when determining the pace of
future adjustments to the target range, it will consider
the cumulative tightening of monetary policy, the lags
with which monetary policy affects economic activity
and inflation, and economic and financial

developments. The chairman of that institution
indicated that when a sufficiently restrictive interest
rate level is reached, they will maintain it there until
there is confidence that inflation is decreasing in a
sustained manner, and that this will take some time.
He also reiterated that FOMC members will continue
making decisions meeting by meeting, that is, without
providing specific guidance, and that the pace of
adjustments will depend on economic data.

Regarding the update of its economic projections, the
Committee's medians for headline and core inflation
expectations were revised upwards for almost every
year. Median growth expectations for 2022 were
revised upwards, from 0.2 to 0.5%, while for 2023
and 2024, they were revised downwards to 0.5 and
1.6%, respectively. Median unemployment

expectations for 2022 were revised downwards to


-1.0%

2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 2024


-----

3.7%, and upwards for both 2023 and 2024 (4.6%),
as well as for 2025 (4.5%). As for the reference rate,
the median of expectations for the end of 2023
increased from 4.6% in September to 5.1% in
December, from 3.9 to 4.1% for the end of 2024, and
from 2.9 to 3.1% for the end of 2025, while the longterm rate remained unchanged. In this context, the
expected trajectory for the federal funds rate implied
by financial instruments anticipates a terminal rate
close to 5.0% and rates of around 4.5% and 3.0% for
the end of 2023 and 2024, respectively.

Regarding the European Central Bank, analysts'
forecasts anticipate that at its December 15 meeting
it will increase its refinancing, key lending and key
deposit rates by 50 bps, to 2.50, 2.75 and 2.00%,
respectively. The president of that central bank had
stated that at its December meeting they would
decide on the key principles for reducing the portfolio
associated with its Asset Purchase Program (APP).

In the main emerging economies, most central banks
continued raising their reference interest rates.
Nevertheless, some central banks, such as those of
India and Israel, slowed the pace of upward
adjustments. In the case of the central banks of
Hungary, Poland, Chile and Brazil, their reference
rates were left unchanged. Some of them reiterated
that they will keep their interest rates at current levels
for a prolonged period in order to ensure the
convergence of inflation to their targets. In the case
of China, although the central bank kept the interest
rate unchanged, it cut the reserve requirement ratio.
Meanwhile, Turkey's central bank made an additional
150 bp cut in its interest rate and announced that it
decided to end the cycle of cuts that began in August.

In the context described above, since Mexico’s
previous monetary policy decision international
financial markets registered less tightening (Chart 5).
Stock markets in most of the major advanced
economies continued posting gains, while emerging
markets exhibited mixed results (Chart 6). As for
foreign exchange markets, during the reported period
the US dollar depreciated against the currencies of
advanced economies, after having significantly
appreciated in previous months. This was due to
expectations of a more moderate pace of interest
rate hikes by the Federal Reserve. Most emerging
economies' currencies appreciated (Chart 7). In most
of the main advanced economies, long-term
government bond interest rates decreased during the
period, while short-term ones registered mixed
adjustments. In most emerging economies, both
long-term and short-term interest rates declined. In
this context, since Mexico’s previous monetary policy


decision, most emerging economies registered
cumulative capital inflows to fixed income markets.
While some fixed income markets in Emerging Asia,
particularly in China, exhibited outflows, the latter
registered cumulative capital inflows to equity
markets.

**Chart 5**

**Financial Conditions Index[1/]**

Units

103

Tightening

102

Easing

101

100

99

98

97

96

2020 2021 2022 2023

Financial Conditions Index - United States
Financial Conditions Index - Global
Financial Conditions Index for Euro area 2/

1/ The financial conditions index is constructed considering the effect of five
variables on economic activity: the reference interest rate, the 10-year
government bond, the spread of investment-grade bonds over the
government debt bond with equivalent maturity, the ratio of a stock index
with 10-year average earnings per share and the trade-weighted exchange
rate. Emerging economies include Brazil, Chile, China, Czech Republic,
Hungary, India, Indonesia, Israel, Malaysia, Mexico, Philippines, Poland,
Romania, South Korea, South Africa, Thailand, and Turkey. The global
sample includes G10 countries and emerging economies.
2/ In the case of emerging economies, the financial conditions index
considers the CDS as the credit spread component and includes the debtweighted exchange rate. The vertical black line indicates the last scheduled
meeting of Banco de México's Monetary Policy Committee.
Source: Prepared by Banco de México with Bloomberg and Goldman Sachs
data.


-----

**Chart 6**

**Change in Selected Financial Indicators from**

**November 4, 2022 to December 14, 2022**

Percent; basis points


downward movements (Chart 8), in line with the
movements observed in global yield curves.

**Chart 8**

**Mexican Markets’ Performance**

Percent, MXN/USD and index


14%

7%


100

50


58,000

56,000

54,000

52,000

50,000

48,000

46,000

44,000

42,000

40,000


11.0

10.5

10.0

9.5

9.0

8.5

8.0

7.5

7.0


22.0

21.5

21.0

20.5

20.0

19.5

19.0

18.5

18.0


0%

-7%


0

-50


-14%


-100


1/ DXY: a weighted average estimated by the Intercontinental Exchange
(ICE) of the nominal exchange rate of the main six currencies operated
globally with the following weights: EUR 57.6%, JPY: 13.6%, GBP: 11.9%,
CAD: 9.1%, SEK: 4.2%, and CHF: 3.6%.
Source: Bloomberg and ICE.

**Chart 7**

**Selected Emerging Economies: Financial Assets**

**Performance as of November 4, 2022**

Percent, basis points Percent, basis points


Range in year Range since previous monetary policy Nov.4,2022 Dec.9,2022

decision

Source: Prepared by Banco de México.

Since Mexico's previous monetary policy decision,
the Mexican currency traded in a range of 82 cents,
between 19.04 and 19.86 pesos per US dollar,
reaching during the period its lowest level since
March 2020. However, it ended the period with a
depreciation of 1.15% (Chart 9). The above occurred
in a context in which trading conditions, both realized
and prospective, continued improving.


M-bond


5.5

5.0

4.5

4.0

3.5

3.0

2.5

2.0

Inflation-indexed bonds


Range in year Range since previous monetary policy Nov.4,2022 Dec.9,2022


**Chart 9**

**Mexican Peso Exchange Rate including Moving**

**Averages**

**MXN/USD**


Mexican peso


100-day moving average

50-day moving average


Note: An upward adjustment indicates currency appreciation. Interest rates
correspond to swap rates at the specified terms, except for Hungary, where
government securities with 3-year maturities were used as a reference. For
the Philippines, a 2-year swap rate was used, and for Russia, a 2-year and
3-year swap rate was used.
Source: Bloomberg.

**A.2. Current situation of the Mexican economy**

**A.2.1. Mexican markets**

Regarding domestic financial markets, the Mexican
peso continued showing resilience, although with
volatility, while interest rates registered mostly


25.50
25.00
24.50
24.00
23.50
23.00
22.50
22.00
21.50
21.00
20.50
20.00
19.50
19.00
18.50
18.00
17.50
17.00

|2-year 10-year Equity Region Country Currencies interest Interest markets rates rates|Col2|March 2020. However, CDS depreciation of 1.15% (C -32 in a context in which trad -24 and prospective, continu -41 -101 Ch -46 Mexican Peso Exchan N.A. -31 Ave -110 MX -3 25.50 -56 25.00 -30 24.50 24.00 -26 23.50 -36 23.00 22.50 -25 22.00 -29 21.50 -37 21.00 20.50 -37 20.00 t rates 19.50 where 19.00 18.50 ce. For 18.00 ar and 17.50 17.00|
|---|---|---|
|Mexico -1.15% -0.19% -35 -87 Brazil -3.71% -8.70% 125 110 Latin Chile 7.44% -0.24% -204 6 America Colombia 5.84% -1.17% -142 -172 Peru 3.35% 1.21% -96 -37|||
|Russia -1.12% 0.79% -19 10 Poland 5.66% 6.82% -148 -179 Emerging Turkey -0.42% 17.14% -366 -73 Europe Czech Republic 6.11% -4.05% -70 -121 Hungary 2.23% 3.61% -133 -134|||
|China 3.18% 4.43% 24 22 Malaysia 7.25% 2.71% -10 -32 India 0.19% 2.02% -28 -17 Asia Philippines 5.45% 6.38% -11 13 Thailand 7.37% -0.20% -2 -45 Indonesia 0.98% -4.69% -87 -53|||
|Africa South Africa 3.57%|8.08% 8 -15||
|Note: An upward adjustment indicates currency appreciation. Interes correspond to swap rates at the specified terms, except for Hungary, government securities with 3-year maturities were used as a referen the Philippines, a 2-year swap rate was used, and for Russia, a 2-ye|||


2020 2021 2022

Source: Prepared by Banco de México.

Interest rates on government securities showed a
significantly positive performance, with movements
of between -49 and 27 basis points in the short-term
nodes, while longer-term securities decreased up to
95 basis points (Chart 10). The yield curve of real
interest rate instruments increased 162 basis points
in the one-year node and decreased up to 55 basis


J  F  M A M  J  J  A S  O  N  D  J  F M  A  M J  J  A  S  O  N  D J  F M  A  M  J  J  A S O  N  D


-----

points in the rest of the curve. In this context,
breakeven inflation implicit in spreads between
nominal and real interest rates of market instruments
decreased between 28 and 38 basis points (Chart
11). These movements took place in an environment
in which trading conditions showed some stability.

**Chart 10**

**Nominal Yield Curve of Government Securities**

**Percent, basis points**

11.50 90

11.00 60

#¡REF!

30

10.50

0

10.00

-30

9.50

-60

9.00 -90

8.50 -120

November-4th 2022 December-8th 2022 Change (November-4th 2022 to December-8th 2022)

Trading range over the period

Source: PIP.

**Chart 11**

**Breakeven Inflation and Inflation Risk**

**Implied in Government Securities’ Yields**

Basis points

600

550

500

450

400 3-year

10-year

350 20-year

30-year

300 3-year average

10-year average

250 20-year average

30-year average

200

J    M M    J    S    N    J    M   M    J    S    N

2021                                   2022

Source: PIP.

Regarding expectations for the path of the monetary
policy reference rate, information implicit in the
interest rate swaps curve incorporates an increase of
39 basis points for the December decision (Chart 12).
Most analysts surveyed by Citibanamex anticipate a
50-basis point increase in the reference rate for
December’s decision and a rate of 10.38% for the
end of 2023.


2021               2022               2023

Source: Prepared by Banco de México with Bloomberg data.

**A.2.2. Economic activity in Mexico**

During the third quarter of 2022, the Mexican
economy maintained its pace of recovery (Chart 13),
reaching a level similar to that registered in the last
quarter of 2019, prior to the health emergency. The
economy is expected to have continued recovering
during the fourth quarter, albeit at a slower pace.

**Chart 13**

**Gross Domestic Product**

Quarterly percentage change, s. a.

6

13.15

4

2

0

-2

-4

-17.76

Q-III

-6

I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV I II III

2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022

s. a. / Seasonally adjusted figures. The chart’s range was adjusted to
facilitate its reading.
Source: Mexico’s System on National Accounts (SCNM, for its Spanish
acronym), INEGI.

Regarding external demand, in October the value of
manufacturing exports continued increasing. Both
automotive and non-automotive exports have been
expanding, although the former have shown a certain
deceleration throughout the year (Chart 14).


**Chart 12**

**Interbank Funding Rate Implied in TIIE Swaps**

Percent


13.00


Banxico overnight rate (reference rate)


-----

As for domestic demand, private consumption
continued recovering moderately in September, after
having declined in May and June. This recovery is
attributed to the growth in consumption of goods and
services. Gross fixed investment continued showing
a weak performance. In September, machinery and
equipment partially reversed the improvement
registered in August, while investment in construction
continued trending downwards.

**Chart 14**

**Total Manufacturing Exports**

Indices 2013 = 100, s. a.

200

180

160

140

120

100

80 Total

Automotive

60


**Chart 15**

**Global Indicator of Economic Activity**

**Indices 2013 = 100, s. a.**


130

120

110

100

Total IGAE 1/

90 Industrial production 2/

Services IGAE 1/

80

Agricultural and livestock September
products' IGAE 1/
October

70

J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O

2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022


40

J

2017


15.8 October


s. a. / Seasonally adjusted series and trend series based on data in nominal
US dollars. The former is represented by a solid line and the latter by a
dotted line
Source: Prepared by Banco de México with data from the Tax
Administration Service (SAT, for its Spanish acronym), the Ministry of the
Economy (SE, for its Spanish acronym), Banco de México, the National
Institute of Statistics and Geography (INEGI, for its Spanish acronym).
Mexico’s Merchandise Trade Balance, and the National System of
Statistical and Geographical Information (SNIEG, for its Spanish acronym),
Information of national interest.

On the production side, at the end of the third quarter,
tertiary activities rebounded (Chart 15) and

registered increases, mainly in commerce;

accommodation and food services; and in

transportation and mass media information services.
As for industrial production, at the beginning of the
fourth quarter, manufacturing remained sluggish,
although it ceased decreasing, after two months of
contractions. Mining and construction also remained
weak (Chart 16).


s. a. / Seasonally adjusted and trend series. The former is represented by a
solid line and the latter by a dotted line.
1/ Figures up to September 2022.
2/ Monthly Indicator of Economic Activity (figures up to October 2022).
Source: Mexico’s System of National Accounts (SCNM, for its Spanish
acronym), INEGI.

**Chart 16**

**Industrial Activity [1/]**

Indices 2013 = 100, s. a.

130

120

110

100

90

80

Total

70 Mining (22.3%)

Manufacturing (49.7%)

60 Construction (23.3%)

Utilities (4.7%) October

50

J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O

2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022

s. a. / Seasonally adjusted and trend series. The former is represented by a
solid line and the latter by a dotted line.
1/ Figures in parenthesis correspond to their share in the total in 2013.
Source: Mexico’s System of National Accounts (SCNM, for its Spanish
acronym), INEGI.

Regarding the cyclical position of the economy,
according to the output gap estimate, slack
conditions continued decreasing during the third
quarter (Chart 17). In October, both national and
urban unemployment rates remained at relatively low
levels (Chart 18). Based on seasonally adjusted
figures, IMSS-insured jobs continued increasing in
November, although at a slower rate. Finally, in
October, unit labor costs in the manufacturing sector
continued trending downwards (Chart 19).


-----

**Chart 17**

**Output Gap Estimates [1/]**

Potential output percentages, s. a.


12

8

4

0

-4

-8

-12

Global Economic Activity Index

-16 (IGAE) 2/

Gross Domestic Product 2/

-20 Q-III

95% confidence interval 3/
September

-24

J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S

2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022


**Chart 19**

**Productivity and Unit Labor Costs in the**

**Manufacturing Sector [1/]**

**Indices 2013 = 100, s. a.**


s. a. / Calculations based on seasonally adjusted figures.
1/ Output gap estimated with a tail-corrected Hodrick-Prescott filter; see
Banco de México (2009), “Inflation Report, April-June 2009”, p.74.
2/ GDP figures up to the third quarter of 2022 and IGAE up to September
2022.
3/ Output gap confidence interval calculated with a method of unobserved
components.
Source: Prepared by Banco de México with INEGI data.

**Chart 18**

**National and Urban Unemployment Rates**

Percent, s. a.

6.5

Urban unemployment rate

6.0

National unemployment rate

5.5

5.0

4.5

4.0

3.5

3.0

October

2.5

J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O

2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022

s. a. / Seasonally adjusted and trend series. The former is represented by a
solid line and the latter by a dotted line.
Source: Prepared by Banco de México with data from ENOE, ETOE (from
April to June 2020), and ENOE new edition (ENOE[N]) from July to date.


125

Unit labor costs 157.14

120

Productivity

115

110

105

100

95

90

October

85

J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O

2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022

s. a. / Seasonally adjusted and trend series. The former is represented by a
solid line and the latter by a dotted line.
1/ Productivity based on hours worked.
Source: Prepared by Banco de México with seasonally adjusted data of the
Monthly Manufacturing Industry Survey and industrial activity indicators of
Mexico’s System of National Accounts (Sistema de Cuentas Nacionales de
_México, SCNM), INEGI._

In October 2022, domestic financing to firms
registered a positive real annual variation for the
fourth consecutive month. Bank credit to firms
continued recovering gradually, exhibiting a positive
real annual variation for the sixth consecutive month.
This occurred in a context in which the demand for
corporate credit continued recovering and lending
conditions remained tight compared to those
prevailing at the beginning of the pandemic. These
conditions, however, had been easing for smaller
firms between the second half of 2021 and the
second quarter of 2022. Net corporate debt issuance
in the domestic market continued increasing in
October, in contrast with the negative flows observed
during the first half of the year. As for credit to
households, commercial bank housing portfolio
continued expanding. In turn, bank consumer credit
continued increasing at a real annual rate, as a result
of the dynamism of payroll credit, credit cards, and
personal loans. This has taken place in a context in
which household demand for credit has continued to
increase. Mortgage lending and consumer credit
conditions remained relatively stable during the third
quarter of the year.

In October, interest rates on bank credit to firms were
at levels above those observed at the end of 2019.
Corporate credit intermediation margins did not show
significant changes with respect to the previous
month and overall are at levels lower than those
observed in February 2020. Interest rates on
mortgages have increased as of July, after having


-----

remained at levels around their historical lows since
August 2020. In July-August 2022, credit card
interest rates increased with respect to the previous
bimester, while those of payroll loans registered a
similar level. As for portfolio quality, in October 2022,
corporate loan delinquency rates were similar to
those observed in the previous month and continued
at low levels. Finally, consumer portfolio delinquency
rates did not show significant changes, thus
remaining at levels lower than those registered prior
to the onset of the pandemic.

**A.2.3. Development of inflation and inflation**
**outlook**

Between October and November 2022, annual
headline inflation decreased from 8.41 to 7.80%
(Chart 20 and Table 1). This result is explained by
the reduction in non-core inflation, given that core
inflation continued increasing.

**Chart 20**

**Consumer Price Index**

Annual percentage change

14

CPI

13

Core

12

Non-core

11
10

9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0

-1
-2 November
-3

J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S

2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022

Source: Banco de México and INEGI.

Between October and November 2022, annual core
inflation rose from 8.42 to 8.51%. In an environment
of high global demand and greater wage variations,
core inflation continued to be affected by the still high
costs of different commodities, which continued
exerting pressure on the production costs of different
goods and services. In particular, annual

merchandise inflation increased from 11.15 to
11.28% during the same period (Chart 21). The
annual variation of food merchandise prices, which
was already at high levels, continued increasing,
from 13.95 to 14.09% during the same period (Chart
22). This behavior continued to reflect the high levels
of international references for food commodities, as
well as the lagged effects of their previous increases.
Annual inflation of non-food merchandise rose from
8.03 to 8.13% during the same period. Annual


services inflation increased from 5.30 to 5.35% in the
same months, pressured by the greater operating
costs of businesses to prevent contagions, the
increase in input prices, as well as by higher wage
costs. Regarding services other than education and
housing, the high inflation of food services continued
to stand out.

**Chart 21**

**Merchandise and Services Core Price Sub-index**

Annual percentage change

12

Merchandise

11 Services

10

9

8

7

6

5

4

3

2

1

November

0

J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S

2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022

Source: Banco de México and INEGI.

**Chart 22**

**Merchandise Core Price Sub-index**

Annual percentage change

16

Food, beverages and tobacco

14 Non-food merchandise

12

10

8

6

4

2

November

0

J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S

2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022

Source: Banco de México and INEGI.

Between October and November 2022, annual noncore inflation decreased from 8.36 to 5.73% (Chart
23 and Table 1). This behavior was due to the fall
from 14.25 to 8.89% in the annual inflation of
agricultural and livestock products, which was driven
by a reduction from 12.63 to 3.44% in the inflation of
fruits and vegetables. The fall from 3.10% to 2.29%
in annual energy inflation, mainly attributed to a

|Chart 20 Consumer Price Index Annual percentage change|Col2|Col3|Col4|Col5|Col6|Col7|Col8|Col9|Col10|Col11|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|CPI|||||||||||
|||Core|||||||||
|||Non-core|||||||||
||||||||||||
||||||||||||
||||||||||||
||||||||||||
||||||||||||
||||||||||||
||||||||||||
||||||||||||
||||||||||||
||||||||||||
||||||||||||
||||||||||||
||||||||||||
|November|||||||||||


-----

reduction from -16.54% to -17.29% in the annual
variation of L.P. gas prices, also stood out.

**Chart 23**

**Non-core Price Sub-index**

Annual percentage change

25

20

15

10

5

0

-5

Non-core
Agricultural and livestock products

-10 Energy and government-authorized prices

November

-15

J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S

2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022

Source: Banco de México and INEGI.

Regarding inflation expectations drawn from the
survey conducted by Banco de México among
private sector specialists, between October and
November the median for headline inflation for the
end of 2022 decreased from 8.50 to 8.36%, while that
for core inflation rose from 8.29 to 8.37%. The
median of headline inflation expectations for the end
of 2023 was revised from 5.09 to 5.07%, while that
for core inflation increased from 5.01 to 5.06%. The
median of headline inflation expectations for the


medium term remained at 4.00%. The median of
headline inflation expectations for the long term (5 to
8 years) remained at 3.60% and for core inflation
continued at 3.55%. Finally, compensation for
inflation and inflationary risk decreased, although it
continues at high levels. Within it, expectations
implied by market instruments continued increasing,
while the inflation risk premium decreased, although
it remains at high levels.

Inflation is still projected to converge to the 3% target
during the third quarter of 2024. These projections
are subject to risks. On the upside: i) persistence of
core inflation at high levels; ii) external inflationary
pressures associated with the pandemic; iii)
pressures on agricultural and livestock product prices
and on energy prices due to the ongoing geopolitical
conflict; iv) exchange rate depreciation; and v)
greater cost-related pressures. On the downside: i) a
greater-than-anticipated slowdown of the world
economy; ii) a decline in the intensity of the
geopolitical conflict; iii) a better functioning of supply
chains; iv) a lower pass-through of some cost-related
pressures; and v) a larger-than-anticipated effect
from the Federal Government’s measures to fight
elevated prices. Although some shocks show signs
of subsiding, the balance of risks for the trajectory of
inflation within the forecast horizon remains biased to
the upside.


**Table 1**

**Consumer Price Index and Components**

Annual percentage change

**Item** **September 2022** **October 2022** **November 2022**

**CPI** **8.70** **8.41** **7.80**

**SubyacenteCore** **8.28** **8.42** **8.51**

**Merchandise** **10.84** **11.15** **11.28**

Food, beverages and tobacco 13.38 13.95 14.09

Non-food merchandise 8.00 8.03 8.13

**Services** **5.35** **5.30** **5.35**

Housing 3.15 3.14 3.11

Education (tuitions) 4.49 4.49 4.49

Other services 7.44 7.33 7.45

**No SubyacenteNon-core** **9.96** **8.36** **5.73**

**Agricultural and livestock products** **15.05** **14.25** **8.89**

Fruits and vegetablesFruits abd vegetables 14.18 12.63 3.44

Livestock productsLivestock 15.79 15.61 13.79

**Energy and government-authorized prices Energéticos y Tarifas Aut. por Gobierno** **5.88** **3.77** **3.23**

Energy productsEnergy 6.16 3.10 2.29

Government-authorized pricesTarifas Autorizadas por Gobierno 5.23 5.42 5.61

Source: INEGI.


-----

-----

