-----

-----

**FOREWARNING**
This document is provided for the reader’s convenience
only. The translation from the official Spanish version
was made by Banco de México’s staff. Discrepancies
may arise between the original document in Spanish
and its English translation. For this reason, the original
Spanish version is the only official document.


**1. PLACE, DATE AND PARTICIPANTS**

**1.1. Place: Meeting held by virtual means.**

**1.2. Date of Governing Board meeting: August 9,**
2023.

**1.3. Participants:**

- Victoria Rodríguez, Governor.

- Galia Borja, Deputy Governor.

- Irene Espinosa, Deputy Governor.

- Jonathan Heath, Deputy Governor.

- Omar Mejía, Deputy Governor.

- Rogelio Eduardo Ramírez, Secretary of Finance

and Public Credit.

- Gabriel Yorio, Undersecretary of Finance and

Public Credit.

- Eduardo Magallón, Alternate Secretary of the

Governing Board.

Prior to this meeting, preliminary work by Banco de
México’s staff analyzing the economic and financial
environment as well as the developments in inflation
and the determinants and outlook for inflation, was
conducted and presented to the Governing Board
(see Annex).

**2. ANALYSIS AND RATIONALE BEHIND THE**
**GOVERNING BOARD’S VOTING**

**_International environment_**

**Most members pointed out that the global**
**economy continued growing during the second**
**quarter. Some members stated that, although this**
occurred at a slower pace than in the previous
quarter, it was faster than expected. **One member**
mentioned that the above took place in an
environment of high uncertainty and of tightening of
global monetary conditions. **Most** **members**

**highlighted that the performance of the global**
**economy has been driven, in part, by the services**
**sector. In a related manner, some members stated**
that the favorable evolution of consumption

contributed to the resilience of economic activity.


**One member added the positive performance of**
investment in some countries. **Another member**
indicated that the normalization of global supply
chains has also supported world economic growth.

**Most members noted that economic growth**
**exhibits heterogeneity across regions. One**
member underlined that economic activity in the euro
area expanded marginally, while Latin American
countries recovered moderately. In contrast, **some**
members highlighted the resilience of the US
economy. **One member pointed out that economic**
activity figures in the United States have been higher
than expected. **Another considered that an**
unsynchronized deceleration among the various
sectors of the US economy has probably prevented
an abrupt weakening of aggregate activity, as some
sectors have been contracting while others have
been expanding. He/she added that this would be
associated with the asymmetric effects of the shocks
derived from the pandemic as well as with the various
lags with which monetary policy operates, affecting
industrial production faster and more notably than
tertiary activities.

**Some members stated that world growth prospects**
for 2023 continue implying a deceleration, although
slightly less intense than previously anticipated. One
member mentioned that, considering the recent
revisions, 3% growth is foreseen for both 2023 and
2024. **Another member pointed out that the**
expected slowdown would result, in part, from the
dissipation of the effects of the fiscal support
provided during the pandemic and the lagged impact
of tight monetary conditions; he/she highlighted that
this impact has been more apparent in the
manufacturing sector, mainly in advanced

economies. He/she mentioned that the balance of
risks to global economic activity remains biased to
the downside due to different factors, such as the
resurgence of concerns over the banking systems in
advanced economies and a greater-than-expected
weakness in the Chinese economy. **One member**
noted that favorable revisions to the growth outlook
for Asian economies, particularly for China, are not
foreseen.

In the case of the United States, **one member**
pointed out that growth forecasts have been revised
upwards during this year. However, another member
mentioned that the US economy is still expected to
slow down as of the third quarter. **Despite the**
**above,** **the** **majority** **considered** **that** **the**

**probability of an upcoming recession has**
**diminished. One** member indicated that, although
monetary policy is operating, the economy has

1


-----

adjusted more gradually than in other hiking cycles,
and thus, the perception that a soft landing could
materialize has increased.

Regarding global labor markets, **some members**
highlighted that these remain tight in several
countries. However, one member argued that labor
markets exhibit certain signs of a better balance
between supply and demand. He/she pointed out
that US non-farm payroll growth kept moderating,
while the labor force continued trending upwards.
He/she underlined that nominal wage growth has
stabilized in the United States, in contrast to the euro
area and the United Kingdom, where it is still trending
upwards.

**All members indicated that although headline**
**inflation** **continued** **decreasing** **in** **most**

**economies, it remains at high levels. Most**
**members highlighted that it still lies above**
**central bank targets in a large number of**
**economies. They attributed the decrease in**
**global headline inflation to lower pressures on**
**energy** **and** **food** **prices.** **Some** members

mentioned that, overall, inflation is expected to
converge to its target between 2024 and 2025. One
member stated that the convergence process is still
subject to high uncertainty. Most members
**highlighted that, globally, the core component**
**has shown resistance to decline.** **One member**
pointed out that this component continues exhibiting
persistence, which may still be reflecting effects of
the shocks from the pandemic, geopolitical tensions
and tight labor markets, which overall have led to a
pass-through of costs to consumers. Nevertheless,
**another member considered that there are a number**
of differentiated dynamics among economies.
He/she stated that, for example, in the United States,
lower contributions of services to core inflation have
been observed, while services inflation continues
trending upwards in the euro area.

Among the risks to the global inflation outlook, some
members mentioned the possibility of a surge in
international commodity prices, especially following
Russia's exit from the Black Sea grain export deal.
As an additional risk, **one member added the**
climate-related factors affecting various crops
around the world. In addition, he/she warned about
the possibility of disruptions in production chains,
especially of semiconductors, in view of the trade
tensions between China and the United States, and
in the context of a high demand for such inputs by the
technology sectors associated with artificial

intelligence.


**Most members pointed out that central banks of**
**the major advanced economies raised their**
**reference rates. All members mentioned as an**
**example the case of the US Federal Reserve and**
**some members of the European Central Bank. One**
member stated that the Bank of Japan adjusted its
yield curve control program, raising the upper limit for
its long-term interest rate. **Nevertheless, most**
**members considered that central banks in**
**advanced economies appear to be nearing the**
**end of their hiking cycles. They observed that**
**said authorities indicated that their subsequent**
**actions will be dependent on incoming data. One**
member highlighted that further interest rate
increases have not been ruled out. Another member
added that these institutions reiterated their
commitment to maintain high interest rates for an
extended period. As for emerging economies, some
members stated that in most of these economies the
monetary authorities left their reference rates
unchanged, while some adjusted them downwards.
**All members mentioned that the central banks of**
**Brazil and Chile lowered their reference rates in**
**response to specific macroeconomic conditions**
**in each economy. One member underlined that in**
both cases headline inflation has been declining.
He/she pointed out that in Brazil inflation has been
below 4.75% since March, which is the upper limit of
the tolerance band, whereas in Chile economic
activity has weakened considerably. **Another**
member noted that, although inflation in Chile has not
converged to the central bank’s target, as it has in
Brazil, the high level of unemployment and the
outlook for lower growth motivated the interest rate
cut. **One member stated that these economies**
typically have more pronounced monetary policy
cycles. Some members indicated that, in light of the
particular macroeconomic conditions faced by each
country, monetary policy is likely to remain
heterogeneous at a global level. **One member**
argued that this heterogeneity responds, in part, to
the focalization of the diverse monetary tightening
cycles.

**All members mentioned that, in its July meeting,**
**the US Federal Reserve increased the target**
**range of the federal funds rate by 25 basis points.**
**One member noted that this is consistent with the**
median of the most recent projections by the Federal
Open Market Committee (FOMC) members. **Some**
members highlighted that the chairman of that
institution argued that interest rate decreases would
take place once a sustained downward trend in
inflation is confirmed. **One member underlined that**
the chairman of that institution does not deem it
appropriate to make interest rate cuts this year.

2


-----

**Another** member pointed out that, in addition, he
indicated that they no longer expect a recession for
this year. **Some members stated that even an**
additional increase is possible during the remainder
of 2023.

**Most members pointed out that international**
**financial markets have recently registered**
**volatility. They explained that this volatility was**
**mainly caused by concerns regarding the fiscal**
**situation in the United States. Nevertheless, they**
**indicated that the downgrade in US credit ratings**
**had a moderate effect on markets. One member**
underlined that the revisions to expectations
regarding the end of the monetary authorities'
restrictive cycle in advanced economies also
contributed to the recent financial volatility. Some
members highlighted that financial markets’

sensitivity to economic data has increased due to the
data-dependent approach that a number of central
banks have stressed. **Most members underlined**
**the greater risk aversion and higher volatility**
**registered during the period. In this context, they**
**noted that long-term interest rates increased.**
**One member pointed out that the main stock market**
indices had mixed results. **Some members stated**
that the effects have also been felt in foreign
exchange markets. In this regard, **some members**
mentioned the recent appreciation of the US dollar.
In this context, one member forewarned that the high
levels of public debt accumulated after the pandemic,
along with tight financial conditions, could undermine
governments' ability to repay. He/she added that
further downgrades in sovereign credit ratings could
pose a risk to global economic growth and financial
stability.

**_Economic activity in Mexico_**

**All members highlighted that the Mexican**
**economy has shown resilience. Most members**
**pointed out that, according to GDP flash**
**estimates, the economy registered higher-than-**
**anticipated growth during the second quarter of**
**the year. One member added that this would imply**
an expansion for the seventh consecutive quarter,
something not seen since the end of 2015. **Most**
**members pointed out that said growth was driven**
**by the three major sectors of the economy. In**
**particular, they highlighted the performance of**
**industrial production and services.** **One member**
noted that growth was supported by domestic
spending. He/she underlined the contribution of
greater investment in public infrastructure projects
and growth in those subcomponents of services
which had lagged behind the most during the post

pandemic recovery process. **Another member**
highlighted that the services sector is the one that
has contributed to growth the most. **One member**
added that the performance of the components of
tertiary activities has been heterogenous. **Some**
members mentioned that the strong labor market has
also contributed to the favorable performance of
economic activity.

**Some** members attributed the favorable

performance of industrial production to a significant
increase in civil engineering construction projects.
**One member pointed out that this reflected the**
significant dynamism in public construction

associated with railway works. In contrast, he/she
mentioned that private sector construction shows
significant sluggishness and has not regained its prepandemic levels yet. **Another member pointed out**
that, within private construction, the industrial,
commercial and service construction sector has
recently improved. He/she considered that this
segment is the one that could best reflect the
nearshoring process. He/she mentioned that the
positive trend observed in credit for industrial parks
and warehouses suggests that said expansion could
continue. However, he/she stated that, although
manufacturing activity continues growing and
remains at high levels, it has recently lost momentum
influenced by the slowdown in US manufacturing
activity.

**Most members noted that domestic demand has**
**continued to grow. They stated that said**
**expansion has been supported by consumption.**
**One member pointed out that it has grown at a**
higher-than-anticipated rate. **Another** member

asserted that it is at historical highs. Regarding the
determinants of consumption, **one** member

mentioned that, although remittances in US dollars
remain at high levels, their value in Mexican pesos
and in real terms has decreased during the year, and
thus, in his/her opinion, this factor hardly explains the
current dynamism of household spending. In
contrast, he/she indicated that the strengthening of
the labor market could indeed be supporting
consumption, especially that of services. He/she
added that the National Survey of Household Income
and Expenditure (ENIGH, for its acronym in Spanish)
suggests that there has been a reallocation of
resources towards lower income deciles, which have
a higher marginal propensity to consume, possibly
contributing to a higher-than-expected growth in
domestic spending. **Most members stated that**
**investment maintained its pace of recovery. One**
member mentioned that there was a significant
reactivation of non-residential construction.

3


-----

**Some members highlighted that, during the second**
quarter of 2023, the value of exports decreased
slightly with respect to that observed in the previous
quarter. Despite the aforementioned, **some**

members noted that exports remain at high levels.
**One member argued that Mexico's increased share**
in US imports has offset the effects of the slowdown
in total US imports. **Another member stated that**
manufacturing exports have recovered from the
contraction observed at the beginning of the year.
**One member added that, in turn, imports exhibit solid**
growth in the components of consumer and capital
goods.

As for the risks to Mexican economic activity, some
members argued that these are balanced. **One**
member stated that on the one hand there is still a
possibility of a noticeable slowdown in the US
economy, particularly in 2024. On the other hand,
he/she considered that the reconfiguration of global
production chains could give a greater boost to
domestic economic activity. **Most** **members**

**highlighted that the estimate of the output gap**
**continues to narrow. One member noted that it is**
not statistically different from zero and **another**
member stated that the point estimate is virtually at
zero. One member added that it is anticipated to
remain close to zero during 2023 and 2024.

**All members pointed out that the labor market**
**continued to show strength. Most members**
**underlined the dynamism of employment and the**
**fact that the unemployment rate remains at**
**historic lows. One member mentioned that the labor**
force participation rate has returned to levels close to
those observed prior to the pandemic. **Another**
member added that an expanded measure of
unemployment that includes part-time workers and
individuals out of the labor market but who are
available for work is also at extremely low levels.
He/she indicated that the unemployment gap is
estimated to be negative and that over the past 10
months it has continued to widen. In this context,
**some members stated that the labor market remains**
tight. **Most members noted the relatively high**
**magnitude of wage revisions.** **Some members**
indicated that there was an increase in the growth
rate of real wages of IMSS-insured workers. **One**
member stated that such increase responds to the
disinflationary process and the stabilization of
nominal wages. **Another** member noted that
contractual wage revisions accelerated, particularly
in private sector companies. He/she added that the
estimate of the output gap practically at zero, along
with the strength of consumption and of the labor
market, do not only show an economy that is


resilient, but one that is actually vigorous and that the
strength of the labor market could be causing
pressures on the cost structure.

**_Inflation in Mexico_**

**Most members stated that the disinflation**
**process in Mexico remains underway as a result**
**of the mitigation of the shocks associated with**
**the pandemic and the military conflict. In this**
**regard, they highlighted the better functioning of**
**supply chains and the reduction in commodity**
**prices.** **They added that the appreciation of the**
**Mexican peso has contributed to ease price-**
**related pressures.** **Some members forewarned that**
this process has also relied on comparison base
effects.

**All members pointed out that, since the last**
**monetary policy meeting, headline inflation has**
**continued decreasing and registered 4.79% in**
**July. Some members indicated that it has decreased**
for six consecutive months. The majority pointed
**out that since September 2022, when it reached**
**its highest level in this inflationary episode, it had**
**already** **accumulated** **a** **reduction** **of** **3.91**

**percentage points, 2.82 of which are attributed to**
**non-core** **inflation.** **In** **this** **context,** **they**

**underlined that the latter component, which is**
**the most volatile, has contributed significantly to**
**the fall in headline inflation. Nevertheless,** **some**
members highlighted that the core component has
also contributed to the disinflationary process and
that its contribution has recently increased. **One**
member estimated that of the 2.06 percentage points
by which headline inflation has decreased over the
past four months, 1.05 are attributable to core
inflation.

**All members mentioned that after the decline in**
**core inflation since the last monetary policy**
**meeting, the core component registered 6.64% in**
**July. Some members highlighted that, since**
November 2022, when it reached its highest level
during this inflationary period, it has decreased by a
total of 1.87 percentage points, 1.45 of which took
place over the last four months. One member
considered that the latest figures have been positive
and confirm a downward trajectory of its annual
variation. He/she pointed out that the most recent
readings have been below the anticipated level.
He/she added that the seasonally adjusted

annualized monthly changes are already near the
upper limit of the variability interval. **Another**
member argued that the percentage of the core
consumption basket that displays a seasonally
adjusted annualized monthly inflation above 10%

4


-----

has been decreasing, from a maximum of about 50%
of the basket to only 6% in the latest data. However,
he/she noted that the share of the basket with
variations of less than 3% is still below its historical
average. He/she argued that this suggests that,
although progress has been made in the

disinflationary process, there is still a long road
ahead.

**Despite the decline in the core component, most**
**members highlighted that it remains at high**
**levels.** **One member stressed that the fundamental**
problem of the disinflationary process continues to be
the fact that core inflation is far from target. **Most**
**members pointed out that it exhibits a persistent**
**behavior. One member mentioned that, while said**
persistence may be, in part, due to shocks from the
pandemic and the geopolitical conflict, it may also
respond to a contamination of the price formation
process, as suggested by the increased frequency
and magnitude of price adjustments. He/she also
argued that, while external pressures on this
component have diminished, domestic pressures
have increased. He/she underlined that, in his/her
opinion, the latter are due, in part, to demand-related
pressures, higher inflation expectations, and to the
wage policy. He/she stated that the favorable
performance of private consumption is evidence of
demand-related pressures. He/she considered that
wage growth remains at levels that are not
compatible with the inflation target and warned that
wage dynamics do not show signs of moderation.
**Some members argued that this persistence would**
be reflecting the dynamics of services prices.

**Within core inflation, most members noted that**
**the merchandise component has continued to**
**decline.** **Some members considered that this has**
mirrored the mitigation of global shocks. **One**
member highlighted that merchandise inflation has
decreased for seven consecutive months. However,
**most members agreed that it still remains at high**
**levels.** **One member mentioned that annual food**
merchandise inflation is still close to double-digit
levels. **Most members considered that services**
**inflation still does not show a clear downward**
**inflection point.** **They underlined that it remains**
**high. One member pointed out that this is observed**
not only in Mexico but also in other economies.
**Another stated that, although it is above its historical**
mean, several of the shocks observed during the
year have not accumulated, as it occurred in 2021
and 2022. **One member delved into the fact that,**
since the last monetary policy decision, inflation of
services other than housing and education

decreased slightly. In this regard, another member


added that inflation of food services and of
transportation services remain at high levels. Some
members highlighted that inflation of education
services continues trending upwards. **One member**
indicated that this is also observed in housing
inflation.

**Most members argued that the normalization of**
**households’ consumption patterns has affected**
**the evolution of services inflation. Some**
members mentioned that the evolution of services
inflation has reflected the lagged effect of

accumulated cost-related pressures from global
shocks. One member stated that, while households
reallocated their spending from services to

merchandise at the beginning of the pandemic, the
demand for services has been growing insofar as the
population’s mobility has increased. He/she

considered that this process has taken time, as
evidenced by the slow recovery observed in the
activity indicators of entertainment and of food
preparation and temporary accommodation services.
Thus, these reflect the cost-related pressures which
accumulated in the context of the ongoing recovery
of demand that the sector is experiencing. Another
member considered that the high levels of services
inflation are not necessarily associated with domestic
pressures. He/she acknowledged that there is a
certain effect of the dynamism of the economy and of
the labor market on services prices, but he/she
considered that this effect does not appear to be of
sufficient magnitude to account for the high levels of
services inflation. He/she stated that, in any case,
these factors have contributed to the persistence of
core inflation, and that it is important to monitor them.
He/she added that, for the conduct of monetary
policy, it is necessary to appropriately distinguish the
factors behind the inflationary dynamics.

**Most members pointed out that in July non-core**
**inflation registered a negative annual variation**
**of -0.67%. They underlined that it is at historic**
**lows. They added that annual variations of less**
**than zero had not been observed in the past,**
**except at the beginning of the pandemic. One**
member highlighted the sharp decline in this
component since August 2022 when it registered
double-digit levels. He/she also emphasized the
significant reductions in energy inflation and in
agricultural and livestock goods' inflation during this
period. Another member considered that the decline
in non-core inflation is due to the mitigation of global
shocks. He/she stated that the significant fall in
energy prices, mainly of LP gas, and the low
agricultural and livestock product prices have
contributed to the disinflationary process.

5


-----

**All** **members** **highlighted** **that** **longer-term**

**inflation expectations drawn from surveys**
**remained stable at levels above target.** **One**
member pointed out that, although medium and longterm expectations increased slightly throughout this
inflationary episode, overall, these have remained
anchored. He/she pointed out that, despite their
positive performance, the distribution of these
expectations exhibits some bimodality, with a bias
towards high readings. He/she mentioned that this
phenomenon had already occurred in previous
episodes, and that it was corrected in due course.
However, **another member warned that medium-**
and long-term expectations remain above the target
and do not exhibit a downward trend. **Most**
**members** **mentioned** **that** **short-term**

**expectations decreased. One member considered**
that, although inflation expectations' readings have
improved, there is still work to do, and thus it is
important for monetary policy to continue contributing
to its improvement. **Another member pointed out**
that core inflation expectations for the end of 2024
are still above the upper limit of the target range.
Regarding expectations drawn from market

instruments, **one member stated that break-even**
inflation shows a downward trend due to the decline
in the inflation risk premium, which is below its
historical average. He/she mentioned that the
behavior of expectations is consistent with allowing
the disinflationary process to evolve as expected.

**Most members highlighted that Banco de**
**México’s forecasts continue anticipating that**
**inflation will converge to the 3% target in the**
**fourth quarter of 2024.** **One member mentioned**
that, for this meeting, headline inflation forecasts
remained practically unchanged. **Most members**
**underlined that those corresponding to core**
**inflation were revised marginally upwards for the**
**short term. One member pointed out that this**
revision was offset by a downward adjustment in the
forecast of the non-core component. **Another**
member highlighted that, at the margin, significant
improvements in core inflation figures must be
observed for annual rates to continue decreasing. In
this regard, he/she stated that core inflation could
remain beyond the target range longer than
expected. **Some members estimated that the base**
effect which has favored annual inflation will begin to
decrease towards 2024. In this regard, one member
noted that it can be anticipated that the convergence
process will face difficulties next year. **Another**
member pointed out that at this stage of the
disinflationary process it can be expected that the
speed at which the components of inflation decrease


will be heterogeneous, the process will be non-linear,
and inflation may rebound at certain moments.

**All members agreed that the balance of risks**
**regarding the expected trajectory for inflation**
**over the forecast horizon remains biased to the**
**upside. Among risks to inflation, they highlighted**
**the persistence of the core component at high**
**levels. Some members added as an upward risk the**
possibility of greater cost-related pressures, mainly
from the strong labor market and domestic demand.
**One member warned about the possibility that**
economic growth above 3% narrows the output gap
and leads to inflationary pressures. Another member
noted the risk of an exchange rate depreciation in
light of episodes of international financial volatility.
He/she stated that there is a risk of a correction in
markets’ expectations regarding the Federal

Reserve's future monetary policy stance, which could
affect the expected trajectory of the peso and,
therefore, the convergence of inflation to the target.
**One member added that insecurity and possible**
additional increases to the minimum wage could also
lead to cost increments for firms. Most members
**pointed out the risk of non-core inflation**
**increasing more than expected in the next**
**months.** **One member considered a matter of**
concern the expectation that the favorable dynamics
of the non-core component reverses in a context in
which core inflation is still at high levels. **Another**
member estimated that an additional risk derives
from the fact that, since the non-core component is
the main factor that has allowed the decline in
headline inflation, and since the inflation of this
subindex has reached its lowest historical point, it is
foreseeable that it will return to values in line with its
historical mean, which are more elevated than the
values forecasted by Banco de México, thus making
the convergence to the target more difficult. **One**
member stated that the high incidence of non-core
inflation on the improvement of the inflationary
outlook constitutes a structural weakness for
headline inflation dynamics. He/she mentioned the
risk of price-related pressures on agricultural and
livestock products due to the impact of the "El Niño"
meteorological phenomenon. **Another member**
noted that some elements that have favored the
convergence of inflation, such as the decline in
commodity prices and base effects, could contribute
less to such convergence towards the end of the
year. Some members stated that additional shocks
cannot be ruled out in view of a highly uncertain
environment. **Most members considered that, in**
**light of the risks, the improvement in the**
**inflationary outlook remains fragile.**

6


-----

**_Macrofinancial environment_**

Regarding financing in the economy, **one member**
pointed out that both total and domestic financing
continued increasing. **Most members noted that**
**bank consumer lending continued to expand.**
**One member associated the above with the strength**
of the labor market. Some members noted that credit
to firms also continued growing. However, **one**
member noted that its rate of expansion has
stabilized. He/she also indicated that the latest
information points to an increase in the demand for
bank lending, from both firms and households, and
to a decrease in the supply of bank lending for some
sectors. Looking ahead, he/she pointed out that the
demand for credit is expected to continue showing
dynamism and its supply, to continue exhibiting
heterogeneity, although it is not necessarily expected
that lending conditions will tighten. He/she

highlighted that firms and households continue
substituting liquid assets for long-term instruments.
**Another member underlined that delinquency rates**
remain at relatively low and stable levels.

**Most members highlighted that the Mexican peso**
**continued to display the resilient performance**
**that it has been presenting.** **One member pointed**
out that in July of this year the nominal exchange rate
reached levels unseen since December 2015, while
in real terms it reached levels similar to those
observed in May 2013. **Another member indicated**
that the peso has accumulated a gain of around 12%
in 2023. **Among the factors that have explained**
**the resilience of the national currency in the**
**medium run, most members mentioned the**
**volatility-adjusted domestic and foreign interest**
**rate** **spread,** **as** **well** **as** **Mexico's** **solid**

**macroeconomic** **fundamentals** **compared** **to**

**other emerging economies.** **Some members**
added that the positive outlook on the nearshoring
process has also contributed to the above. **One**
member noted the high inflow of remittances, the
weakening of the dollar, and the uncertainty about
the start of an easing cycle by the US Federal
Reserve.

**Some** members noted that recently domestic
financial markets registered volatility, in line with
global financial markets. **One member stated that,**
since the last policy meeting, the Mexican peso
traded in a wide range of around 80 cents, and
finished the period with a slight depreciation. **Most**
**members highlighted that, despite the recent**
**volatility associated with an increase in risk**
**aversion, trading conditions in the foreign**
**exchange market remained at adequate levels.**


**One member pointed out that long positions**
continued being taken on the Mexican peso in the
derivatives market, in order to take advantage of the
interest rate spread. He/she stated that this
accumulation is comparable in magnitude to
remittance flows during the quarter. He/she added
that non-resident investors took advantage of recent
exchange rate fluctuations to increase their positions
in _M-Bonos, which in turn contributed to limit the_
upward adjustment in the exchange rate. He/she
argued that, in a floating exchange rate regime,
exchange rate fluctuations work as an automatic
stabilizer by absorbing eventual shocks. He/she
noted that in such a regime, the authorities do not
aim for a certain exchange rate, but rather focus on
ensuring orderly trading conditions in the foreign
exchange market.

**Most members noted that long-term interest**
**rates on government bond yields rose as a result**
**of the recent episode of higher risk aversion. One**
member pointed out that the yield curve maintained
stable operating metrics. **Another member stated**
that the stock market declined during this period,
affected by the communications sector. **Some**
members indicated that one rating agency

downgraded Pemex's credit rating while another one
changed its outlook from stable to negative. **One**
member warned about the higher financial cost that
this company could face and the possible difficulties
to meet its short-term refinancing needs. He/she
argued that the multiple rating downgrades between
January 2019 and July 2023 signal the company's
recent financial deterioration. He/she mentioned that
the lack of investment in maintenance, the lack of
changes in its business strategy, and an outlook for
lower capital expenditures have increased its
dependence on federal resources, which could be a
risk to sovereign debt ratings. He/she added that the
Mexican banking system has significant exposure to
this company. Another member considered that the
downgrade of this company's rating had a limited
impact on domestic financial markets. He/she stated
that Mexico’s sovereign risk premia remained
practically unchanged.

**_Monetary policy_**

**The Governing Board evaluated the magnitude**
**and diversity of the inflationary shocks and their**
**determinants, along with the evolution of**
**medium- and long-term inflation expectations**
**and the price formation process. It considered**
**that the disinflationary process is underway**
**given that diverse pressures have eased.**
**Nevertheless, it deemed that these continue**

7


-----

**having an incidence on inflation, and thus it**
**remains high. Also, that the inflationary outlook**
**is still very complex. Based on the above, and**
**considering the monetary policy stance already**
**attained, with the presence of all its members, the**
**Board decided unanimously to maintain the**
**target for the overnight interbank interest rate at**
**11.25%. With this decision, the monetary policy**
**stance remains in the trajectory required for**
**inflation to converge to its 3% target within the**
**forecast horizon.**

**The Board will thoroughly monitor inflationary**
**pressures as well as all factors that have an**
**incidence on the foreseen path for inflation and**
**its expectations. It estimates that the inflationary**
**outlook will be complicated and uncertain**
**throughout the entire forecast horizon, with**
**upward risks. Thus, in order to achieve an orderly**
**and sustained convergence of headline inflation**
**to the 3% target, it considers that it will be**
**necessary to maintain the reference rate at its**
**current level for an extended period. The central**
**bank reaffirms its commitment with its primary**
**mandate and the need to continue its efforts to**
**consolidate an environment of low and stable**
**inflation.**

**One member highlighted that it is essential to**
continue with a very cautious approach, carefully
assessing the outlook for inflation and its

determinants. He/she underlined that since the last
monetary policy meeting, the disinflation process in
Mexico continued underway. However, he/she
warned that the outlook is still complex and
uncertain. He/she pointed out that although inflation
has decreased, its path towards the target is still
lengthy and faces significant challenges. For this
reason, he/she considered that the reference rate
must still remain at its current level for an extended
period. He/she stated that this will give more time for
the disinflationary process to continue and to become
more generalized among the inflation components.
He/she added that it will also allow to evaluate the
behavior of inflation determinants. He/she underlined
that the disinflation process responds to monetary
policy actions, as well as to the fading of the effects
of inflationary shocks. He/she highlighted that in this
episode, Banco de México's decisions have
contributed to the anchoring of inflation expectations,
especially longer terms ones. He/she pointed out
that, despite the magnitude of inflationary pressures,
such expectations have remained stable. He/she
added that monetary policy has also contributed to
the resilient performance of the Mexican peso, in an
environment of tight global monetary conditions.


He/she argued that the anchoring of longer-term
inflation expectations has prevented inflationary
shocks from leading to even higher inflation levels.
He/she stated that the behavior of the national
currency has also contributed to the disinflationary
process. He/she reiterated that this does not mean
that there is a target for the interest rate spread or for
the level of the exchange rate. He/she stated that,
although Banco de México takes into consideration
developments in international monetary policy, this is
merely one among many factors that are analyzed at
each meeting. He/she pointed out that central bank
decisions obey particular macroeconomic conditions
prevailing in each economy. He/she argued that due
to the above, there is currently a certain
heterogeneity in the decisions made by the monetary
authorities. He/she mentioned that, in the case of
Mexico, the central bank will continue making its
monetary policy decisions based on the country's
inflation outlook. He/she concluded by emphasizing
that, in accordance with its constitutional mandate,
the consolidation of an environment of price stability
must remain monetary policy’s priority. He/she
highlighted that this is for the benefit of the Mexican
population, especially the lower-income segments,
which are affected to a greater extent by the
regressive effects of the inflationary phenomenon.

**Another** **member considered that it is essential to**
preserve the achieved level of monetary tightening in
order to continue reducing inflation as expected and
to mitigate the upside risks to inflation. He/she
argued that the high uncertainty regarding the
inflationary process and a balance of risks biased to
the upside make it necessary to continue operating
cautiously, favoring a flexible monetary policy stance,
dependent on incoming data. He/she pointed out that
for this reason maintaining the level of monetary
restriction longer than expected or even that a further
tightening is required, cannot be ruled out. He/she
stated that the monetary policy statement should
acknowledge that the favorable evolution of inflation
has mainly responded to external factors and to the
non-core component, and that, on the contrary,
domestic pressures may hinder the convergence of
inflation to the target. He/she indicated that there are
two risk factors with significant implications for
monetary policy conduction in the short and medium
terms that urge caution against rushing with the
withdrawal of monetary restriction. He/she

mentioned as a first factor the accumulated lag in
physical investment and the fall in productivity, which
may have reduced the potential growth of the
economy. He/she estimated that, if this were the
case, inflationary demand pressures could

materialize even when traditional estimates of the

8


-----

output gap do not indicate an overutilization of
productive capacity. He/she noted as a second factor
Pemex's financial situation given its possible impact
on public finances, financial stability, and the
exchange rate. He/she stated that these two factors
reinforce the convenience of maintaining the
monetary policy stance in restrictive territory during
the entire planning horizon. He/she expressed that
this is a necessary condition not only to induce the
convergence of inflation to the target, but also to
manage the risks associated with such convergence.

**One** **member stated that, despite its improvement,**
the inflationary outlook continues facing domestic
and idiosyncratic risks and structural factors, which
calls for maintaining the current level of the reference
rate for an indefinite period. He/she considered that,
given the increasing domestic pressures on inflation,
monetary policy should continue considering the
international context as a secondary factor. In this
regard, he/she mentioned that there is still a wide
interest rate spread between Mexico and the United
States, and that global risks are contained. He/she
noted that although the exchange rate has
contributed to mitigate external price-related

pressures its level is not a goal in the decisionmaking process. He/she argued that the beginning of
monetary easing in some emerging economies
responds to contexts different from that of Mexico,
and therefore cannot be taken as a reference to
determine the central bank's policy stance. He/she
warned that in light of the still high level of headline
and core inflation expectations for 2024, it is
essential to stress that a restrictive stance will be
maintained to ensure the anchoring of inflation
expectations. He/she argued that it will be important
to monitor that the effects of this stance are fully
transmitted to the economy. He/she warned that
several analysts as well as markets are discounting
cuts in the reference rate before the end of 2023.
However, he/she pointed out that it is still premature
to consider a possible cut, even in the case of a finetuning to avoid an overly restrictive stance. He/she
noted that, for now, the further tightening of the
restrictive stance will continue through passive
monetary policy management. He/she estimated that
normalization towards a neutral stance is foreseen
beyond the forecast horizon. Finally, he/she
expressed that in the forward guidance, the period
during which the policy rate will remain in place must
still be characterized as extended, as such period
may cover the rest of the year. He/she stated that, for
this reason, it is essential that such guide signals that
the inflationary problem has not yet been resolved
and that it stresses the commitment to the primary
mandate of price stability.


**Another** **member considered that the disinflation**
process continues to advance, although some
elements that have worked in favor of convergence
may contribute less towards the end of the year, and
the balance of risks remains biased to the upside.
He/she pointed out that the nature of the observed
shocks starting with the pandemic has led to an
environment of high uncertainty which could extend
the lag with which monetary policy operates. He/she
noted that these lags are considerable and may not
be stable throughout the entire horizon. He/she
highlighted that the greater resilience of the economy
may suggest a more gradual transmission of
monetary policy onto domestic demand which
contributes to a slower decline in the core
component. He/she noted that the latter could be
explained, among other factors, by the normalization
of consumption patterns and the growth of tertiary
activities, which tend to be less sensitive to interest
rates than other sectors. He/she mentioned that the
better performance of the economy has also
contributed to ease tighter credit conditions and to
maintain the prices of various assets at high levels,
which has caused credit channels and asset prices
to operate slowly. He/she pointed out that, despite
this, monetary policy has tightened further through
both the increase in the ex-ante real interest rate and
the behavior of the real exchange rate. He/she
indicated that the level of restriction attained is
contributing to the anchoring of inflation expectations
and to the disinflationary process. However, he/she
argued that monetary restriction will still require an
extended period to be adequately transmitted and to
guarantee: the consolidation of an orderly and
sustained trajectory of inflation to the 3% target, a
neutral balance of risks around the inflation forecast,
and an adjustment of inflation expectations towards
their historical averages. Considering all of the
above, he/she deemed that the reference rate should
be maintained at its current level. He/she warned that
expectations implicit in the fixed income market
anticipate a cycle of cuts in the reference rate for
2024 similar to that of an economic crisis scenario,
which is not consistent with the expected behavior of
economic activity. He/she expressed that, in this
environment of high uncertainty, communication
must underline that the stance will continue to be
flexible and data-dependent in order to comply with
the constitutional mandate.

**One** **member considered that the solid stance**
adopted by Banco de México has contributed to the
disinflationary process. However, he/she noted that,
despite better inflation readings and its more
favorable outlook, there are elements that make it
convenient to continue with a cautious approach and

9


-----

maintain the reference rate at its current level for an
extended period. He/she argued that since there is a
stance consistent with inflation’s convergence and
monetary policy operates with lags, the effects of this
monetary tightening should be allowed to continue
having an incidence on the economy, which appears
to be operating at its potential. He/she considered
that the persistence of core inflation as well as the
fact that the balance of risks remains biased to the
upside, in an environment of high uncertainty, are an
important challenge, and thus new shocks cannot be
ruled out. Likewise, he/she stated that, although they
have remained anchored, inflation expectations are
still affected, and during this pause period,
improvements in their readings will continue to be
observed. He/she highlighted that this period will also
allow us to analyze the effects of the shocks
associated with the global inflationary episode on
how the economy operates, not only in the short
term, but also its possible impact in the long term.
He/she also stated that the level of restriction
attained is sufficiently robust in light of possible
adjustments in the stance relative to other
economies. He/she indicated that Banco de México's
timely and decisive actions have allowed it to
implement a more gradual tightening cycle than in
other emerging economies, but in a more timely
manner than in advanced economies. In this regard,
he/she stated that the pace of normalization of
monetary cycles is foreseen to be heterogeneous.
Regarding forward guidance, he/she highlighted that
it has allowed to transmit Banco de México's vision
of the inflationary outlook effectively. He/she added
that, without being too explicit, it has contributed to
strengthen the monetary policy stance. He/she
delved into the fact that, in view of the prevailing
uncertain and complex environment, a moderate and
effective use of forward guidance should be pursued,
in order for it to consolidate as a vehicle to facilitate
the understanding of monetary policy actions looking
ahead. He/she was of the opinion that it must be
communicated that currently it is not prudent to
discuss the possibility of cuts in the reference rate
and that it must stay at its current level for an
extended period, which will give time to see
substantial improvements in the inflationary outlook,


while fostering an orderly adjustment of the economy
and markets.

**3. MONETARY POLICY DECISION**

The Governing Board evaluated the magnitude and
diversity of the inflationary shocks and their
determinants, along with the evolution of mediumand long-term inflation expectations and the price
formation process. It considered that the

disinflationary process is underway given that
diverse pressures have eased. Nevertheless, it
deemed that these continue having an incidence on
inflation, and thus it remains high. Also, that the
inflationary outlook is still very complex. Based on the
above, and considering the monetary policy stance
already attained, with the presence of all its
members, the Board decided unanimously to
maintain the target for the overnight interbank
interest rate at 11.25%. With this decision, the
monetary policy stance remains in the trajectory
required for inflation to converge to its 3% target
within the forecast horizon.

The Board will thoroughly monitor inflationary
pressures as well as all factors that have an
incidence on the foreseen path for inflation and its
expectations. It estimates that the inflationary outlook
will be complicated and uncertain throughout the
entire forecast horizon, with upward risks. Thus, in
order to achieve an orderly and sustained
convergence of headline inflation to the 3% target, it
considers that it will be necessary to maintain the
reference rate at its current level for an extended
period. The central bank reaffirms its commitment
with its primary mandate and the need to continue its
efforts to consolidate an environment of low and
stable inflation.

**4. VOTING**

Victoria Rodríguez, Galia Borja, Irene Espinosa,
Jonathan Heath and Omar Mejía voted in favor of
maintaining the target for the overnight interbank
interest rate at 11.25%.

10


-----

**ANNEX**

The information in this Annex was prepared for this
meeting by the staff of Banco de México’s
Directorate General of Economic Research and
Directorate General of Central Bank Operations. It
does not necessarily reflect the considerations of the
members of the Governing Board as to the monetary
policy decision.

**A.1. External conditions**

**A.1.1. World economic activity**

Available indicators suggest that during the second
quarter of 2023 global economic activity expanded at
a more moderate pace than in the previous quarter,
although slightly faster than anticipated at the
beginning of the quarter. Global economic activity is
expected to have performed heterogeneously across
economies and sectors. In advanced economies, it
would have been similar to that of the previous
quarter, and in several of the main emerging
economies, it would have decelerated, with the case
of China standing out. Purchasing Managers' Indices
point to a continued expansion of services and a
weakness in global manufacturing activity at the
beginning of the third quarter (Chart 1). Among
global risks, the following stand out: the persistence
of inflationary pressures, the intensification of
geopolitical tensions, tighter financial conditions, and
to a lesser extent, challenges to financial stability.

In the United States, Gross Domestic Product (GDP)
grew at a seasonally adjusted quarterly rate of 0.6%
during the second quarter, after having increased
0.5% in the first quarter of the year. The expansion
during the second quarter was driven by private
consumption, business investment, government
spending, and inventory accumulation (Chart 2).[1]
The positive contributions of the above factors were
slightly offset by the negative impact of net exports
and residential investment.

1 Expressed as a seasonally adjusted annualized quarterly rate,
the change in US GDP was 2.4% in the second quarter and 2.0%
in the first quarter of 2023.


s.a./ Seasonally adjusted figures.
1/ The index varies between 0 and 100 points. A reading above 50 points
is considered an overall increase compared to the previous month and
below 50 points an overall decrease.
Note: The figures in the chart correspond to the respective minimum levels
of each indicator.
Source: IHS Markit.

**Chart 2**

**US Real GDP and Components**

Quarterly percentage rate and contribution

in percentage points, s. a.

3.0 Private consumption expenditures

Residential investment

2.5 Nonresidential investment

Change in private inventories

2.0 Net exportsGovernment consumption expenditures

Total

1.5

1.0

0.5

0.0

-0.5

-1.0

-1.5

-2.0

I II III IV I II III IV I II

2021 2022 2023

s. a./ Seasonally adjusted figures.
Source: BEA.

11


**Chart 1**

**Global: Purchasing Managers’ Index:**

**Production Component**

Diffusion index, s. a.[1/ ]


60

58

56

54

52

50

48

46

44

42

40

J

2017


J


-----

US industrial production contracted at a seasonally
adjusted monthly rate of 0.5% in June, after having
decreased 0.5% in May. The decline in June
reflected a decline in all of its components, with a
2.6% fall in electricity and gas generation standing
out. Manufacturing activity decreased 0.3%, mainly
as a result of a fall in non-durable goods and, to a
lesser extent, in that of durables. Non-residential
construction spending continued expanding during
the second quarter, particularly in the technology
sector. Purchasing Managers' Indices point to some
sluggishness in the manufacturing sector at the
beginning of the third quarter.

The US labor market remained tight even though
some indicators have shown signs of moderation.
The non-farm payroll continued expanding, albeit at
a more moderate pace, going from a job creation of
281 thousand new positions in May to 186 thousand
new positions on average per month in June and
July. The vacancy rate remained at levels that
suggest that the labor market remains tight. Initial
claims for unemployment insurance continued at low
levels. The unemployment rate remained low,
moving from 3.7% in May to 3.5% in July.

In the euro area, economic activity expanded
moderately in the second quarter of 2023. GDP grew
at a seasonally adjusted quarterly rate of 0.3%, after
having stagnated in the previous quarter.[2] Economic
activity, however, continued showing signs of
weakness in light of a sluggish domestic demand.
Moreover, the region's manufacturing activity
continued losing dynamism due to the moderation of
global demand and the tightening of financial
conditions. The services sector showed resilience,
although it has lost some dynamism. The

unemployment rate remained unchanged in June at
6.4%.

The main emerging economies are expected to have
registered heterogeneous GDP growth during the
second quarter of 2023. Emerging Asia grew at a
slower pace in most of its economies. In the case of
China, the pace of growth of economic activity
moderated in the second quarter of 2023. In
Emerging Europe, most economies are expected to
report a moderate expansion compared to the
previous quarter. In Latin America, economic activity
may have contracted in several countries.

2 Expressed as a seasonally adjusted annualized quarterly rate,
the change in euro area GDP was 1.1% in the second quarter and
0.1% in the first quarter of 2023.


International commodity prices registered a mixed
performance since Mexico's previous monetary
policy decision. Oil prices trended upwards starting
in July, as a result of the announcements of the
extension of oil production cuts in Saudi Arabia and
some other members of the Organization of the
Petroleum Exporting Countries and allied countries
(OPEC+), as well as the reduction of commercial
crude inventories in the United States, among other
factors. In Europe, natural gas reference prices
exhibited volatility throughout the period, although in
early August they were below the level registered at
the time of Mexico's previous monetary policy
decision. In the United States, they increased in
response to warmer-than-anticipated weather

conditions, a decrease in wind energy production in
June, and a reduction in inventories. Grain prices
were highly volatile during the period. Although the
non-ratification of the agreement known as the Black
Sea Grain Initiative drove prices significantly higher,
they were subject to downward pressures

subsequently due to improved rainfall forecasts as
well as larger-than-expected harvests of corn in the
United States and of wheat in Argentina. As a result,
at the beginning of August, said prices were below
the levels registered at the beginning of the period
since the last monetary policy decision. Finally,
industrial metal prices trended upwards during most
of the period. This was mainly associated with a
decline in metal production in Europe. However, at
the beginning of August, prices were subject to
downward pressures, in a context of concerns
regarding demand from China and the accumulation
of inventories in that country.

**A.1.2. Monetary policy and international financial**
**markets**

Headline inflation continued decreasing in most
major economies, although it remains at elevated
levels and above central banks' targets in most
cases. Lower energy price pressures contributed to
the reduction, with this item’s inflation even reaching
negative levels in several economies as a result, in
part, of a base effect. The fall in inflation also
reflected, to a lesser extent, lower food inflation.
Core inflation continued showing a resistance to
decline. The normalization of global supply chains
has contributed to the decline in core inflation.

In most of the major advanced economies, headline
inflation declined (Chart 3). Core inflation also

12


-----

declined, although in several cases to a lesser extent
than headline inflation. The most recent headline and
core inflation readings in several major advanced
economies were below the levels expected by
analysts. In the United States, headline inflation
measured by the personal consumption expenditure
deflator fell from an annual rate of 3.8% in May to
3.0% in June, remaining at levels above the 2%
inflation target. This reflected a decline in food and
core inflation. The fall in the annual variation of the
latter was smaller, from 4.6 to 4.1% during the same
period, as a result of a decline in inflation of both
goods and services. Headline inflation measured by
the consumer price index fell in annual terms from
4.0% in May to 3.0% in June. During the same
period, annual core inflation also fell, from 5.3 to
4.8%.

Analysts' short-term inflation forecasts have

remained relatively stable for most major advanced
economies, although increases have been observed
in some cases. However, they continue forecasting
a moderation of headline inflation in 2023 from the
levels registered in 2022, although inflation would
remain at levels above their central banks' targets.
Longer-term inflation expectations for these

economies derived from financial instruments
remained relatively stable with respect to the levels
registered at the end of June.

In most of the major emerging economies, annual
headline inflation also declined. It remains above
their central banks' targets in most cases. In cases
such as Brazil, South Africa, India, Thailand,
Indonesia and China, inflation is within the variability
range considered by each central bank or below their
point targets. In the case of China, annual headline
inflation remained at low levels, decreasing from
0.2% in May to 0.0% in June, and to -0.3% in July.
Core inflation decreased gradually in most of the
major emerging economies.


12

United States PCE 1/

10 United States CPI

Japan

8 Euro area 2/

United Kingdom

6

Canada

4

2 June

July

0

-2

J J J J J J J J J

2019 2020 2021 2022 2023

1/ The personal consumption expenditure deflator is used.
2/ Preliminary figures for July.
Source: Bureau of Economic Analysis, Bureau of Labor Statistics, Eurostat,
Bank of Japan, The UK Office for National Statistics and Statistics Canada.

In this environment, since Mexico's previous
monetary policy decision, the central banks of the
main advanced and emerging economies have
made adjustments to their monetary policy reference
rates in a heterogeneous manner, depending on the
evolution of inflation and other economic indicators
that, in turn, have shown differences among
countries. Central banks of the major advanced
economies increased their reference rates,

underlining that future rate adjustments would be
dependent on incoming data. In particular, in July,
the US Federal Reserve increased its interest rate
again, after leaving it unchanged in June. The central
banks of Norway and the United Kingdom
accelerated the pace of hikes in their June decision.
However, in its most recent decision, the Bank of
England returned to its previous pace of hikes. The
central banks of Sweden and Switzerland decreased
their pace of adjustments, while the Bank of Canada
and the European Central Bank maintained them.
The central banks of Australia and New Zealand left
their interest rates unchanged in their most recent
decisions, after having raised them on previous
occasions. The central banks of Korea and Japan
continued leaving them unchanged. However, the
Bank of Japan announced modifications in the
conduct of its yield curve control in the long-term
segment. The latter, in order to improve the
sustainability of its monetary easing, helping to
improve functionality and reduce volatility in financial

13


**Chart 3**

**Selected Advanced Economies:**

**Headline Inflation**

Annual percentage change


-----

markets.[3] As for their asset purchase programs,
most central banks in this group of economies
continued to gradually reduce their securities’
holdings. Regarding expectations on reference rates
for most major advanced economies, based on the
latest available information, interest rates implicit in
interest rate swap curves (OIS) are expected to
remain at elevated levels for the rest of 2023 for most
of these economies (Chart 4).

**Chart 4**

**Reference Rates and Trajectories**

**Implied in OIS Curves[ 1/]**

Percent

7 **―― US Federal Reserve 2/ Bank of England** End of 2022 End of 2023 End of 2024

6 **― Bank of Japan**

**― European Central Bank deposit rate**
**― OIS implicit trajectory Aug 9, 2023**

5 **--- OIS implicit trajectory Jun 22, 2023**

4

3

2

1

Forecasts

0

-1

2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 2024

1/ OIS: Fixed floating interest rate swap where the fixed interest rate is
associated with the effective overnight reference rate.
2/ For the observed reference rate of the US, the average interest rate of
the target range of the federal funds rate (5.25%- 5.50%) is used.
Source: Banco de México with data from Bloomberg.

Regarding recent monetary policy decisions in the
United States and the euro area, the following stand
out:

i) After having left the target range for the federal

funds rate unchanged in its June decision, the US
Federal Reserve increased it by 25 basis points
(bps) at its July meeting, at 5.25-5.50%. It also
continued reducing the size of its balance sheet.
It reiterated that it will continue evaluating new
information and that, in determining the degree of
additional tightening that may be appropriate, it
will consider the cumulative tightening of
monetary policy, the lags with which it affects
economic activity, inflation, and economic and
financial developments. It highlighted that tighter
credit conditions are likely to affect economic
activity, employment and inflation, although it

3 The Bank of Japan stated that it will continue to allow 10-year
Japanese government bond (JGB) yields to fluctuate in a range of
around +/-0.5 percentage points from the target level, while
conducting yield curve control with greater flexibility, considering
the upper and lower limits of the range as references, rather than


added that the extent of these effects remains
uncertain. During a press conference, the
chairman of that institution indicated that the
Committee estimates that monetary policy is at a
restrictive level and expects it to remain that way
for some time until there is confidence that
inflation is declining in a sustained manner. In this
regard, he mentioned that at its next meeting they
could announce either a pause or an increase in
the reference rate. He also stated that no interest
rate cuts are expected this year and that a
data-dependent stance will be maintained. Based
on the latest available information, expectations
drawn from financial instruments anticipate that
the highest interest rate level will be observed
during the third quarter of 2023, when it will reach
around 5.5%, and then subsequently decrease to
levels of 5.3% by the end of the first quarter of
2024 and to 4.3% by the end of that same year.

ii) The European Central Bank (ECB) maintained

the pace of its reference rate hikes by announcing
an increase of 25 bps in July. Its refinancing, key
lending and key deposit rates stood at 4.25, 4.50
and 3.75%, respectively. It also stated that
subsequent decisions by the Governing Council
will ensure that the ECB's monetary policy rates
are set at sufficiently restrictive levels for as long
as necessary to achieve a timely return of
inflation to its medium-term objective of 2%. The
Council also decided to set the remuneration of
minimum reserves at 0% as of September 20,
which they hope will improve the efficiency of
their monetary policy by reducing the total
amount of interest to be paid on reserves. During
a press conference, the president of that
institution indicated that the economic data will
determine whether at its next meeting in
September an increase in reference rates or a
pause in their adjustments will take place.
Regarding its securities' holdings, the ECB
suspended reinvestments under the Asset
Purchase Program (APP) as of July 2023.

Since Mexico’s last monetary policy decision, in the
main emerging economies most central banks left
their interest rates unchanged. Several of them
suggested that future adjustments will depend on the
evolution of economic indicators. The central banks
of Brazil and Chile announced interest rate cuts.
Meanwhile, those of Russia and Turkey raised their

rigid limits, in its market operations. The Bank raised the interest
rate at which it will offer to purchase 10-year JGBs every business
day through fixed-rate purchase transactions from 0.5 to 1.0%,
unless no bids are likely to be submitted.

14


-----

interest rates again after having left them unchanged
in previous decisions.

International financial markets showed, in general,
greater stability during most of the period. However,
starting in August, an increase in volatility was
observed due to, among other factors, concerns
regarding the fiscal position in the United States. The
latter was associated with the US government's
announcement to increase sovereign debt issuance
and with a downgrade of its debt rating by one of the
main rating agencies. In this environment, since
Mexico’s last monetary policy decision, global
financial conditions registered moderate changes
(Chart 5). Stock markets registered mixed results
across countries. In foreign exchange markets, the
US dollar strengthened slightly against major
advanced economies' currencies in the first weeks of
the reporting period, although it reversed this trend
in the first half of July. More recently, it has
strengthened again, appreciating in early August
from its level at the beginning of the reference period.
The currencies of emerging economies performed
positively against the dollar during most of the
period, which recently reversed marginally in light of
the increased risk aversion associated with the
aforementioned factors. The greater risk aversion
also contributed to the increase in government bond
interest rates in most of the major advanced
economies (Chart 6). Similarly, in most emerging
economies, an increase in long-term interest rates
was observed (Chart 7). Since Mexico's previous
monetary policy decision, cumulative net capital
inflows to emerging economies have been

registered. However, flows exhibited a differentiated
behavior among asset classes, with cumulative net
inflows to equity assets and moderate outflows from
fixed-income assets during most of the period.


103

102

101

100


**Chart 5**

**Financial Conditions Indices[1/]**

Units

Tightening

Easing

J J      J      J      J     J      J      J


Financial Conditions Index - Global
Financial Conditions Index - United States
Financial Conditions Index for Euro area 2/

Source: Prepared by Banco de México with data from Bloomberg and
Goldman Sachs.
1/ The financial conditions index is constructed considering the effect of five
variables on economic activity: the reference interest rate, the 10-year
government bond, the spread of investment-grade bonds over the
government debt bond with equivalent maturity, the ratio of a stock index
with 10-year average earnings per share, and the trade-weighted exchange
rate.
2/ In the case of the euro area, the spread between the sovereign bonds of
France, Italy, Spain, the Netherlands, Belgium, Austria, Portugal and
Finland over the German 10-year bond is also considered. The vertical
black line indicates the last calendarized monetary policy meeting of Banco
de México.


**Chart 6**

**Change in Selected Financial Indicators**

**from June 22 to August 9, 2023**

Percent; basis point

5.0%


40

20


2.5%


0.0%

-2.5%


0

-20


-5.0%


-40


Source: Bloomberg and ICE. 1/ MSCI Emerging Markets Index, which
includes 24 countries. 2/ DXY: a weighted average estimated by the
Intercontinental Exchange (ICE) of the nominal exchange rate of the main
six currencies operated globally with the following weights: EUR 57.6%,
JPY: 13.6%, GBP: 11.9%, CAD: 9.1%, SEK: 4.2%, and CHF: 3.6%.

15


-----

**Chart 7**

**Selected Emerging Economies: Financial**

**Assets Performance as of June 16, 2023**

Percent, basis points Percent, basis points

**Equity** **Interest** **Interest**
**Region** **Country** **Currencies** **CDS**

**markets** **rates 2Y** **rates 10Y**

**Mexico** **0.19%** **-1.55%** **-5** **24** **-1**

**Brazil** **-1.30%** **0.63%** **-86** **-38** **-10**

**Latin**

**Chile** **-7.22%** **9.63%** **-135** **33** **-11**

**America**

**Colombia** **2.32%** **-0.31%** **-23** **-29** **-31**

**Peru** **-1.60%** **4.73%** **3** **-19** **-7**

**Russia** **-14.76%** **10.41%** **-29** **-42** **N.A.**

**Poland** **1.47%** **5.34%** **-51** **-50** **-5**

**Emerging**

**Turkey** **-14.24%** **35.16%** **200** **211** **-85**

**Europe**

**Czech Rep.** **-1.24%** **3.19%** **-1** **-20** **-2**

**Hungary** **-3.49%** **7.84%** **-18** **38** **-8**

**China** **-0.83%** **0.45%** **-6** **-2** **-3**

**Malaysia** **1.19%** **4.08%** **3** **14** **-10**

**India** **-0.99%** **3.69%** **11** **15** **-2**

**Asia**

**Philippines** **-0.30%** **-0.88%** **38** **47** **-9**

**Thailand** **-0.50%** **-1.86%** **12** **2** **-6**

**Indonesia** **-1.67%** **2.30%** **26** **5** **-5**

**Africa** **South Africa** **-2.07%** **-2.00%** **-48** **-23** **-18**

Note: An upward adjustment indicates currency appreciation. Interest rates
correspond to swap rates at the specified terms, except for Hungary, where
government securities with 3-year maturities were used as a reference. For
the Philippines, a 2-year swap rate was used, and for Russia, 2-year and
3-year swap rates were used. The latest CDS data for Russia is as of June
Source: Bloomberg.

**A.2. Current situation of the Mexican economy**

**A.2.1. Mexican markets**

In the international context described above, the
Mexican peso maintained an appreciation trend
against the US dollar observed since Mexico's last
monetary policy decision, despite the temporary
interruption registered at the beginning of August
due to the downgrading of the US credit rating and
the announcement of debt issuance by the US
government. Long-term interest rates were adjusted
slightly upwards (Chart 8). This was accompanied by
a moderate increase in volatility, mainly in the foreign
exchange market.


**Chart 8**

**Mexican Markets’ Performance**

Percent, MXN/USD and index


11.6

11.2

10.8

10.4

10.0

9.6

9.2

8.8

8.4


16.6


19.6

19.1


18.6

18.1


17.6

17.1


56,000

55,000

54,000

53,000

52,000

51,000

50,000

49,000

48,000


M-bono


5.8

5.5

5.2

4.9

4.6

4.3

4.0

3.7

Inflation-indexed bonds


Range in 2023 Range since previous monetary policy Jun16,2023 Aug04,2023

decision

Source: Prepared by Banco de México.

The Mexican currency traded in a range of 0.80
pesos, between 16.62 and 17.42 pesos per US dollar
since the previous monetary policy decision. During
the period, it appreciated marginally by 0.20%, and
reached its lowest level since December 2015 (Chart
9).

**Chart 9**

**Mexican Peso Exchange Rate**

MXN/USD


Range in 2023 Range since previous monetary policy Jun16,2023 Aug04,2023


26


J J         J         J         J         J          J         J
2020             2021             2022             2023

Source: Prepared by Banco de México.


16


-----

Interest rates on government securities registered
mixed results, with some increases in medium- and
longer-term nodes and limited decreases in shortterm ones (Chart 10). The yield curve of real rate
instruments exhibited generalized increases of up to
22 bps. In this context, breakeven inflation implicit in
spreads between nominal and real interest rates of
market instruments increased moderately for most
terms (Chart 11). These movements took place in an
environment in which trading conditions remained
relatively stable, compared to other periods of
uncertainty.

**Chart 10**

**Nominal Yield Curve of Government Securities**

Percent, basis points

12.00 30

25

11.50

#REF! 20

11.00

15

10.50

10

10.00 5

0

9.50

-5

9.00

8.50

8.00

June-16 2023 August-4 2023 Change (June-16 2023 to August-4 2023)

Trading range over the period

Source: PIP.

**Chart 11**

**Breakeven Inflation and Inflation Risk**

**Implied in Government Securities’ Yields**

Basis points

600

550

500

450

400 3-year

10-year

350 20-year

30-year
3-year average

300 10-year average

20-year average
30-year average

250

J J           J          J          J           J

2021                     2022                    2023

Source: PIP.


Regarding expectations for the path of the monetary
policy reference rate, information implicit in the
interest rate swaps curve does not incorporate any
adjustment for the August decision, anticipating a 25bp cut between November and December 2023
(Chart 12). Most analysts surveyed by Citibanamex
anticipate that the reference rate will remain
unchanged in the August decision. The median of
these analysts expects a reference rate of 11.00%
for the end of 2023.

**Chart 12**

**Interbank Funding Rate Implied in TIIE Swaps**

PercentPercent

12.50 Banxico overnight rate (reference rate)

11.50 Implied interest rate in TIIE swaps for 08/04/23

10.50 Implied interest rate in TIIE swaps for 06/16/23

9.50

8.50

7.50

6.50

5.50

4.50

3.50

J J         J J         J        J

2021               2022               2023

Note: Shaded areas represent the range since the last monetary policy
decision.
Source: Prepared by Banco de México with Bloomberg data.

**A.2.2. Economic activity in Mexico**

According to Mexico’s GDP flash estimate published
by INEGI, during the second quarter of the year the
country’s economic activity increased its rate of
expansion at a pace similar to that of the previous
quarter (Chart 13). Thus, it has displayed resilience
and growth at a greater-than-expected pace.

During April-May 2023, private consumption

decelerated due to a contraction in the consumption
of domestic goods and to a lower dynamism in the
consumption of services. Consumption of imported
goods continued trending markedly upwards. Gross
fixed investment increased significantly. This can be
attributed to the outstanding performance of both
non-residential construction and investment in
imported machinery and equipment. As for external
demand, between April and June, the value of
manufacturing exports contracted slightly with
respect to the first quarter, reflecting a fall in
automotive exports and certain sluggishness in the
rest of manufacturing exports (Chart 14).

17


-----

**Chart 13**

**Gross Domestic Product**

Quarterly percentage change, s. a.


6

13.17

4

2

0

-2

-4

-17.81 Q-II 1/

-6

I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV I II

2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023

s. a. / Seasonally adjusted figures. The chart’s range was adjusted to
facilitate its reading.
1/ The figure for the second quarter of 2023 refers to the timely estimate
of quarterly GDP published by INEGI.
Source: Mexico’s System on National Accounts (SCNM, for its Spanish
acronym), INEGI.


contrast, manufacturing of transportation equipment
continued showing dynamism.

**Chart 15**

**Global Indicator of Economic Activity**

Indices 2019 = 100, s. a.

110

105

100

95

90 Total

Secondary activities

85 Tertiary activities 80.2

Primary activities 77.8 May

70.8 May

80

J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M

2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023

s. a. / Seasonally adjusted and trend series. The former is represented by
a solid line and the latter by a dotted line. The range of the chart was
narrowed to facilitate reading.
Source: Mexico’s System of National Accounts (SCNM, for its Spanish
acronym), INEGI.

**Chart 16**

**Industrial Activity [1/]**

Indices 2019 = 100, s. a.

120

110

100

90

Total

80

Mining (22.3%)

Manufacturing (49.7%)

70


**Chart 14**

**Manufacturing Exports**
Indices 2019 = 100, s. a.


140

120

100

80

60

40

J

2017


A J


s. a. / Seasonally adjusted series and trend series based on data in nominal
US dollars. The former is represented by a solid line and the latter by a
dotted line. The chart’s range was adjusted to facilitate its reading.
Source: Prepared by Banco de México with data from the Tax
Administration Service (SAT, for its Spanish acronym), the Ministry of the
Economy (SE, for its Spanish acronym), Banco de México, the National
Institute of Statistics and Geography (INEGI, for its Spanish acronym).
Mexico’s Merchandise Trade Balance, and the National System of
Statistical and Geographical Information (SNIEG, for its Spanish acronym),
Information of national interest.

On the production side, during the bimester
April-May 2023, services continued to expand (Chart
15) as a result of growth in most of its sectors.
Industrial activity increased, mainly due to a
significant rebound in construction in April (Chart 16).
Manufacturing exhibited weakness. Regarding its
components, manufacturing excluding transportation
equipment continued trending downwards. In

|Indices 2019 =|100, s. a.|
|---|---|
|Total Automotive Non-automotive 10.3|June|
|J A J O J A J O J A J O J A 017 2018 2019 2020 / Seasonally adjusted series and tren ollars. The former is represented b|J O J A J O J A J O J A 2021 2022 2023 d series based on data in nomin y a solid line and the latter by|


J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M

2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023

s. a. / Seasonally adjusted and trend series. The former is represented by
a solid line and the latter by a dotted line.
1/ Figures in parenthesis correspond to their share in the total in 2013.
Source: Mexico’s System of National Accounts (SCNM, for its Spanish
acronym), INEGI.

Regarding the cyclical position of the economy, as a
result of the growth of economic activity during the
second quarter of 2023, the point estimate for the
negative output gap was close to zero during said
period (Chart 17). The labor market remained strong.
At the end of the second quarter, the national and
urban unemployment rates decreased at the margin,
reaching new historical lows (Chart 18). Seasonally
adjusted figures show that the creation of IMSS
18


60


Utilities (4.7%) May


-----

insured jobs continued trending upwards in July,
although with some deceleration. Finally, in May
2023, unit labor costs in the manufacturing sector
increased at the margin, remaining above the
average level of 2022 (Chart 19).

**Chart 17**

**Output Gap Estimates [1/]**

Percent of potential output, s. a.

12

8

4

0

-4

-8

-12

Global Economic Activity

-16 Index (IGAE) 2/

Gross Domestic Product 2/

-20 Q-II

95% confidence interval 3/ June

-24

J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M J

2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023

s. a. / Calculations based on seasonally adjusted figures.
1/ Output gap estimated with a tail-corrected Hodrick-Prescott filter; see
Banco de México (2009), “Inflation Report, April-June 2009”, p.74
2/ GDP flash estimate up to Q2-2023 and IGAE implicit up to June 2023,
consistent with said timely figure.
3/ Output gap confidence interval calculated with a method of unobserved
components.
Source: Prepared by Banco de México with INEGI data.

**Chart 18**

**National and Urban Unemployment Rates**

Percent, s. a.

6.5

Urban unemployment rate

6.0

National unemployment rate

5.5

5.0

4.5

4.0

3.5

3.0

2.5

June

2.0

J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J

2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023

s. a. / Seasonally adjusted and trend series. The former is represented by
a solid line and the latter by a dotted line.
Source: Prepared by Banco de México with data from ENOE, ETOE (from
April to June 2020), and ENOE new edition (ENOE[N]) from July to date.


125

Unit labor costs 143.4

120

Productivity

115

110

105

100

95

90

May

85

J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M

2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023

s. a. / Seasonally adjusted and trend series. The former is represented by
a solid line and the latter by a dotted line. The range of the chart was
narrowed to make it easier to read.
1/ Productivity based on hours worked.
Source: Prepared by Banco de México with seasonally adjusted data of the
Monthly Manufacturing Industry Survey and industrial activity indicators of
Mexico’s System of National Accounts (Sistema de Cuentas Nacionales de
México, SCNM), INEGI.

In June 2023, domestic financing to non-financial
private firms continued to expand, registering a
positive real annual variation for four consecutive
quarters. Debt issuance in the domestic market
increased during the quarter, thus continuing the
recovery observed since the second half of 2022.
The bank lending component continued increasing,
although its annual growth rate has stabilized in
recent months (Chart 20). This occurred in a context
in which the demand of firms for loans continued
increasing, particularly among larger firms. In
contrast, lending standards did not change

significantly during the quarter and thus remained
relatively tight.

As for lending to households, in June 2023
commercial bank housing portfolio continued

increasing its rate of expansion. Performing loans to
consumption grew at a faster rate and continued to
be the segment with the highest dynamism. In this
regard, the survey conducted on banks showed a
sustained increase in the demand for consumer
credit, especially in the credit card segment.

19


-----

**Chart 20**

**Performing Credit from Commercial Banks**

**to the Non-financial Private Sector**

Annual percentage change

15

10

5

0

-5

Consumption

-10 Mortgages 1/

2/

Non-financial private firms

-15

June

-20

J J J J J J J J J J J J J

2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023

1/ Adjusted to account for the withdrawal from and the incorporation of nonbank financial intermediaries to the credit statistics.
2/ Adjusted for valuation effects due to movements in the exchange rate.
Source: Banco de México.

In June 2023, bank lending interest rates remained
relatively stable and thus remained at high levels.
Corporate credit intermediation margins remained,
overall, below those observed prior to the pandemic.
However, in June they increased for smaller firms.
Interest rates on mortgages remained relatively low.
As for consumer credit, credit card interest rates
have been increasing. Finally, interest rates for
payroll loans have remained relatively stable since
August 2021.

As for portfolio quality, in June 2023 corporate and
mortgage delinquency rates remained stable with
respect to those observed in the previous month and
thus continued at low levels. Finally, consumer
portfolio delinquency rates increased, although they
remain below pre-pandemic levels.


**A.2.3. Development of inflation and inflation**
**outlook**

Annual headline inflation decreased from 5.06 to
4.79% between June and July 2023. This
performance was due to the reduction in both core
and non-core inflation (Chart 21 and Table 1).

**Chart 21**

**Consumer Price Index**

Annual percentage change

14
13 CPI
12 Core
11 Non-core
10

9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0

-1
-2 July
-3

J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M

2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023

Source: INEGI.

Between June and July 2023, annual core inflation
declined from 6.89 to 6.64%. As for its components,
annual merchandise inflation continued decreasing,
from 8.26 to 7.82% during the same months (Chart
22). Food merchandise inflation remained at high
levels, although it decreased from 10.49 to 9.79%
during the referred period, while that of non-food
merchandises declined slightly from 5.70 to 5.54%
between the referred months (Chart 23). Annual
services inflation decreased marginally from 5.25 to
5.24% between June and July. The annual variation
of prices of services other than education and
housing declined from 6.66 to 6.61% during the
same period, a behavior mainly associated with a
reduction in the annual variation of food preparation
prices. The annual inflation of education services
increased from 4.85 to 4.92%, while that of housing
remained at 3.66%.

20


-----

**Chart 22**

**Merchandise and Services Core Price Subindex**

Annual percentage change

12

Merchandise

11 Services

10

9

8

7

6

5

4

3

2


**Chart 24**

**Non-core Price Sub-index**

Annual percentage change


M S J

2018


1

0

J M S J

2017 2018

Source: INEGI.


25

20

15

10

5

0

-5

-10

-15

J

2017


M S J

2019


M S J

2020


M S J

2021


M S J

2022


M S J

2023


M


16

14

12

10

8

6

4

2

0

J

2017


M S J

2018


July

S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M

2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023

**Chart 23**

**Merchandise Core Price Subindex**

Annual percentage change

Food, beverages and tobacco
Non-food merchandise

July


M S J

2019


M S J

2020


M S J

2021


M S J

2022


M S J

2023


M


Source: INEGI.

Annual non-core inflation declined from -0.36 to
-0.67% between June and July 2023 (Chart 24 and
Table 1). This result was influenced by the decrease
from -6.95 to -7.82% in the annual inflation of energy,
which is associated in turn with the reduction from
-32.05 to -34.87% in the annual variation of LP gas
prices. The annual inflation of agricultural and
livestock products increased from 2.89 to 3.16%
during the same period.


Source: INEGI.

Regarding inflation expectations drawn from the
survey conducted by Banco de México among
private sector specialists, between May and July
2023 the median for headline inflation at the end of
2023 decreased from 5.02 to 4.60%, while that for
the core component shifted from 5.40 to 5.20%. The
median for headline inflation expectations for the end
of 2024 declined from 4.07 to 4.03%, while that for
the core component from 4.17 to 4.13%. The
medians of headline and core inflation expectations
for the next four years remained at 3.80%. The
median of headline inflation expectations for the long
term (5 to 8 years) remained at 3.60%, while that for
the core component adjusted from 3.56 to 3.60%.
Finally, compensation for inflation and inflationary
risk decreased since the previous monetary policy
decision. Regarding its components, expectations
implied by market instruments remained stable,
while the inflation risk premium declined between
May and July.

21


-----

Inflation is still projected to converge to the target in
the fourth quarter of 2024. This projection is subject
to risks. On the upside: i) persistence of core inflation
at high levels; ii) foreign exchange depreciation due
to volatility in international financial markets; iii)
greater cost-related pressures, and iv) pressures on
energy prices or on agricultural and livestock product
prices. On the downside: i) a greater-thananticipated slowdown of the world economy; ii) a
lower pass-through effect from some cost-related


pressures; iii) that the exchange rate appreciation
contributes more than anticipated to mitigate some
pressures on inflation; and, iv) a larger-thananticipated effect from the Federal Government’s
measures to fight elevated prices. The balance of
risks for the trajectory of inflation within the forecast
horizon remains biased to the upside.


**Table 1**

**Consumer Price Index and Components**

Annual percentage change

**Item** **May 2023** **June 2023** **July 2023**

**CPI** **5.84** **5.06** **4.79**

**SubyacenteCore** **7.39** **6.89** **6.64**

**Merchandise** **9.04** **8.26** **7.82**

Food, beverages and tobacco 11.44 10.49 9.79

Non-food merchandise 6.30 5.70 5.54

**Services** **5.43** **5.25** **5.24**

Housing 3.67 3.66 3.66

Education (tuitions) 4.88 4.85 4.92

Other services 7.01 6.66 6.61

**No SubyacenteNon-core** **1.24** **-0.36** **-0.67**

**Agricultural and livestock products** **4.95** **2.89** **3.16**

Fruits and vegetablesFruits abd vegetables 3.73 3.98 7.14

Livestock productsLivestock 5.91 2.05 0.00

**Energy and government-authorized prices Energéticos y Tarifas Aut. por Gobierno** **-1.83** **-3.08** **-3.90**

Energy productsEnergy -5.48 -6.95 -7.82

Government-authorized pricesTarifas Autorizadas por Gobierno 6.99 6.26 5.51

Source:INEGI.


22


-----

-----

-----

