-----

-----

**FOREWARNING**
This document is provided for the reader’s convenience
only. The translation from the official Spanish version
was made by Banco de México’s staff. Discrepancies
may arise between the original document in Spanish
and its English translation. For this reason, the original
Spanish version is the only official document.


**1. PLACE, DATE AND PARTICIPANTS**

**1.1. Place: Meeting held by virtual means.**

**1.2. Date of Governing Board meeting: February 8,**
2022.

**1.3. Participants:**

Victoria Rodríguez, Governor.
Galia Borja, Deputy Governor.
Irene Espinosa, Deputy Governor.
Jonathan Heath, Deputy Governor.
Omar Mejía, Deputy Governor.
Rogelio Eduardo Ramírez, Secretary of Finance and
Public Credit.
Gabriel Yorio, Undersecretary of Finance and Public
Credit.
Elías Villanueva, Secretary of the Governing Board.

Prior to this meeting, preliminary work by Banco de
México’s staff analyzing the economic and financial
environment as well as the developments in inflation
and the determinants and outlook for inflation, was
conducted and presented to the Governing Board
(see Annex).

**2. ANALYSIS AND RATIONALE BEHIND THE**
**GOVERNING BOARD’S VOTING**

**_International environment_**

**Most members mentioned that world economic**
**growth moderated during the fourth quarter of**
**2022.** **They agreed that this was due to the**
**negative effects of the military conflict in Ukraine,**
**the resurgence of infections in China, and tight**
**monetary conditions. Some members considered**
that there are signs of disturbances in international
trade. **One member noted that forward-looking**
indicators of manufacturing and services for this year
are at contraction levels. However, most members
**stated that labor markets in advanced economies**
**continued showing signs of tightening. Some**
members highlighted that in the United States the last
employment data surprised to the upside. **One**
member argued that, while some indicators

associated with financial markets seem to anticipate


an economic recession, the employment data
appears to be more consistent with a slowdown,
rather than a long and lasting contraction.

**Most members noted that global growth forecasts**
**for 2023 continue pointing to a deceleration.**
**However, they stated that they were revised**
**upwards** **from** **what** **had** **been** **previously**

**anticipated. They highlighted the improvement in**
**growth expectations for advanced economies.**
**One member indicated that a heterogeneous**
behavior is expected among emerging economies.
**Some members mentioned that the outlook for the**
Chinese economy improved due to the reopening of
its activities. Among global risks, **some members**
pointed out the tight monetary and financial
conditions, as well as risks associated with a
worsening of geopolitical tensions. **One member**
added the risks derived from the pandemic. Another
member considered that the balance of risks for the
global economy remains biased to the downside.

**Most members highlighted that although headline**
**inflation decreased in a large number of**
**economies, it remains high globally. They warned**
**that it remains above the central banks' targets.**
**They attributed the decline in headline inflation to**
**lower pressures on energy prices. Some members**
added the effect of lesser disruptions in supply
chains. **One member pointed to the lower costs of**
maritime transport and decreased scarcity of
commodities. **Another member considered the**
decline in durable goods’ prices and the greater
stability of inflation expectations. **One member**
highlighted the moderation in food prices. **Another**
member mentioned that the central banks’ actions
have begun to have results on the evolution of
inflation.

**Nevertheless, most members highlighted that, in**
**several cases, the core component still does not**
**show a downward inflection point. One member**
delved into the fact that this is due to the presence of
pressures on the prices of services and merchandise.
**Some members indicated that inflation is expected to**
converge to the central banks' targets for the end of
2024 or in early 2025. One member mentioned that
inflation is expected to decline more slowly in
emerging economies, than in the advanced ones.
**Finally, most members pointed out that, although**
**world inflation is expected to continue declining,**
**several risks and a high level of uncertainty**
**persist.**

**Most members indicated that the majority of**
**central banks continued raising their reference**
**rates. They noted, however, that in some cases**

1


-----

**the magnitude of the increases moderated. Some**
members stated that further increases in reference
rates are anticipated. **In addition, most members**
**noted** **that,** **according** **to** **central** **banks’**

**communication, said rates are likely to remain**
**high for an extended period. Some members**
highlighted that markets continue foreseeing cuts to
reference rates of several central banks towards the
end of 2023. In this regard, most members warned
**that a divergence is being observed, between**
**markets' and central banks' forecasts regarding**
**the path of monetary policy, which, in their**
**opinion, poses significant challenges for their**
**communication. They emphasized that this**
**divergence could imply risks for the global**
**financial system.** **One member mentioned that an**
abrupt correction of market expectations could
become a factor of financial instability in the future.
**Another member added that in the case of the**
Federal Reserve there is uncertainty about whether
this is due to differences in the anticipated speed of
inflation convergence or in the probability assigned to
an economic recession.

**All members stated that, in its last meeting, the**
**Federal Reserve raised the target range for the**
**federal funds rate by 25 basis points. Some**
members pointed out that this represented a
slowdown in the pace of tightening. **One member**
pointed out that this occurred in a context of lower
figures for both headline and core inflation. Another
member noted that the chairman of the Federal
Reserve indicated that the reduction in the pace of
interest rate hikes will allow to assess the economy's
progress toward its goals and to determine the
required magnitude of future increases. **Most**
**members underlined that said central bank**
**anticipated additional increases. One** member
pointed out that, regardless, economic analysts had
made only small revisions to the possible level of the
terminal rate for that institution.

**Most members mentioned that international**
**financial conditions eased during the period.**
**They argued that yield curves have flattened and**
**the US dollar has depreciated. Some members**
highlighted that stock market indices increased. Most
**members pointed out that this easing was partly**
**due to markets’ expectations that central banks**
**could begin to cut their reference rates towards**
**the end of the year. However, they indicated that**
**financial conditions remain at restrictive levels.**
**Some members noted that, in this context, emerging**
economies registered a positive performance, with
capital inflows to different asset classes. **One**
member stated that this was due to a renewed


interest in riskier assets and to expectations of high
interest rate spreads relative to the Federal Reserve.
**Some members indicated that, towards the end of the**
period, markets reversed some of their gains after the
release of the US employment report.

**_Economic activity in Mexico_**

**Most members highlighted that the flash estimate**
**of GDP suggests that the Mexican economy**
**continued growing during the fourth quarter of**
**2022. However, they noted that it lost momentum**
**as compared to previous quarters. They argued**
**that this was due to a weakening of industrial**
**activities and of services. In contrast, one member**
noted that primary activities remain showing
dynamism. **Regarding** **the** **components** **of**

**industrial activity, most members added that the**
**manufacturing sector has moderated due to the**
**slowdown in US demand.** In this regard, **some**
members mentioned the fall in non-automotive
exports. One member also highlighted the slowdown
in automotive exports. He/she pointed out that the
mining and electricity sectors registered a lack of
dynamism. **Another member mentioned that the**
construction sector has exhibited some recovery.
Regarding services, he/she stated that its

components continued to perform heterogeneously
**One member pointed out that the Global Economic**
Activity Indicator (IGAE, for its acronym in Spanish)
figures for November suggests that the weak
performance of the services sector can be attributed
to a lower dynamism in commerce and in
accommodation and food preparation services.
However, he/she specified that the GDP flash
estimate suggests an improvement in services in
December. Most members foresee that in the next
**quarters the lower economic dynamism at a**
**global level will result in lower growth rates of**
**domestic economic activity. Regarding the cyclical**
position of the economy, **some members indicated**
that the output gap is expected to have continued
narrowing in view of the recovery of the Mexican
economy. One member added that, although it is in
negative territory, it is not statistically different from
zero.

**Most** **members** **highlighted** **that** **private**

**consumption has moderated.** However, one
member note that it remains elevated. **Some**
members noted that consumption of durable and nondurable goods has weakened. Some members stated
that indicators of the determinants of consumption,
such as consumer confidence, remittances and the
wage bill, remain at high levels. One member warned
that in general the slowdown in consumption and

2


-----

services could be associated with high inflation levels
in Mexico, which may explain why some of the sectors
with the greatest inflationary pressures are also
sectors in which activity is lagging. Another member
mentioned that despite the slowdown during the
fourth quarter of 2022, consumption has grown at
rates above those of economic activity, which
suggests the presence of demand-related pressures
on prices.

**Most members stated that gross fixed investment**
**remained sluggish. One member pointed out that,**
from a medium-term perspective, the most dynamic
component has been imported machinery and
equipment, without which investment would be
significantly below its pre-pandemic levels. However,
**most members noted that, at the margin,**
**construction displayed a slight reactivation.** In
contrast, some members indicated that investment in
machinery and equipment declined. **One member**
argued that the lack of investment has restricted
aggregate supply, and coupled with the lack of
competitive conditions in many sectors, has resulted
in an inelastic demand in the face of price increases.

**Most members agreed that the labor market**
**continues to strengthen. They described that the**
**participation rate continues recovering and that**
**unemployment rates remain at low levels. One**
member added that complementary rates, such as
under-employment, continue decreasing. **Another**
member noted that the employment rate improved
relative to the third quarter, reaching a level similar to
that reported prior to the health emergency. **One**
member highlighted that the unemployment rate is
below pre-pandemic levels. **Some** members

mentioned that the labor market is showing signs of
tightening. **Some members considered that the**
information drawn from business opinion surveys
reflects a dynamic and growing labor market,
considering the information they provide on the
evolution of vacancies, quits, and layoffs. **One**
member indicated that part of the tightening in the
labor market can be explained by a greater
improvement in employment rates, as compared to
labor participation, especially for men, which has
contributed to a lower rate of unemployment. He/she
argued that, according to the National Survey of
Occupation and Employment (ENOE, for its acronym
in Spanish), a lower participation rate is observed with
respect to the levels observed prior to the pandemic
due to a decline in the labor force in both young and
older age groups. He/she noted that as age groups
transition into the next age range, participation is
likely to increase and some signs of tightening may
thus decrease. However, he/she warned that this may


take a long time. In this context, **another member**
stated that the increase in the IMSS-insured workers
average base salary and contractual wage revisions
remain at high levels and noted that these wage
increases are generating inflationary pressures given
the deterioration in labor productivity.

**_Inflation in Mexico_**

**All members highlighted that in January headline**
**inflation reached 7.91%. They added that the core**
**component registered 8.45%. Most members**
**warned that, although headline inflation was**
**lower than expected, core inflation surprised to**
**the** **upside.** **On** **the** **other** **hand,** **they**

**acknowledged that global inflationary pressures**
**have somewhat eased. In this context, one member**
considered that there are signs that some pressures
on inflation in Mexico have indeed started to
moderate. In this regard, he/she mentioned that
seasonally adjusted and annualized monthly changes
in headline inflation have kept declining since August
2022. He/she argued that the trimmed mean
indicators of headline and core inflation are below
observed inflation figures, which means that the
extreme upward variations in some subcomponents
have affected the observed data, although they have
begun to stabilize. He/she noted that the number of
CPI items showing variations above 10% has
continued to decrease. Another member pointed out
that, indeed, the current inflationary scenario
contrasts with the one observed a few months ago,
when upward shocks were generalized. However,
he/she stated that, although some shocks have
eased, this does not mean that the inflationary
problem is close to being solved. He/she highlighted
that the environment continues to be characterized by
deep and persistent inflationary pressures. One
member underlined that inflation in Mexico has
developed certain inertia which cannot be explained
entirely by external pressures. Thus, most members
**pointed out that core inflation, which reflects**
**inflation's trend more accurately, still does not**
**show a downward trend. In this context, they**
**mentioned that the inflationary environment**
**remains complex and uncertain.**

**All members were concerned that core inflation**
**continues at high levels and remains more**
**persistent than expected. One member added that**
the inflation dynamics of merchandise and of services
warns about the low sensitivity of core inflation to
lesser external price pressures, given the easing of
the effects of the pandemic and the military conflict in
Ukraine. **Regarding core inflation’s components,**
**all members indicated that merchandise inflation**

3


-----

**remains high and that its decline has been**
**gradual, especially that of food merchandise.**
**Some members stated that this component could still**
be affected by the external shocks related to the
pandemic and the military conflict. **One member**
added that, although some of these shocks have
partially reversed, international reference prices are
still at high levels and register volatility. **Most**
**members pointed out that the domestic prices of**
**these goods seem to be facing asymmetric**
**effects from the shocks, since the decline in**
**pressures of international price references is not**
**being passed on to the final consumer at the**
**same rate as that observed with upward**
**pressures.** **One** member noted that food

merchandise inflation continues to be above 14% in
annual terms, no longer as a result of external
pressures only, but also of domestic pressures.

**All members highlighted the rebound in services**
**inflation in January. Some members mentioned that**
it was larger than expected. One member pointed out
that this rebound was almost four times higher than
the average registered between 2014 and 2022 for
the month of January. **Another member stated that**
this component registered a very significant

annualized monthly variation when considering the
seasonally adjusted series. **In addition, most**
**members noted that the frequency of upward**
**price revisions in services has been increasing.**
**They also highlighted the increase in housing**
**services inflation. One member added that food**
services continue showing very high monthly price
variations. He/she added that those of entertainment
and health and personal care services also continue
trending upwards. He/she specified that such
components should not be affected by the external
shocks. When analyzing the pressures being
experienced by services, another member indicated
that these have been subject to multiple shocks.
He/she added that the increase in their prices
suggests that external pressures may be taking
longer to fade, while other domestic pressures may
be becoming more apparent. In this regard, **one**
member noted the accumulation of cost-related
pressures associated with the adoption of measures
to contain contagions, accompanied by those
resulting from the setting of new contracts that take
higher prices as a reference. **Some members**
considered that the pass-through of costs to
consumers is possibly higher now than in earlier
stages of the pandemic. **In this regard, most**
**members highlighted that, after the lockdown, the**
**demand for services has increased. Some**
members expressed concern about the behavior of
services inflation indicating pressures from domestic


factors. In particular, they stated that increases in
services prices, since these are non-tradable,
respond to domestic pressures.

**Some members pointed out that non-core inflation**
reached 6.32%. Some members stated that the
evolution of this component is what has contributed
the most to the decline in headline inflation. They
noted that both the agricultural and livestock
products’ and the energy products’ subindices
registered lower annual variations as compared to the
previous year. One member underlined that, although
agricultural and livestock products’ inflation has
declined relative to the levels observed in the third
quarter of 2022, it still remains at high levels. Some
members indicated that the non-core component was
affected in January particularly by the behavior of fruit
and vegetables’ prices.

**Most** **members** **pointed** **out** **that** **inflation**

**expectations for 2023 and 2024 increased once**
**again.** **One member stated that these differed**
considerably from Banco de México’s December
forecast. **Another member highlighted that inflation**
expectations remain high in general. However, **one**
member pointed out that those corresponding to the
next 12 months have decreased slightly. **As for**
**longer-term expectations, most members agreed**
**that these declined somewhat, although they**
**remain above target. Thus, one member stated that**
long-term expectations have remained anchored.
**Some members mentioned that the referred**
decreases took place after the increases registered
during previous months. **One member stated that**
expectations drawn from market instruments have
also decreased. **Another member highlighted that**
the breakeven inflation rate remained above the
upper limit of the variability interval set around the
inflation target. **One member pointed out that the**
downward revision in expectations, despite being
favorable, is still insufficient to ensure the

convergence of inflation to its target.

**All members emphasized that, in view of a slower-**
**than-anticipated** **disinflationary** **process,**

**forecasts for headline and core inflation have**
**been adjusted upwards for the entire horizon.**
**They underlined that the persistence of core**
**inflation suggests that, looking ahead, its**
**trajectory, albeit downward, will be above the**
**previously anticipated one.** **Most members**
**underlined that said adjustment responds to the**
**persistence of inflation and to higher-than-**
**anticipated pressures on food merchandise and**
**services’ prices.** **One member argued that the**
mitigation of inflationary pressures at a global level is

4


-----

anticipated to result in a downward trend for inflation,
although at a slower pace. Some members pointed
out that the considerable revision of the inflation
forecast required delaying convergence to the target
by one quarter. **In this context, most members**
**noted that inflation is anticipated to converge to**
**the target in the fourth quarter of 2024.**

**With respect to upward risks to inflation, all**
**members mentioned the persistence of its core**
**component at high levels.** **One member considered**
the current synchronization between the high levels
of merchandise inflation and the increase in services’
inflation to be a challenge. **Some members warned**
about higher cost-related pressures. In this regard,
**one member expressed his/her concern about the**
increased labor costs. Specifically, he/she mentioned
that the gap between the minimum wage and the
average wage has narrowed, which is accompanied
by higher costs of vacation benefits. He/she also
indicated the transfer of cargo operations to the new
airport as an additional source of risks of possible
inflationary pressures.

**All members underlined that the balance of risks**
**for inflation remains biased to the upside. One**
member stated that this occurs even despite an
environment of economic slowdown and of

accumulated increases in the reference rate.
**Another member warned that the balance has**
deteriorated as a result of domestic pressures.
He/she stated that this increases the fear that the
return of inflation to its objective takes even longer
than anticipated. Nevertheless, **one** member

highlighted that, although the balance of risks
remains biased to the upside, it has not deteriorated,
considering the adjustment to the estimated inflation
trajectory. Another member underlined the difficulty
in determining the pace at which the shocks caused
by the health emergency and by the military conflict
will dissipate. He/she stated that this stage of
disinflation is surrounded by greater uncertainty than
what is usually observed during the inflation-reduction
stages.

**_Macrofinancial environment_**

**Most members agreed that domestic financial**
**markets overall performed in an orderly manner.**
**Some members noted that this was due to a greater**
risk appetite among international investors. **One**
member highlighted that the Financial Conditions
Index for Mexico decreased slightly. **Another**
member underlined that the 5-year default risk premia
for Mexico decreased by 20 basis points. **Most**
**members mentioned that the stock market**
**registered gains.** **Some members noted that these**


were driven by the consumption and industrial
sectors.

**Most members underlined that, since the last**
**monetary policy decision, the Mexican peso has**
**appreciated against the US dollar, reaching its**
**minimum level since March 2020. Some members**
pointed out that it traded in a narrow range. **One**
member added that it exhibited healthy trading
metrics and a considerable trading volume. He/she
specified that it has remained within the lower range
of the distribution implied by one-month options,
which shows its stability and resilience. **Another**
member underlined that the Mexican peso continued
to stand out due to its strength among emerging
economies’ currencies. **Some members mentioned**
that the wide spread of interest rates between Mexico
and the United States adjusted by volatility has
contributed to the positive performance of the national
currency. **One member added that the above has**
also been supported by Mexico’s sound

macroeconomic fundamentals relative to other
emerging economies. However, **another member**
noted that risk aversion has increased recently,
generating exchange rate volatility. **One member**
observed that it remains sensitive to global factors,
especially to the dynamics of US financial assets.

**Most members mentioned that short-term interest**
**rates increased while medium- and long-term**
**ones decreased. One member underlined that**
changes in short-term interest rates have reflected
the adjustments in the reference rate implemented by
Banco de México. Some members stated that the
mixed behavior in interest rates resulted in a
flattening of the yield curve. One member added that
this has deepened the inversion of this curve to
historical levels. **Another member mentioned a**
reduction in the yield curve of real interest rate
instruments.

Regarding financing to the private sector, **some**
members mentioned that commercial bank credit
continues expanding, reflecting the positive growth
rates of performing loans to consumer and firms. One
member added that mortgage lending also increased.
He/she pointed out that this dynamism was observed
despite the fact that interest rates in those segments
have increased following the increments in the
reference rate. He/she noted that, in line with Banco
de México’s EnBan survey, credit demand by large
firms continued increasing during the fourth quarter of
2022. He/she stated that banks with the largest
market share reported an increment in credit demand
via credit cards, as well as for auto and personal
loans. He/she added that less relaxed lending

5


-----

standards have been observed for some credit
segments. He/she underlined that it is necessary to
monitor the evolution of credit and financing
conditions. **Another member pointed out that**
delinquency rates remain at low and stable levels.
Regarding the composition of savings’ instruments
held by the private sector, **one member stated that**
monetary policy actions have had an impact, by
increasing the holdings of longer-term instruments.

**_Monetary policy_**

**The Governing Board evaluated the magnitude**
**and diversity of the inflationary shocks and its**
**determinants, along with the evolution of**
**medium- and long-term inflation expectations and**
**the price formation process. It considered the**
**challenges** **stemming** **from** **the** **ongoing**

**tightening of global financial conditions, the**
**environment of uncertainty, the persistence of**
**accumulated inflationary pressures and the**
**possibility of greater effects on inflation, as well**
**as the monetary policy stance already attained in**
**this hiking cycle. In particular, it deemed that,**
**given the dynamics of core inflation, on this**
**occasion it is necessary to continue with the**
**magnitude of the reference rate adjustment of the**
**previous policy meeting, in order to be in a better**
**position to tackle a still complex inflationary**
**environment. Based on the above, and with the**
**presence of all its members, the Board decided**
**unanimously to raise the target for the overnight**
**interbank interest rate by 50 basis points to**
**11.00%. With this action, the monetary policy**
**stance adjusts to the trajectory required for**
**inflation to converge to its 3% target within the**
**forecast horizon.**

**The Board will thoroughly monitor inflationary**
**pressures as well as all factors that have an**
**incidence on the foreseen path for inflation and**
**its expectations. This, in order to set a policy rate**
**that is consistent at all times with both the orderly**
**and sustained convergence of headline inflation**
**to the 3% target within the time frame in which**
**monetary policy operates as well as with an**
**adequate adjustment of the economy and**
**financial markets. Most members of the Board**
**consider that, given the monetary policy stance**
**already attained and depending on the evolution**
**of incoming data, for the next policy meeting, the**
**upward adjustment to the reference rate could be**
**of lower magnitude.**

**One** **member pointed out that the described recent**
evolution of core inflation and its outlook are reasons
for Banco de México to act even more cautiously.


He/she underlined that upward risks related to the
persistence of the core component at high levels and
to cost-related pressures have become more evident.
He/she expressed concern over the fact that the
balance of risks for inflation remains biased to the
upside. He/she stated that timely data confirms the
complex nature of the inflationary outlook and
considered that the disinflationary process will be, at
the margin, more difficult than anticipated. He/she
recalled that, given a complex outlook, in the previous
monetary policy decision it was determined that for
the following meeting an additional increase in the
reference rate would be required. He/she argued that,
although some elements of the economic and
financial environment have performed as anticipated,
given the unfavorable dynamics of inflation,

especially of its core component, in this meeting, it is
prudent to continue with the same pace of upward
adjustments to the reference rate as in the previous
meeting. He/she considered that this would allow to
address the complex juncture and the associated
upward risks in a timely manner. He/she added that it
would also show Banco de México’s firm commitment
to fulfilling its primary mandate of price stability, and
would prevent any perception of complacency.
He/she noted that the ongoing disinflationary process
is especially uncertain given the atypical nature of the
several inflationary shocks that have been faced.
He/she pointed out that, in this context, the available
information and its assessment should be key in
every monetary policy decision. He/she mentioned
that the adopted actions have been timely, given the
long-lasting and intense pressures that this central
bank has been pointing out. For this reason, he/she
reiterated that it has been possible to attain a
restrictive monetary policy stance, just as the context
warrants. He/she mentioned that, during the
upcoming policy decisions, it will be necessary to
consider the additional strengthening of the monetary
policy stance that would be attained with the current
proposed decision. He/she highlighted that, given the
complex and uncertain inflationary outlook, this
central bank needs to remain vigilant and persevere
in its efforts to ensure the stability of the purchasing
power of the national currency.

**Another** **member underlined that monetary policy**
should be conducted in a firm and forceful manner, in
order to prevent the inflationary process from
becoming long-lasting and its painful effects on the
economy, especially on lower-income households.
He/she warned about the risk that inflation does not
decline at a pace consistent with its convergence to
the target in the planning horizon. He/she highlighted,
as domestic inflationary pressures, consumption
dynamics, the labor market tightening, and the high

6


-----

inflation expectations. He/she underlined the

significant persistence of core inflation and concerns
over the positive correlation between high inflation
and its greater persistence. In this context, he/she
argued that the proposed 50-basis point adjustment
to the reference rate is necessary to achieve the
convergence of inflation to the target in the forecast
horizon. He/she added that it would send a clear
signal of commitment to the constitutional mandate.
He/she considered that it would also restate that
Banco de México conducts monetary policy

autonomously and that there is no coupling with the
Federal Reserve’s decisions. He/she added that,
given the possibility that inflation decreases faster in
the United States than in Mexico, the road ahead for
Banco de México would be longer. Regarding the
monetary policy statement, he/she added that it is
necessary to highlight the deteriorated inflationary
dynamics, especially the resistance of the core
component to decline, the balance of risks to the
upside, the upward revision in inflation forecasts, and
the still high level of inflation expectations. In view of
the high level of uncertainty, he/she highlighted the
importance of being extremely cautious when
communicating the forward guidance, considering
that it does not represent a commitment. He/she
suggested that it must indicate that, depending on the
evolution of incoming data, further increases could be
required. He/she added that it would be worth
mentioning that a restrictive monetary policy stance
will need to be maintained in the referred horizon to
guarantee convergence to the target. He/she argued
that the current monetary policy decision and the
accompanying communication will be important for
the formation of market expectations. He/she stated
that the main monetary authorities at the global level,
as well as Banco de México, should communicate
more clearly that high inflation, above its targets,
could be more persistent than previously anticipated.
He/she pointed out that, in such a case, it would be
necessary to maintain the tight monetary policy
stances until inflation and its expectations show a
sustained downward trend. He/she added that a clear
and timely communication must contribute to adjust
reference rate expectations. This, considering the
unfounded optimism that prevails at the global level,
including in Mexico, claiming it is possible to return to
the inflation target with lower rates.

**One** **member argued that, given the highly complex**
inflationary outlook, a recalibration of monetary
astringency is required. He/she mentioned that the
convergence of inflation to its target requires the core
component to follow a sustained and decreasing
trend, especially the food merchandise inflation.
He/she pointed out that these prices are the main


reference for the public to form their expectations.
He/she noted that the synchronization of inflationary
cycles between Mexico and the United States
required similar adjustments in reference rates, but
the inflation differential has now increased. He/she
argued that a 50-basis point increase would indicate
that the priority is to control inflation in Mexico, rather
than maintaining an interest rate differential. He/she
argued that, given the lesser weight of the relative
stance, the adjustments to the rate differential will
result in changes to the absolute stance. He/she
stated that such stance must continue to be
determined independently, without aiming for a
specific level of the relative stance, while being
careful that this last one does not reach an overly
restrictive level. He/she noted that the change from
global to domestic pressures justifies a restrictive
monetary policy stance for longer than anticipated.
He/she mentioned that the increase proposed in this
decision would be unexpected, and that therefore it
should be clearly justified. He/she considered that the
absolute monetary policy stance, measured through
the ex-ante real interest rate, can be characterized by
seven stages of the current monetary cycle. He/she
stated the first three stages were determined by the
sequential increases of 25, 50 and 75 basis points in
the reference rate, which consolidated a restrictive
monetary policy stance. He/she mentioned that the
fourth stage began in December 2022 with a gradual
slowdown in the pace of upward adjustments and will
end when the terminal interest rate level is eventually
attained. He/she stated that its calibration is
important, given that it would remain fixed for an
extended period and would be subject to the evolution
of incoming data. He/she indicated that a balance
must be pursued between avoiding an early
deceleration of the pace of reference rate increases
without previously observing a significant

improvement in the inflationary outlook and reaching
a terminal rate that is higher than necessary. He/she
mentioned that a fifth stage will begin when the
terminal rate is achieved. He/she pointed out that
during said stage the ex-ante real interest rate will
increase as inflation expectations decrease. He/she
added that, to prevent the monetary policy stance
from becoming too restrictive, it will be necessary to
proceed to the sixth stage. He/she explained that,
during said stage, the reference rate must begin
declining alongside inflation expectations, in order to
maintain an ex-ante real interest rate above 6%, but
without exceeding 7%. He/she expressed that during
the last stage a neutral monetary policy stance would
be adopted, once the inflation target is reached.
He/she underlined the importance of forward
guidance throughout these stages. He/she indicated
that it should be highlighted that the forward guidance

7


-----

is data-dependent and that it does not represent an
unwavering commitment. He/she added that it should
be communicated that the central bank is currently
close to reaching the terminal rate, but highlighting
that the restrictive monetary policy stance will not
yield until commitment with the primary mandate is
fulfilled.

**Another** **member pointed out that the most recent**
data on inflation and to a greater extent, their
incidence in the expected determinants, defy the
anticipated convergence and represent a clear signal
that the balance of risks remains biased upwards.
He/she found it worrisome that the observed decline
in inflation of some merchandise has been
characterized by being very gradual, due to the fact
that there is an asymmetric and lagged passthrough
between inflationary global pressures and the final
consumer prices in the economy, specially within the
set of food merchandises. He/she mentioned that this
occurs in parallel to a deterioration of the inflation of
non-tradeable goods in the economy, and thus a
failure to act preemptively in view of the

abovementioned signals, there would be a

synchronization of pressures which would imply
relevant challenges for the behavior of core inflation
during the second half of the year. He/she considered
that, given the significant adjustments in inflation
forecasts, which required even the postponement by
one quarter of the point-wise convergence to the
target, currently it is not feasible to lower the pace of
interest rate increases. He/she recalled that, in an
inflation forecast-targeting regime, the monetary
policy stance must be consistent with the behavior of
the expected inflation determinants, and thus
strengthening the restrictive monetary policy will
consolidate a stance consistent with inflation
convergence. However, he/she considered that,
given the significant adjustment to the forecasts, the
proposed increase in the interest rate, and the notably
restrictive level attained by the ex-ante real interest
rate, the balance of risks for inflation will be
compatible with a slower pace of adjustments in
future monetary policy decisions. He/she stated that
Banco de México has made unprecedented efforts to
consolidate an absolute policy stance that allows to
guarantee the convergence of inflation within the
forecast horizon, regardless of the relative policy
stance. He/she pointed out that, looking ahead,
decisions must remain flexible, dependent on
incoming data and on the evolution of the balance of
risks, in order to maintain at all times congruence with
fulfilling the constitutional mandate.

**One** **member stated that the inflationary outlook**
continues posing challenges and considered that it is


still not appropriate to slow the pace of interest rate
increases. First of all, he/she pointed out that the
materialization of the new inflation forecast requires a
reference rate that addresses the higher persistence
of the core component. He/she highlighted that it
would send a clear signal regarding the commitment
to the primary mandate, which would contribute to
preserve credibility. He/she added that this is also
relevant for the effectiveness of the inflation forecasttargeting regime. Second, he/she mentioned that
inflation expectations are still negatively affected,
although some have decreased at the margin. He/she
noted that the proposed decision seeks to contribute
to the reduction of inflation expectations and to
preserve the effectiveness of this transmission
channel. He/she highlighted that the reduction in 12month expectations elevates the ex-ante real interest
rate, making the increases in the reference rate more
effective. He/she added that monetary policy actions
should continue contributing to expectations returning
to their historic levels. Third, he/she indicated that the
high levels of inflation could result in more
persistence. He/she mentioned that the proposed
increase seeks to address this risk and prevent
second-round effects, the future costs of which will
probably be greater if no timely action is taken.
Finally, he/she considered that an uncertain

environment persists, despite the fact that certain
pressures have been mitigated. He/she added that
the convergence of inflation to its target faces
considerable challenges. He/she stated that,

although the monetary policy stance is already
restrictive, it needs to be reinforced to consolidate the
convergence of inflation to its target. He/she
considered that, for the next decisions, it is necessary
to take into account the tightening that has been
achieved and the fact that monetary policy operates
with a lag. He/she pointed out that, the degree of
monetary restriction already attained could increase
if inflation expectations decline. He/she argued that,
looking ahead, the pace of adjustments of the
reference rate could be modified, and that it is very
close to reaching a level that is appropriate to
consolidate a disinflationary process in line with the
inflation forecast.

**3. MONETARY POLICY DECISION**

The Governing Board evaluated the magnitude and
diversity of the inflationary shocks and its

determinants, along with the evolution of mediumand long-term inflation expectations and the price
formation process. It considered the challenges
stemming from the ongoing tightening of global
financial conditions, the environment of uncertainty,
the persistence of accumulated inflationary pressures

8


-----

and the possibility of greater effects on inflation, as
well as the monetary policy stance already attained in
this hiking cycle. In particular, it deemed that, given
the dynamics of core inflation, on this occasion it is
necessary to continue with the magnitude of the
reference rate adjustment of the previous policy
meeting, in order to be in a better position to tackle a
still complex inflation environment. Based on the
above, and with the presence of all its members, the
Board decided unanimously to raise the target for the
overnight interbank interest rate by 50 basis points to
11.00%. With this action, the monetary policy stance
adjusts to the trajectory required for inflation to
converge to its 3% target within the forecast horizon.

The Board will thoroughly monitor inflationary
pressures as well as all factors that have an incidence
on the foreseen path for inflation and its expectations.
This, in order to set a policy rate that is consistent at
all times with both the orderly and sustained
convergence of headline inflation to the 3% target
within the time frame in which monetary policy
operates as well as with an adequate adjustment of
the economy and financial markets. The Board
considers that, given the monetary policy stance
already attained and depending on the evolution of
incoming data, for its next policy meeting, the upward
adjustment to the reference rate could be of lower
magnitude.

**4. VOTING**

Victoria Rodríguez, Galia Borja, Irene Espinosa,
Jonathan Heath, and Omar Mejía voted in favor of


increasing the target for the overnight interbank
interest rate by 50 basis points to 11.00%.

**5. DISSENTING OPINIONS / VOTES**

**Dissenting opinion on the monetary policy**
**statement. Irene Espinosa.**

Domestic price dynamics has become more complex
and uncertain. Inflationary pressures have not given
in as we had anticipated in December, and we
adjusted our forecast with a balance of risks to the
upside. In view of inflation’s negative surprise to the
upside in January, the lower increase in the reference
rate adjustment that we foresaw in December for
today’s decision was insufficient. This situation
reflects the high uncertainty surrounding the new
dynamics of inflation, which shows a greater
persistence and greater domestic pressures, as
external ones have started to subside. We must
therefore be extremely cautious with our forward
guidance. It must be credible and feasible, without
putting the central bank’s reputation at risk and
without undermining the effectiveness of

communication with markets. This gains special
relevance given the discrepancy between the
monetary authorities’ messages of maintaining a
restrictive policy stance for an extended period, and
more accommodative market expectations. For this
reason, our guide must indicate that the road towards
consolidating the convergence of inflation to the
target continues and, thus, limiting the next decision
by referring to a policy rate adjustment of lower
magnitude implies a high and costly risk of correction
if the assumptions do not materialize.

9


-----

**ANNEX**

The information in this Annex was prepared for this
meeting by the staff of Banco de México’s Directorate
General of Economic Research and Directorate
General of Central Bank Operations. It does not
necessarily reflect the considerations of the
members of the Governing Board as to the monetary
policy decision.

**A.1. External conditions**

**A.1.1. World economic activity**

World economic activity growth moderated during the
fourth quarter of 2022 relative to the previous quarter.
Heterogeneity continued to be observed among
different economies. Persistent economic disruptions
in different regions and sectors due to the military
conflict between Russia and Ukraine and the
resurgence of COVID-19 in China contributed to this
moderation. These developments took place in an
environment of tight financial and monetary

conditions, associated with an increase in interest
rates by central banks to contain the high levels of
inflation. In addition, the latest Purchasing Managers'
Index readings reflected a slower pace of

deterioration in the manufacturing sector and some
stabilization in services at the global level (Chart 1).
Among the most important risks to the global
economy are those associated with the pandemic,
prolonged or increased inflationary pressures,
worsening geopolitical tensions, and tighter financial
and monetary conditions.

1 Expressed as a seasonally adjusted annualized quarterly rate,
the change in US GDP in the fourth quarter of 2022 was 2.9% and
3.2% in the third quarter of 2022.


**Chart 1**

**Global: Purchasing Managers’ Index:**

**Production Component**

Diffusion index, s. a.[1/]

60

58

56

54

52

50

Manufacturing

48 Manufacturing (excl. China)

46 Services

Services (excl. China)

44 32.5 39.2

24.8 33.0 January

42 23.7 35.1

20.7 32.2

40

J J J J J J J J J J J J J

2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023

s.a./ Seasonally adjusted figures.
1/ The index varies between 0 and 100 points. A reading above 50 points is
considered an overall increase compared to the previous month and below
50 points an overall decrease.
Source: IHS Market.

In the United States, Gross Domestic Product (GDP)
grew at a seasonally adjusted quarterly rate of 0.7%
during the fourth quarter, slightly below the 0.8%
registered in the third quarter of the year (Chart 2).[1]
Economic activity was supported by higher inventory
accumulation and private consumption. The latter
was driven by the strength of the labor market and by
the use of savings accumulated during the pandemic.
However, recent indicators suggest that

consumption has been losing dynamism partly as a
result of the continued tightening of financial
conditions. Government spending and net exports
also contributed to GDP growth, although to a lesser
extent. This was partially offset by the deterioration
in residential investment. Some analysts' surveys
anticipate a weakening of economic activity during
the first quarter of 2023.

10


-----

**Chart 2**

**US Real GDP and Components**

Quarterly percentage rate and contribution in

percentage points, s. a.

3.0 Private consumption expenditures

Residential investment

2.5 Nonresidential investment

Change in private inventories

2.0 Net exportsGovernment consumption expenditures

Total

1.5

1.0

0.5

0.0

-0.5

-1.0

-1.5

-2.0

I II III IV I II III IV I

2021 2022 2023

s.a./ Seasonally adjusted figures.
Note: The pink diamond refers to Blue Chip's January 2022 forecasts.
Source: BEA and Blue Chip.

After registering a null variation in October, US
industrial production contracted at an average rate of
0.7% in November and December. This fall reflected
a decline in manufacturing and mining, which was
partially mitigated by a rebound in electricity and gas
generation. Purchasing Managers' Indices suggest
that manufacturing will continue to show weakness,
in an environment of a slowdown in domestic and
external demand.

The US labor market continued showing signs of
tightening. The non-farm payroll registered the
creation of 517,000 new jobs in January 2023, figure
higher than the 275,000 jobs created on average per
month during November and December 2022. The
unemployment rate went from 3.6% in November
2022 to 3.4% in January 2023. Initial claims for
unemployment insurance decreased to 183

thousand claims during the week ending January 28.
In this environment, certain wage indicators, while
showing signs of deceleration, continued growing at
a high rate.

In the euro area, economic activity decelerated
during the fourth quarter of 2022 with respect to the
previous one. In particular, it expanded 0.1% at a
seasonally adjusted quarterly rate, after having
grown 0.3% in the third quarter.[2] This moderation
was due to the effects of the military conflict in
Ukraine on energy supplies, the high levels of
uncertainty, the weakening of external demand, and
tightening financial conditions. Unemployment,

2 Expressed as a seasonally adjusted annualized quarterly rate,
the change in euro area GDP was 0.5% in the fourth quarter of
2022 and 1.2% in the third quarter of 2022.


however, remained stable at 6.6% in December.
Purchasing Managers' Indices point to a lesser
deterioration in manufacturing activity than

previously expected and to a slight recovery in
services in the short term.

In most major emerging economies, economic
activity is foreseen to have slowed or contracted
during the fourth quarter of 2022. In Emerging Asia,
a moderation in economic activity is expected in a
large number of economies. In the particular case of
China, economic activity slowed during the fourth
quarter due to the increase in COVID-19 infections
and the continued deterioration of the country's real
estate sector. Nevertheless, said economy is
expected to recover in the first quarter of 2023. This
would be driven by the lifting of mobility restrictions
that began at the end of last year, although
uncertainty prevails about the effects of the
pandemic in the future. In most Emerging European
and Latin American economies, activity is expected
to have deteriorated during the last quarter of 2022.

International commodity prices have registered a
mixed behavior with episodes of volatility since
Mexico's previous monetary policy decision. During
this period, oil prices exhibited bouts of volatility.
Although there was a significant fall in crude oil prices
at the beginning of January related to the increase in
COVID-19 cases in China, this trend was

subsequently reversed due to the easing of
restrictions and greater optimism regarding a
possible recovery in fuel demand in that country. At
the beginning of February, prices registered some
volatility associated with changes in expectations
regarding the future evolution of interest rates by the
main central banks and their effect on demand.
Meanwhile, natural gas reference prices in Europe
and the United States showed, in general, a
downward trend during most of the period, supported
by relatively high levels of inventories. However, they
exhibited volatility associated with fluctuations in
weather conditions in both regions. Grain prices
remained relatively stable. Factors such as the
evolution of the pandemic in China and weather
conditions in several countries caused prices to
fluctuate within a narrow range during the period.
Finally, most industrial metal prices trended upwards,
with the price increase observed since the second
week of January as a result of the optimism
surrounding the economic recovery in China
standing out.

11


-----

**A.1.2. Monetary policy and international financial**
**markets**

World inflation remains high, although in its latest
readings headline inflation declined in a large
number of economies, both advanced (Chart 3) and
emerging, due to lower pressures on energy prices
and, in some cases, on food prices. However,
headline inflation remains significantly above their
central banks' targets. Imbalances between supply
and demand have moderated recently in some
markets, in an environment of diminished disruptions
in supply chains. However, in several cases, the core
component does not show a downward inflection
point.

In the United States, annual headline inflation as
measured by the personal consumption expenditure
deflator declined from 5.5 in November to 5.0% in
December, its lowest level since September 2021.
This reflected a fall in energy prices and core
inflation. The annual variation of the latter went from
4.7 to 4.4% between the referred dates, mainly as a
result of a lower inflation in merchandise prices.
Analysts' short-term inflation forecasts for most of the
main advanced economies remained at high levels,
although they foresee a moderation in inflation in
2023 with respect to the levels registered in 2022.
Meanwhile, longer-term inflation expectations drawn
from financial instruments for these economies
exhibited limited adjustments.

3 In December, the Bank of Japan adjusted the yield curve control
mechanism with the aim of improving market functioning and
encouraging a smoother formation of the entire curve, while
maintaining accommodative financial conditions. Said central
bank increased the amount of monthly purchases of Japanese
government bonds (JGB) from ¥7.3 trillion to ¥9 trillion. It also
widened the range of 10-year bond yield fluctuations from the
target level, from around +/- 0.25 percentage points to around
+/- 0.50 percentage points. It also announced that it would offer to
purchase 10-year JGBs at 0.5% each business day through fixed

**Chart 3**

**Selected Advanced Economies:**

**Headline Inflation**

Annual percentage change

12
11 United States PCE 1/
10 United States CPI

9 Japan
8

Euro area 2/

7
6 United Kingdom
5 Canada
4
3
2
1
0

-1 December

January

-2

January

-3 January
-4

2019 2020 2021 2022 2023

1/ The personal consumption expenditure deflator is used.
2/ Preliminary figures for January.
Source: Bureau of Economic Analysis, Bureau of Labor Statistics, Eurostat,
Bank of Japan, Statistics Canada, The UK Office for National Statistics.

In the environment described above, since the last
monetary policy decision in Mexico, the central banks
of most main advanced economies continued
tightening their monetary policy stances. However,
most of these banks moderated the magnitude of the
increases compared to those announced in previous
decisions, including the US Federal Reserve and the
European Central Bank. Looking ahead, additional
increases are expected. Some central banks pointed
to a possible pause in their hiking cycles, although
they are expected to keep their interest rates at high
levels for an extended period. In particular, after
raising its reference rate in January, the Bank of
Canada indicated that it expects to keep it at its
current level and is prepared to raise it if necessary.
The Bank of England eliminated the explicit mention
of the possibility that further rate increases would be
required and that, in light of persistent inflationary
pressures, it would take forceful measures, although
it stated that, if necessary, it would push for further
monetary tightening. In its January decision, the
Bank of Japan left its short- and long-term interest
rates unchanged. In addition, in December, it
announced adjustments to its yield curve control
mechanism.[3] Regarding their asset purchase

programs, most central banks in advanced

rate purchase operations, unless it is very likely that no offers are
submitted. In order to encourage the formation of a yield curve
consistent with the guidelines for its short- and long-term interest
rates, the Bank of Japan decided that it will respond rapidly for
each maturity with increases in its JGB purchases and fixed-rate
purchases. In its January decision, it reiterated the

aforementioned measures and announced adjustments to various
funding facilities.

12


-----

economies continued to gradually reduce their
securities’ holdings. In this environment,

expectations drawn from financial instruments
anticipate interest rates to remain high for an
extended period in most major advanced economies,
although they suggest that in some cases these
could begin to decline in the second half of 2023 or
in 2024 (Chart 4). This contrasts with the rhetoric of
some central banks that have mentioned that a
restrictive policy stance will be necessary for some
time, until there is confidence that inflation is on a
clear downward trajectory.

**Chart 4**

**Reference Rates and Trajectories**

**Implied in OIS Curves[ 1/]**

Percent


restoring price stability will likely require

maintaining a tight monetary policy stance for
some time. He further added that while the
monthly decline in inflation in recent months is
welcome, substantially more evidence is needed
to be confident that inflation is on a sustained
downward path. He maintained that the

Committee will continue to make decisions
meeting by meeting, that is, without providing
specific guidance, considering the totality of
incoming data and their implications for the
outlook for economic activity and inflation.
Regarding its balance sheet, the Federal Reserve
reiterated that it will continue to reduce its
securities’ holdings according to its previously
announced plans. In this context, the expected
trajectory for the federal funds rate implicit in
financial instruments foresees that the highest
level of the interest rate in 2023 will be reached
during the second quarter and will be of around
5.15%, to subsequently decrease to 4.8% by the
end of 2023 and to 3.4% by the end of 2024. This
contrasts with the FOMC's December forecasts,
which indicate that the federal funds rate will
remain at higher levels for a longer period,
anticipating a level of 5.1% at the end of 2023 and
of 4.1% at the end of 2024.


7.0%

6.0%

5.0%

4.0%

3.0%

2.0%

1.0%

0.0%


**― US Federal Reserve 2/**
**― Bank of England**
**― Bank of Japan**

**― European Central Bank deposit rate**
**― OIS implicit trajectory 08 Feb 2023**
**--- OIS implicit trajectory 14 Dec 2022**


End of
2024


End of
2022


End of
2023

|% % % %|--- OIS implicit t|rajectory 14 Dec|2022|Col5|Col6|Col7|s|Col9|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|%|||||||||
||||||||||
|%|||||||||


-1.0%

2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 2024


1/ OIS: Fixed floating interest rate swap where the fixed interest rate is
associated to the effective overnight reference rate.
2/ For the observed reference rate of the US, the average interest rate of
the target range of the federal funds rate (4.50% - 4.75%) is used.
Source: Banco de México with data from Bloomberg.

Among the recent monetary policy decisions of major
advanced economies, the following stand out:

i) The US Federal Reserve slowed its interest rate

hikes from 50 bps in December to 25 bps in
February. Thus, in its latest decision, it set the
target range for the federal funds rate between
4.50 and 4.75%. In addition, the Federal Open
Market Committee (FOMC) stated again that it
anticipates that ongoing increases in the target
range will be appropriate. It indicated that, in
determining the pace of future increases in the
target range, it will take into account the
cumulative tightening of monetary policy, the lags
with which monetary policy affects economic
activity and inflation, as well as the economic and
financial developments. During a press

conference, the chairman of that institution
suggested that a couple of more increases in the
reference rate will be appropriate in order to attain
a sufficiently restrictive level. He added that


ii) The European Central Bank (ECB) increased its

reference rates in the meetings held during the
reported period. However, it slowed the pace of
its interest rate increases to 50 bps at both its
December and February meetings, after having
raised them by 75 bps at its October meeting. In
its latest decision, it thus set its refinancing, key
lending and key deposit rates at 3.00, 3.25 and
2.50%, respectively. In December and February,
it stated that the Governing Council expects to
further increase interest rates at a steady pace
and that it will keep them at sufficiently restrictive
levels to ensure a timely return of inflation to the
2% target. In this regard, the Governing Council
announced in February that it intends to raise
reference rates by another 50 bps at its March
meeting and will then evaluate the subsequent
path of its monetary policy. Regarding the
normalization of its securities’ holdings, it
announced in December that starting in March it
will begin reducing its Asset Purchase Program
(APP) portfolio at a measured and predictable
pace, given that not all principal payments on
maturing securities will be reinvested. It stated
that the reduction will be of €15 billion per month,
on average, until the end of June 2023, and that
its subsequent pace of reduction will be
determined over time. However, it added that it

13


-----

will periodically reassess the pace of portfolio
reduction. The details on the implementation of
the portfolio reduction were announced at its
February meeting.

In the main emerging economies, a large number of
central banks continued raising their reference rates.
However, some central banks, such as those of
Colombia and South Africa, slowed the pace of
interest rate hikes. Others, such as those of Hungary,
the Czech Republic, Poland, Ukraine, Turkey,
Malaysia, Chile and Brazil, left their interest rates
unchanged. Some suggested that they will maintain
their interest rates at current levels for an extended
period and that they are ready to raise them if
necessary. China's central bank left its interest rates
unchanged.

In the context described above, since the last
monetary policy decision in Mexico, international
financial markets registered a greater appetite for risk
and financial conditions eased, although they still
remain tight (Chart 5). In particular, stock markets in
most of the major advanced and emerging
economies continued registering gains (Chart 6). In
foreign exchange markets, the US dollar depreciated
during most of the period, although it slightly
recovered at the end of the period, which can be
associated with the statements made by the Federal
Reserve members, who anticipate higher interest
rates in light of the continued strength of the labor
market. This occurred in an environment in which the
pace of increases in the US reference rate has
moderated slightly and in which the end of its hiking
cycle is expected to be nearer than that of other
economies. Short- and long-term government bond
interest rates in most of the main advanced
economies registered volatility during the period.
However, they rose recently due to the latest US
employment situation report, which continues to
show strength in the labor market. In most cases,
interest rates are above the level observed in midDecember (Chart 7). In emerging economies, most
long-term interest rates declined, while short-term
interest rates registered mixed results. In this
context, in general, capital inflows were registered in
emerging economies.


0%

-7%


**Chart 5**

**Financial Conditions Index[1/]**

Units


103

102


25

20


101

100


15

10


99

98


5

0


97


-5


96 -10

2020 2021 2022 2023

Financial Conditions Index - Global
Financial Conditions Index - United States
Financial Conditions Index - Eurozone 2/
Financial Stress Index 3/

1/ The financial conditions index is constructed considering the effect of five
variables on economic activity: the reference interest rate, the 10-year
government bond, the spread of investment-grade bonds over the
government debt bond with equivalent maturity, the ratio of a stock index
with 10-year average earnings per share, and the trade-weighted exchange
rate. 2/In the case of the euro area, the spread between the sovereign bonds
of France, Italy, Spain, the Netherlands, Belgium, Austria, Portugal and
Finland over the German 10-year bond is also considered. 3/ Data from the
Office of Financial Research, constructed with 33 financial variables from
five categories: credit, equity valuation, financing, safe haven assets, and
volatility. The vertical black line indicates the last calendarized monetary
policy meeting of Banco de México.
Source: Prepared by Banco de México with data from Bloomberg and
Goldman Sachs.

**Chart 6**

**Change in Selected Financial Indicators from**

**December 14, 2022 to February 8, 2023**

Percent; basis points


14%

7%


100

50


0

-50


1/ DXY: a weighted average estimated by the Intercontinental Exchange
(ICE) of the nominal exchange rate of the main six currencies operated
globally with the following weights: EUR 57.6%, JPY: 13.6%, GBP: 11.9%,
CAD: 9.1%, SEK: 4.2%, and CHF: 3.6%
Source: Bloomberg and ICE.

14


-----

**Chart 7**

**Selected Emerging Economies: Financial Assets**

**Performance as of December 9, 2022**

Percent, basis points Percent, basis points

**2-year** **2-year**

**Equity**
**Region** **Country** **Currencies** **interest** **Interest** **CDS**

**markets**

**rates** **rates**

**Mexico** **5.29%** **6.75%** **-17** **-51** **-23**

**Brazil** **3.24%** **2.44%** **-9** **12** **-23**

**Latin**

**Chile** **9.72%** **1.96%** **85** **19** **-17**

**America**

**Colombia** **3.86%** **1.93%** **-34** **-93** **-20**

**Peru** **0.60%** **1.09%** **108** **6** **0**

**Russia** **-12.79%** **3.24%** **119** **-70** **N.D.**

**Poland** **3.46%** **10.23%** **-102** **-81** **-21**

**Emerging**

**Turkey** **-0.91%** **-2.40%** **8** **-64** **0**

**Europe**

**Czech Rep.** **5.90%** **15.50%** **32** **-20** **-10**

**Hungary** **11.06%** **2.54%** **-139** **-144** **-25**

**China** **3.17%** **1.76%** **9** **-2** **-25**

**Malaysia** **3.30%** **0.90%** **-25** **-30** **-18**

**India** **0.53%** **-2.15%** **-2** **-2** **-17**

**Asia**

**Philippines** **3.07%** **6.80%** **0** **-10** **-19**

**Thailand** **5.30%** **4.02%** **3** **-18** **-14**

**Indonesia** **4.43%** **2.93%** **12** **-39** **-23**

**Africa** **South Africa** **1.24%** **7.46%** **29** **-79** **-24**

Note: An upward adjustment indicates currency appreciation. Interest rates
correspond to swap rates at the specified terms, except for Hungary, where
government securities with 3-year maturities were used as a reference. For
the Philippines, a 2-year swap rate was used, and for Russia, a 2-year and
3-year swap rate was used. The latest CDS data for Russia is as of June 1,
2022.
Source: Bloomberg.

**A.2. Current situation of the Mexican economy**

**A.2.1. Mexican markets**

In the international context described above, the
Mexican peso appreciated since Mexico’s previous
monetary policy decision (Chart 8), while interest
rates registered a mixed behavior, with increases in
short-term maturities and decreases in long-term
ones, which led to a greater inversion of the yield
curve. This occurred in an environment of renewed
interest in holding assets of emerging economies,
due to factors such as the reopening of several
economic sectors in China and expectations of a
lower monetary tightening by the Federal Reserve.


Range in year Range since previous monetary policy 09-Dec-22 02-Feb-23


25.50
25.00
24.50
24.00
23.50
23.00
22.50
22.00
21.50
21.00
20.50
20.00
19.50
19.00
18.50
18.00
17.50
17.00


**Chart 8**

**Mexican Markets’ Performance**

Percent, MXN/USD and index


10.8

10.4

10.0

9.6

9.2

8.8

8.4

8.0

7.6

7.2


22.0

21.5

21.0

20.5

20.0

19.5

19.0

18.5

18.0


58,000

56,000

54,000

52,000

50,000

48,000

46,000

44,000

42,000

40,000


M-bond


5.8

5.4

5.0

4.6

4.2

3.8

3.4

3.0

2.6

2.2

Inflation-indexed bonds


Range in year Range since previous monetary policy 09-Dec-22 02-Feb-23

decision

Source: Prepared by Banco de México.

The Mexican peso traded in a range of 1 peso and
35 cents, between 18.51 and 19.86 pesos per US
dollar (Chart 9), reaching its lowest level since March
2020 and ending the reference period with an
appreciation of 5.29%. The above occurred in a
context in which trading conditions, both observed
and prospective, continued improving.

**Chart 9**

**Mexican Peso Exchange Rate including Moving**

**Averages**

MXN/USD


Mexican peso


100-day moving average

50-day moving average

|(Chart 8), while inte ehavior, with increase decreases in long-t ter inversion of the y environment of rene of emerging econom he reopening of sev a and expectations by the Federal Reserv|25.50 rest 25.00 24.50 s in 24.00 erm 23.50 23.00 ield 22.50 22.00 wed 21.50 21.00 ies, 20.50 eral 20.00 19.50 of a 19.00 18.50 e. 18.00 17.50 17.00|
|---|---|


J F M A M  J  J  A S  O N  D  J  F M  A M J  J  A  S  O N D  J  F M  A M  J  J  A  S  O N D J F

2020 2021 2022 2023


Source: Prepared by Banco de México.

Interest rates on government securities showed
mixed dynamics characterized by a flattening, with
increases of up to 20 bps in the short-term nodes,
while longer-term nodes decreased up to 55 bps
(Chart 10). The yield curve of real interest rate
instruments decreased by up to 29 bps. In this
context, breakeven inflation implicit in spreads
between nominal and real interest rates of market
instruments registered movements between -26 and
37 bps (Chart 11). These movements took place in

15


-----

an environment in which trading conditions showed
some stability, but remained below the levels
observed prior to the onset of the pandemic.

**Chart 10**


**Chart 12**

**Interbank Funding Rate Implied in TIIE Swaps**

Percent


12.50


Banxico overnight rate (reference rate)

Implied interest rate in TIIE swaps for 02/02/23

Implied interest rate in TIIE swaps for 09/12/22

J  M  M  J  S  N  J M  M  J  S  N  J  M  M  J   S  N

2021               2022               2023


Source: PIP. Trading range over the period

**Chart 11**

**Breakeven Inflation and Inflation Risk**

**Implied in Government Securities’ Yields**

Basis points

600

550

500

450

400 3-year

10-year

350 20-year

30-year

300 3-year average

10-year average

250 20-year average

30-year average

200

J   M M    J    S    N    J    M   M    J    S    N    J

2021                         2022                     2023

Source: PIP.

Regarding expectations for the path of the monetary
policy reference rate, information implicit in the
interest rate swaps’ curve incorporates an increase
of 17 bps for the February decision (Chart 12). Most
analysts surveyed by Citibanamex anticipate that the
reference rate will be raised by 25 bps in the
February decision, up to a level of 10.75%, while for
the end of 2023 they anticipate, on average, a rate of
10.50%.


Source: Prepared by Banco de México with Bloomberg data.

**A.2.2. Economic activity in Mexico**

According to Mexico’s GDP flash estimate published
by INEGI, the Mexican economy continued growing
during the fourth quarter of 2022 (Chart 13), although
at a slightly slower pace than in the three previous
quarters. The Mexican economy is expected to
continue facing a complex global economic

environment and high uncertainty that is anticipated
to lead to a low dynamism of domestic activity over
the next quarters.

**Chart 13**

**Gross Domestic Product**

Quarterly percentage change, s. a.

6

13.15

4

2

0

-2

-4

-17.76

Q-IV1/

-6

I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV

2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022

s. a. / Seasonally adjusted figures. The chart’s range was adjusted to
facilitate its reading.
1/ Figure for the fourth quarter of 2022 refers to INEGI’s GDP quarterly flash
estimate.
Source: Mexico’s System on National Accounts (SCNM, for its Spanish
acronym), INEGI.

Regarding external demand, the value of

manufacturing exports contracted during the fourth

16


-----

quarter of 2022, with respect to the third one. In
particular, both automotive and non-automotive
exports exhibited weakness at the end of 2022 (Chart
14). As for domestic demand, in November private
consumption halted the moderate recovery observed
in previous months, reflecting declines in the
consumption of both goods and services. Gross fixed
investment has displayed higher levels in recent
months, although it stagnated in November. Within it,
investment in construction showed an incipient
reactivation during the same month, while investment
in machinery and equipment exhibited weakness.

**Chart 14**

**Total Manufacturing Exports**

Indices 2013 = 100, s. a.

200

180

160

140

120

100

80 Total

Automotive

60


**Chart 15**

**Global Indicator of Economic Activity**

**Indices 2013 = 100, s. a.**


130

120

110

100

Total

90

Secondary activities

Tertiary activities

80

Primary activities

November

70

J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O N

2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022


40

J

2017


15.8 December

A J O J A J O J A J O D


s. a. / Seasonally adjusted series and trend series based on data in
nominal US dollars. The former is represented by a solid line and the latter
by a dotted line. The chart’s range was adjusted to facilitate its reading.
Source: Prepared by Banco de México with data from the Tax
Administration Service (SAT, for its Spanish acronym), the Ministry of the
Economy (SE, for its Spanish acronym), Banco de México, the National
Institute of Statistics and Geography (INEGI, for its Spanish acronym).
Mexico’s Merchandise Trade Balance, and the National System of
Statistical and Geographical Information (SNIEG, for its Spanish acronym),
Information of national interest.

On the production side, in November, tertiary
activities decreased for the second consecutive
month, reversing the growth registered in September
(Chart 15). The decrease occurred relatively across
all sectors. Industrial activity continued showing
weakness, mainly due to the slowdown in
manufacturing (Chart 16). In contrast, construction
showed a certain reactivation.


s. a. / Seasonally adjusted and trend series. The former is represented by a
solid line and the latter by a dotted line.
Source: Mexico’s System of National Accounts (SCNM, for its Spanish
acronym), INEGI.

**Chart 16**

**Industrial Activity [1/]**

Indices 2013 = 100, s. a.

130

120

110

100

90

80

Total

70 Mining (22.3%)

Manufacturing (49.7%)

60 Construction (23.3%)

Utilities (4.7%) November

50

J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O N

2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022

s. a. / Seasonally adjusted and trend series. The former is represented by a
solid line and the latter by a dotted line.
1/ Figures in parenthesis correspond to their share in the total in 2013.
Source: Mexico’s System of National Accounts (SCNM, for its Spanish
acronym), INEGI.

Based on timely information, the negative output gap
continued decreasing gradually during the fourth
quarter of 2022 (Chart 17). At the end of 2022, both
national and urban unemployment rates remained at
relatively low levels (Chart 18). Based on seasonally
adjusted figures, IMSS-insured jobs continued
trending upwards at the beginning of 2023. Finally, in
November, unit labor costs in the manufacturing
sector partly reversed the decline observed in the
previous month (Chart 19).

In December 2022, domestic financing to firms
registered a positive real annual variation for the sixth
consecutive month. Bank credit to firms continued
recovering gradually, showing a positive real annual
variation for the eighth consecutive month. This

17


-----

occurred in a context in which demand for corporate
credit continued recovering and lending conditions
remained tight compared to those prevailing at the
beginning of the pandemic. These conditions,
however, have been easing for smaller firms since
the second half of 2021. Net corporate debt issuance
in the domestic market increased significantly during
the fourth quarter of 2022, in contrast with the
negative flows observed during the first half of that
year.

**Chart 17**

**Output Gap Estimates [1/]**

Potential output percentages, s. a.

12

8

4

0

-4

-8

-12

Global Economic Activity Index

-16 (IGAE) 2/

Gross Domestic Product 2/

-20 Q-IV

95% confidence interval 3/ December

-24

J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O D

2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022

s. a. / Calculations based on seasonally adjusted figures.
1/ Output gap estimated with a tail-corrected Hodrick-Prescott filter; see
Banco de México (2009), “Inflation Report, April-June 2009”, p.74.
2/ GDP figures up to 4-2022 and IGAE implicit up to December 2022,
consistent with said timely figure.
3/ Output gap confidence interval calculated with a method of unobserved
components.
Source: Prepared by Banco de México with INEGI data.

**Chart 18**

**National and Urban Unemployment Rates**

Percent, s. a.

6.5

Urban unemployment rate

6.0

National unemployment rate

5.5

5.0

4.5

4.0

3.5

3.0

December

2.5

J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O D

2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022

s. a. / Seasonally adjusted and trend series. The former is represented by a
solid line and the latter by a dotted line.
Source: Prepared by Banco de México with data from ENOE, ETOE (from
April to June 2020), and ENOE new edition (ENOE[N]) from July to date.


125

Unit labor costs 157.14

120

Productivity

115

110

105

100

95

90

November

85

J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O N

2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022

s. a. / Seasonally adjusted and trend series. The former is represented by a
solid line and the latter by a dotted line.
1/ Productivity based on hours worked.
Source: Prepared by Banco de México with seasonally adjusted data of the
Monthly Manufacturing Industry Survey and industrial activity indicators of
Mexico’s System of National Accounts (Sistema de Cuentas Nacionales de
_México, SCNM), INEGI._

As for credit to households, commercial bank
housing portfolio kept growing. Banking consumer
credit continued expanding in real annual terms as a
result of the dynamism of payroll credit and credit
cards loans, while the personal loan portfolio has
moderated its pace of growth. This has taken place
in a context in which household demand for credit
overall has continued to increase. Mortgage lending
and consumer credit conditions remained relatively
stable during the fourth quarter of 2022.

In December 2022, interest rates on bank credit to
firms increased, consistent with the behavior of the
reference rate, reaching levels above those observed
at the end of 2019. Corporate credit intermediation
margins remained at levels below those of February
2020, although they increased slightly in December
2022. Interest rates on mortgages have increased
since July 2022, after having remained at levels
around their historical lows since August 2020. In
July-August 2022, credit card interest rates

increased with respect to the previous bimester,
while those of payroll loans registered similar levels.

As for portfolio quality, in December 2022 corporate
and housing loan delinquency rates decreased with
respect to those observed in the previous month and
continued at low levels. Finally, consumer portfolio
delinquency rates increased, although they remained
at levels lower than those observed prior to the onset
of the pandemic.

18


**Chart 19**

**Productivity and Unit Labor Costs in the**

**Manufacturing Sector [1/]**

Indices 2013 = 100, s. a.

.


-----

**A.2.3. Development of inflation and inflation**
**outlook**

Between November 2022 and January 2023, annual
headline inflation increased from 7.80 to 7.91%
(Chart 20 and Table 1). This result is explained by
the increase in non-core inflation during this period.
Core inflation remained at high levels and, although
it interrupted its upward trend, it still does not show a
downward trajectory.

**Chart 20**

**Consumer Price Index**

Annual percentage change

14
13 CPI

Core

12

Non-core

11
10

9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0

-1
-2 January
-3

J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J

2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023

Source: Banco de México and INEGI.

Between November 2022 and January 2023, annual
core inflation declined from 8.51 to 8.45%. Annual
merchandise inflation decreased from 11.28 to
11.00% during the same period (Chart 21). Within it,
food merchandise prices, which had been increasing
since mid-2021, remained relatively stable, at high
levels of 14.09 and 14.08% in the same months,
while non-food merchandise prices decreased from
8.13 to 7.53% (Chart 22). Annual services inflation
rose from 5.35 to 5.51% during the same period. The
prices of this component continued to be affected by
higher input prices, in a context where the demand
for services has recovered. In the same months, the
annual variation of services other than education and
housing registered levels of 7.45 and 7.53%, with the
high inflation of food services standing out, while
housing inflation rose from 3.11 to 3.38%.


**Chart 21**

**Merchandise and Services Core Price Sub-index**

Annual percentage change

12

Merchandise

11 Services

10

9

8

7

6

5

4

3

2

1

January

0

J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J

2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023

Source: Banco de México and INEGI.

**Chart 22**

**Merchandise Core Price Sub-index**

Annual percentage change

16

Food, beverages and tobacco

14 Non-food merchandise

12

10

8

6

4

2

January

0

J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J

2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023


Source: Banco de México and INEGI.

Annual non-core inflation increased from 5.73 to
6.32% between November 2022 and January 2023
(Chart 23 and Table 1). Within its components, the
annual inflation of agricultural and livestock products
rose from 8.89 to 9.93%. This increase is explained
by the rise from 3.44 to 10.17% in the annual inflation
of fruits and vegetables, while that of livestock
products decreased from 13.79 to 9.73%. The annual
variation of energy products registered levels of 2.29
and 2.52% during the same period.

19


-----

**Chart 23**

**Non-core Price Sub-index**

Annual percentage change


20

15

10

5

0

-5

-10

-15

J

2017


M S J

2018


M S J

2019


M S J

2020


M S J

2021


M S J

2022


M S J

2023


Source: Banco de México and INEGI.

Regarding inflation expectations drawn from the
survey conducted by Banco de México among
private sector specialists, between November 2022
and January 2023, the medians for headline and core
inflation for the end of 2023 increased from 5.07 to
5.18% and from 5.06 to 5.20%, respectively. The
median of headline inflation expectations for the end
of 2024 rose from 3.80 to 4.00%, while that for core
inflation increased from 3.89 and 4.00%. The median
of headline and core inflation expectations for the
next 4 years (medium term) decreased from 4.00 to


3.80% and from 4.00 to 3.83%, respectively. The
median of headline inflation expectations for the long
term (5 to 8 years) decreased slightly from 3.60 to
3.58%, while that for core inflation was revised from
3.55 to 3.50%. Finally, compensation for inflation and
inflationary risk remains at high levels. Within it,
expectations implied by market instruments

remained stable, while the inflation risk premium
decreased, although it remains at high levels.

Inflation is projected to converge to the 3% target in
the fourth quarter of 2024. These projections are
subject to risks. On the upside: i) persistence of core
inflation at high levels; ii) pressures on energy prices
or on agricultural and livestock product prices; iii) the
Chinese economy’s reopening; iv) exchange rate
depreciation; and v) greater cost-related pressures.
On the downside: i) a greater-than-anticipated
slowdown of the world economy; ii) a decline in the
intensity of the geopolitical conflict; iii) a better
functioning of supply chains; iv) a lower pass-through
effect from some cost-related pressures; and v) a
larger-than-anticipated effect from the Federal
Government’s measures to fight elevated prices. The
balance of risks for the trajectory of inflation within
the forecast horizon remains biased to the upside.


**Table 1**

**Consumer Price Index and Components**

Annual percentage change

**Item** **November 2022** **December 2022** **January 2023**

**CPI** **7.80** **7.82** **7.91**

**SubyacenteCore** **8.51** **8.35** **8.45**

**Merchandise** **11.28** **11.09** **11.00**

Food, beverages and tobacco 14.09 14.14 14.08

Non-food merchandise 8.13 7.68 7.53

**Services** **5.35** **5.19** **5.51**

Housing 3.11 3.17 3.38

Education (tuitions) 4.49 4.49 4.48

Other services 7.45 7.07 7.53

**No SubyacenteNon-core** **5.73** **6.27** **6.32**

**Agricultural and livestock products** **8.89** **9.52** **9.93**

Fruits and vegetablesFruits abd vegetables 3.44 7.22 10.17

Livestock productsLivestock 13.79 11.50 9.73

**Energy and government-authorized prices Energéticos y Tarifas Aut. por Gobierno** **3.23** **3.66** **3.44**

Energy productsEnergy 2.29 2.91 2.52

Government-authorized pricesTarifas Autorizadas por Gobierno 5.61 5.48 5.70

Source: INEGI.


20


-----

-----

-----

