-----

-----

**FOREWARNING**
This document is provided for the reader’s convenience
only. The translation from the official Spanish version
was made by Banco de México’s staff. Discrepancies
may arise between the original document in Spanish
and its English translation. For this reason, the original
Spanish version is the only official document.


**1. PLACE, DATE AND PARTICIPANTS**

**1.1. Place: Meeting held by virtual means.**

**1.2. Date of Governing Board meeting:** June 21,
2023.

**1.3. Participants:**

- Victoria Rodríguez, Governor.

- Galia Borja, Deputy Governor.

- Irene Espinosa, Deputy Governor.

- Jonathan Heath, Deputy Governor.

- Omar Mejía, Deputy Governor.

- Rogelio Eduardo Ramírez, Secretary of Finance

and Public Credit.

- Gabriel Yorio, Undersecretary of Finance and

Public Credit.

- Elías Villanueva, Secretary of the Governing Board.

Prior to this meeting, preliminary work by Banco de
México’s staff analyzing the economic and financial
environment as well as the developments in inflation
and the determinants and outlook for inflation, was
conducted and presented to the Governing Board
(see Annex).

**2. ANALYSIS AND RATIONALE BEHIND THE**
**GOVERNING BOARD’S VOTING**

**_International environment_**

**Most members pointed out that global economic**
**activity** **has** **continued** **to** **recover,** **albeit**

**heterogeneously** **across** **countries.** **They**

**highlighted that economic activity in the United**
**States has continued showing resilience. They**
**indicated that, in contrast, economic growth in**
**China has turned out to be lower than expected.**
**One member considered that the global economic**
recovery has been atypical. He/she highlighted that
a rebalancing among aggregate expenditure

components continues, along with a lesser global
supply and demand imbalance. **Most members**
**underlined the strength of the labor market in the**


**United States. Some members mentioned that this**
is also observed in other advanced economies. One
member added that global economic activity and
labor markets remain strong even under tight liquidity
conditions and uncertainty factors.

**Most** **members** **stated** **that** **world** **growth**

**prospects** **for** **2023** **continue** **implying** **a**

**deceleration,** **although** **less** **intense** **than**

**previously anticipated. They added that a slight**
**rebound of economic activity is expected for**
**2024.** **One** member added that, in this context, a
moderation of world labor markets is anticipated.
**Some members considered that a recession in some**
economies is likely, albeit moderate and short-lived.
**One member mentioned that the resilience of the US**
economy has contributed to improve growth
prospects for Latin America. He/she commented that
a better economic performance is also foreseen in
the euro area, while lower growth is anticipated in
Asia. **Another member stated that timely indicators**
point to a greater expansion of services compared to
manufacturing. Among the risks to global economic
growth, some members mentioned the prevalence of
an environment of geopolitical tensions and
economic fragmentation. **One member pointed out**
that this has encouraged the nearshoring process. In
this regard, he/she mentioned that shocks

associated with the pandemic and the geopolitical
conflict in Ukraine, in addition to their short-term
effects, could also have implications for the long
term. **Another** member underlined the risk

associated with tighter financial conditions.

**All members pointed out that headline inflation**
**continued decreasing in most economies. Most**
**members attributed such decline to lower**
**pressures** **on** **energy** **and** **food** **prices.**

**Nevertheless, all members forewarned that**
**headline inflation remains at high levels. One**
member added that it is still above central banks’
targets. Most members highlighted that the core
**component has shown a resistance to decline.**
**One member pointed out that, at the global level, the**
core component remains at levels nearly twice the
central banks’ targets. **Another member estimated**
that it will decline very gradually. He/she pointed out
that services inflation remains affected in several
economies, highlighting the upward trend in the
shelter component in the United States. **One**
member underlined that, in some economies, core
inflation even continues trending upwards. **Another**
member mentioned that, during disinflationary
processes, the reduction in inflation is not necessarily
linear, but rather, fluctuations may occur, making it
difficult to identify its trend. He/she used as an

1


-----

example the cases of Canada, Japan and the United
States, which registered a moderate rebound in
headline inflation in April, as compared to the
previous month. He/she considered that longerlasting or more intense effects of price-related
shocks cannot be ruled out, which could delay the
convergence of inflation to its target.

**Most members highlighted that, after having left**
**their reference rates unchanged, some advanced**
**economy monetary authorities increased them**
**again. One member stated that, while the global**
monetary tightening cycle has been somewhat
similar across economies, looking ahead, a greater
heterogeneity in its pace of moderation is expected.
He/she pointed out that this is due to the unequal
evolution of core inflation, as well as to the
differences in the timing of the respective monetary
policy cycles, with advanced economies having
started their hiking cycles after several emerging
economies. **Some members indicated that, overall,**
central banks continue stating that interest rates
should remain at high levels for an extended period.
**Most members mentioned that, in light of the**
**complex inflationary environment, there was an**
**increase in the expected trajectory for reference**
**rates of advanced economy central banks. They**
**also noted a lower probability of interest rate cuts**
**this year.**

**Most members mentioned that, in its last**
**meeting, the US Federal Reserve left the target**
**range for the federal funds rate unchanged. One**
member stated that the chairman of that institution
ruled out interest rate cuts in 2023 and mentioned
instead that these cuts would only be evaluated once
inflation has decreased considerably. **Most**

**members underlined that the median of the**
**Federal Reserve members' projections suggests**
**that they could raise the funds rate by 50 basis**
**points in the second half of 2023.** **One member**
mentioned that the Federal Reserve now expects the
US economy to show more resilience while it
anticipates higher levels of core inflation by the end
of the year.

**Most** **members** **highlighted** **the** **positive**

**performance of international financial markets.**
**They attributed said results to greater risk**
**appetite following the suspension of the debt**
**ceiling in the United States as well as to the**
**perception of lower risks in its banking sector.**
**Some members indicated that expectations that the**
main central banks are nearing the end of their hiking
cycle also contributed to the above. One member
added that the probability of a systemic risk event


materializing has decreased. **Most members**
**mentioned that the lesser risk aversion was**
**reflected in gains in the main stock market**
**indices. One member noted that this was more**
apparent in the technology sector shares. He/she
underlined that interest rates increased in the main
economies. **Another member pointed out that the**
increase in short-term interest rates was due to the
reassertion of the restrictive tone by the main central
banks. **One member noted that foreign exchange**
markets showed a heterogeneous behavior by
region, with Latin American currencies appreciating
the most. **Another member stated that emerging**
economies registered inflows into equity assets and
outflows from fixed-income assets. He/she added
that, although risk appetite increased, the outlook for
financial markets remains negative, given the
environment of uncertainty and the expectation of an
economic deceleration.

**_Economic activity in Mexico_**

**Most members pointed out that domestic**
**economic activity has shown resilience in a**
**complex external environment. One member**
mentioned that in the first quarter of 2023 GDP
surprised to the upside. Another member stated that
available information suggests that economic activity
would have expanded in April, supported by the
manufacturing sector and by a certain reactivation of
tertiary activities. **Most members noted that some**
**recent indicators point to a deceleration in the**
**second quarter. One member added that the**
balance of risks to growth is more equilibrated given
that some upward risks, such as the resilience of the
US economy, have gained more relevance.

**Some members noted that industrial production**
rebounded in April 2023, after having contracted
during the previous month. **One member warned**
that, from a medium-term perspective, it remains
sluggish and does not show a change in trend since
the second half of 2022. **Another member**
mentioned that manufacturing recovered slightly in
April and that the component of transportation
equipment has already reached its pre-pandemic
levels, but that other segments of industrial
production decreased at the margin. Some members
highlighted that there are signs of a loss of dynamism
in manufacturing production. One member added
that mining shows signs of deceleration. As to the
services sector, **some members underlined its**
growth during the first quarter of the year. However,
**one member highlighted that only 30% of its**
subsectors followed clearly positive dynamics during
said period. Another member noted the dynamism

2


-----

shown by the segment of accommodation and food
preparation services, which is about to reach its prepandemic level. He/she indicated that the services
segments that have recovered more rapidly since the
pandemic are those mostly associated with the
industrial sector.

**Some members underlined that domestic demand**
has continued increasing, although **one member**
considered that it has done so at a slight pace. Most
**members indicated that, by the end of the first**
**quarter of 2023, private consumption continued**
**expanding,** **mainly** **supported** **by** **the**

**consumption of imported goods. One member**
mentioned that the consumption of services shows
sluggishness. **Another member indicated that, in**
monthly terms, it grew marginally in March, although
he/she emphasized that, in annual terms, it
registered high growth. He/she underlined that the
timely indicator of private consumption shows that it
continued growing during the April-May bimester,
albeit with some moderation at the margin. **One**
member pointed out that leading indicators, such as
indices based on Internet searches, suggest that
there will be a moderation in the growth of
consumption of services. **As for investment, most**
**members underlined that it continued increasing**
**in March, mainly driven by spending on**
**machinery** **and** **equipment.** **However,** **they**

**highlighted that construction remains weak. One**
member attributed the latter to the decreasing trend
in residential investment. **Another** member

underlined that, given the opportunities provided by
nearshoring, it is necessary to implement public and
fiscal policies that foster a favorable environment for
private investment and that public investment
focuses on the provision of the infrastructure
necessary to attract investment.

**Regarding the external sector, most members**
**noted that the value of manufacturing exports**
**decreased in April, due to a fall in the automotive**
**sector. One member explained that the above**
reflected a fall in the volume exported, rather than in
prices. **Some members highlighted that non-**
automotive exports to the United States continued
increasing and remained at high levels. One member
forewarned that, looking ahead, a moderation in
external demand continues to be expected.

**All members pointed out that the labor market**
**remains strong. They highlighted that the**
**unemployment rate is at minimum historical**
**levels. Some members mentioned that the labor**
participation rate continued increasing. One member
underlined that the number of IMSS-insured workers


continued expanding. **Another member added that**
the number of available job vacancies increased.
He/she mentioned that this tends to be associated
with positive economic activity shocks, rather than
with a sectoral reallocation. In this context, most
**members considered that the labor market**
**shows signs of tightness.** **Some members noted**
that the unemployment gap is negative, that is, that
the open unemployment rate is lower than the Nonaccelerating Inflation Rate of Unemployment

(NAIRU). One member added that such gap appears
to be negative, even with a metric that includes the
inactive but available-for-work population. **Another**
member indicated that employment is growing at a
rate higher than labor participation, which in the past
has coincided with a positive output gap. Most
**members** **underlined** **the** **relatively** **large**

**magnitude of wage revisions.** **One member**
reiterated that in May the annual variations of
contractual wages and of wages of IMSS-insured
workers remained at high levels. **Another member**
pointed out that the annualized quarterly growth rate
of average wages drawn from the National Survey of
Occupation and Employment (ENOE, for its acronym
in Spanish) accelerated during the first quarter of the
year. Finally, one member added that the wage bill is
increasing at a rate unseen in a long time, and that
some business sector participants perceive labor
shortages to some extent.

**Most members stated that the estimate of the**
**output gap keeps narrowing. Some members**
pointed out that it is not statistically different from
zero. One member expressed that he/she expects it
to remain close to zero during 2023 and 2024.
**Another member cautioned that GDP has grown at**
a slower rate than employment, which raises
questions regarding the impact of the shocks that
have affected the economy on the country's factor
productivity.

**_Inflation in Mexico_**

**All members highlighted that, since the last**
**monetary** **policy** **meeting,** **annual** **headline**

**inflation continued decreasing, although it**
**remains at high levels. They mentioned that, in**
**the first fortnight of June, it registered 5.18%.**
**One member underlined that headline inflation has**
decreased for more than four consecutive months.
**Another member mentioned that it continues on its**
convergence path. **One member highlighted that**
different measures of central tendency show
widespread decreases. He/she added that there is a
high probability that the current price dynamics do
not correspond to those of a high inflation regime.

3


-----

**All members underlined that the decrease in**
**headline inflation has fundamentally responded**
**to the evolution of the non-core component and,**
**to a lesser degree, to the decline in core inflation.**
**One member noted that of the 3.52 percentage**
points by which headline inflation decreased
between August 2022 and the first fortnight of June,
around 75% is attributable to the fall in the non-core
component, which declined by 10.6 percentage
points during that period. He/she added that the core
component so far has decreased by slightly over 1.5
percentage points since its peak in November 2022.
**Another** member noted that the disinflationary
process will comprise two stages. The first one, in
which inflation decreases but still remains at elevated
levels, and the second one, in which it consolidates
at levels consistent with its target. He/she pointed out
that in the first stage the speed of reduction of the
CPI components will be heterogeneous, and
therefore some of them will likely have relatively high
readings.

**All members indicated that diverse inflation**
**pressures have been easing. One member added**
that this has been more noticeable during the second
quarter of 2023. Another member pointed out that
most supply chains are already operating under
normal conditions, that international food and
commodity prices are clearly decreasing, and that
inflation in the United States is declining, while
producer prices in Mexico are exhibiting negative
inflation rates. Most members considered that the
**monetary tightening attained has contributed to**
**the inflation’s behavior.** **One member added that**
base effects are also contributing to the above.
He/she mentioned that some estimates that
decompose inflation in different time frequencies
show that its decline is mainly explained by shortterm factors, while medium- and long-term trends
remain affected. Some members noted that inflation
is still influenced by the shocks it has been subject
to.

**All members stated that core inflation continued**
**decreasing,** **although** **more** **gradually** **than**

**headline inflation. They mentioned that, in the**
**first fortnight of June, it registered 6.91%. One**
member argued that its decrease has been more
noticeable in recent months, given that of the nearly
158 basis points it has fallen since its peak in
November 2022, approximately 118 have been
registered since April 2023. Another member agreed
that core inflation is already trending downwards,
although he/she acknowledged that there is still a
long road ahead. One member pointed out that it


remains at high levels and continues facing
significant pressures.

**Most members mentioned that merchandise**
**inflation has continued decreasing. One member**
highlighted that it has been declining for six
consecutive months, but still remains at high levels.
**Another member considered that its decline has**
been slow. One member noted that it has benefited
from significant base effects. **Most members**
**warned** **that** **food** **merchandise** **inflation**

**continues** **registering** **double-digit** **annual**

**variations.** **One member highlighted that the prices**
of basic goods associated with food and personal
care products continue registering increases of over
10%. However, **another member mentioned that**
signs of mitigation of merchandise price pressures
are more noticeable when seasonally adjusted and
annualized monthly variations of their price index are
considered. He/she noted that, based on latest
readings, the three-month moving average of such
variations in food merchandise prices registers
5.87%, while its annual rate registers 10.67%.
He/she added that for non-food merchandise these
figures are 3.48 and 5.65%, respectively. He/she
pointed out that the share of weight-adjusted items
from the food merchandise component with price
variations larger than 10% is currently at 10.6%, after
having been at 80% in 2022. He/she added that, in
the case of non-food merchandise, this share is
currently 7.7%, while last year it was above 40%.

**Some members noted that annual services inflation**
remains high. One member underlined that most
variations in services prices have not yet registered
an inflection point. Some members noted, however,
that, at the margin, this component showed signs of
moderation. **One** member mentioned that it

decreased slightly during the first fortnight of June,
due to a marginal reduction in the inflation of services
other than housing and education. He/she added that
inflation of housing and education services remained
relatively stable, although at levels above 3%.
**Another member noted that the dynamics of**
services prices improved when considering their
seasonally adjusted and annualized monthly

variation, which shows a three-month moving
average of 3.84% compared to the annual rate of
5.23%. He/she emphasized that the share of CPI
items in the services basket, which currently shows
double-digit price variations, is 1.1%, while at the
beginning of the year it reached levels of around
20%.

**Some members noted that the high level of services**
inflation occurs in a context of a strong labor market,

4


-----

in which the demand for services has recovered. One
member acknowledged that there is a certain effect
of labor market dynamics, but he/she stated that their
magnitude does not seem to be such as to explain
the levels reached by services inflation. He/she
considered that, in any case, this would be one of the
factors that have contributed to the persistence of
core inflation. He/she added that, while domestic
pressures are typically associated with increases in
services inflation, the behavior of the latter currently
reflects other factors, such as global shocks to
certain components or delayed price increases due
to weak demand at the time. Therefore, he/she
estimated that its evolution not necessarily responds
to domestic pressures. He/she stated that, in his/her
opinion, the dynamics of services inflation continue
reflecting: i) the recovery of this sector in view of the
mitigation of changes in consumption patterns, which
has led to price increases that had been postponed
due to weak demand, and, in this regard, he/she
highlighted the increases in education prices; ii) that
housing inflation continues being affected by last
year's high inflation figures; and iii) that some items
continue responding to increases in international
references, such as food services. Regarding this
last item, he/she mentioned that the sub-index of
services excluding housing, education and tourism is
338 basis points above its historical average, of
which 213 correspond to food services.

**Most members mentioned that non-core inflation**
**remained at historically low levels, reaching**
**0.03% during the first fortnight of June. They**
**pointed out that the above was due to the lower**
**annual variations of energy and agricultural and**
**livestock products’ prices. One member stated**
that monetary policy does not have a major impact
on this component. Another member highlighted that
domestic gas prices exhibit negative variations of a
magnitude unseen in historical records.

**Some members underlined that longer-term inflation**
expectations have remained stable. Nevertheless,
**one member mentioned that their dispersion is high**
and noted that the skewness coefficient of their
distribution is still positive. **Another member stated**
that medium- and long-term expectations remain
high and do not exhibit a downward trend, which
he/she considered a matter of concern. **Most**
**members considered that short-term inflation**
**expectations** **have** **improved** **somewhat,**

**registering moderate adjustments. One member**
pointed out that this behavior has not been
generalized. **Some** members indicated that

expectations for the next 12 months and those for the
end of 2023 and 2024 decreased. **One member**


underlined that expectations for the end of 2024 are
above Banco de México’s projections. **Some**
members indicated that breakeven inflation

increased since the last monetary policy decision and
remains above target. One member estimated that
the price dynamics of basic consumer goods could
affect household inflation expectations.

**Most members emphasized that inflation is still**
**projected to converge to the 3% target in the**
**fourth quarter of 2024. One member stated that**
these previsions consider Banco de México’s
monetary policy actions and that the effects of the
inflationary shocks associated with the pandemic and
with the military conflict in Ukraine continue
dissipating. **Some members mentioned that Banco**
de México’s forecasts for headline inflation were
revised marginally downwards for some quarters.
They added that those for core inflation remained
practically unchanged. One member pointed out that
its seasonally adjusted annualized quarterly rate is
expected to continue declining and fall below the
upper limit of the target range in the fourth quarter of
2023.

**Most members considered that uncertainty**
**regarding the expected disinflationary process**
**persists.** **They highlighted that this is a complex**
**phenomenon.** **Some members estimated that,**
although base effects will favor the decline in core
inflation during the remainder of the year, there is a
significant challenge for this decline to continue
towards the end of 2023 and during 2024. **One**
member indicated that, although external inflationary
pressures are easing, attention must now center on
domestic pressures, both structural and conjunctural,
especially those related to demand and the labor
market. **Another member estimated that the**
persistence of inflation stems from domestic
pressures. He/she underlined that, based on some
indicators, inflationary pressures of manufactured
goods respond to demand-related pressures.

**All members agreed that the balance of risks for**
**the trajectory of inflation within the forecast**
**horizon remains biased to the upside.** **One**
member mentioned that such balance has not
deteriorated. **Among upward risks to inflation,**
**most members highlighted the persistence of**
**core inflation at high levels. One member rated**
this as the most concerning risk. **Another member**
estimated that the above not only responds to the
shocks associated with the pandemic and with the
military conflict in Ukraine, but also appears to derive
from changes in price formation, as shown by the
greater frequency and magnitude of goods and

5


-----

services’ price adjustments. **Most** **members**

**indicated as an upward risk the possibility of**
**greater cost-related pressures. In this regard,**
**some members expressed concern regarding the**
tightening of the labor market. One member argued
that the accelerated wage growth is incompatible
with the inflation target. He/she considered that
pressures related to labor costs, reflected in different
wage indicators, are already being passed on to
consumers given the strength of demand. However,
**another member underlined that inflation indicators**
that are more sensitive to slack conditions and to
wages show a downward trajectory, although they
remain at high levels. **One member mentioned that**
the evolution of the labor market should be consistent
with the equilibrium of the economy and with price
stability. He/she added that, so far, readings of this
market that could imply adverse effects on inflation
are heterogeneous and nonconclusive. **All**

**members agreed that the dynamics of the labor**
**market should continue to be monitored. One**
member argued that measures of economic slack will
gain even more relevance in the coming months.
Meanwhile, another member mentioned as an
upward risk a possible abrupt correction in market
expectations for the Federal Reserve’s future
actions, with its corresponding impact on the
exchange rate and price stability. **Most members**
**mentioned the risk of a greater-than-expected**
**increase in non-core inflation in the following**
**months. One member warned that, even with the**
foreseen increase in non-core inflation, the central
bank forecasts would imply that, during the planning
horizon, non-core inflation would be below its
average of the last 13 years, and thus there is a risk
that this indicator registers higher-than-anticipated
levels. **Some members mentioned higher prices of**
agricultural and livestock products, caused by
climate-related factors, as an example of risks that
could lead to an increase in non-core inflation.
Among risks to the downside, **one member**
mentioned the possibility of a greater-than
anticipated slowdown in global economic activity,
mainly in the United States, and also in Mexico,
which would lead to lower domestic inflationary
pressures.

**_Macrofinancial environment_**

**All members highlighted the appreciation of the**
**Mexican peso since the previous monetary policy**
**meeting. Most members noted that the peso-**
**dollar exchange rate reached its lowest level**
**since December 2015 and that trading conditions**
**in the foreign exchange market have been**
**favorable. They considered that this behavior is**


**due to the country's sound macroeconomic**
**fundamentals and the wide volatility-adjusted**
**interest rate spread between Mexico and the**
**United States. One member added that the yield in**
domestic currency implied on foreign exchange
forwards being above the reference rate reflects that
the Mexican peso is attractive to investors. **Some**
members considered that remittance inflows and
better investment prospects in view of the

nearshoring process have also contributed to the
favorable behavior of the national currency. **One**
member added the weakening of the US dollar in
recent months and uncertainty regarding the
beginning of a rate-cutting cycle by the US Federal
Reserve.

**Most members highlighted that, since the**
**previous monetary policy decision, short-term**
**government** **bond** **yields** **decreased,** **while**

**medium- and long-term ones registered limited**
**adjustments. One member added that the inversion**
of the yield curve prevailed. **Another member**
underlined that the performance of domestic financial
markets was in line with global markets, registering
gains in the main stock market index and reductions
in risk premia. However, one member noted that the
stock market registered a negative performance at
the margin.

**Some members underlined that there has been a**
recovery in the percentage of Mexican Federal
Treasury Certificates (Cetes, for their acronym in
Spanish) held by foreign investors. **One member**
stated that non-resident holdings of bonds

decreased since the last decision as a result, in part,
of an increase in the cost of foreign exchange
hedging and of profit taking from positions given the
appreciation of the Mexican peso during this year.
He/she indicated that pension and mutual funds have
been the main buyers of government bonds this year.
He/she noted that the increase in employer’s
contributions has increased the resources managed
by the Specialized Investment Companies for
Retirement Funds (Siefores, for their acronym in
Spanish) and, in turn, the demand for different
assets, including government debt and corporate
securities.

**Most members mentioned that the pass-through**
**of increases in the reference rate to commercial**
**bank deposit rates has contributed to incentivize**
**Mexican households to save through term**
**deposits. Some members indicated that commercial**
banks' performing credit to private firms and
households has continued to expand, especially for
consumer credit. **One** member noted that

6


-----

delinquency rates remain relatively low and stable,
although a marginal increase in those of credit cards
has been observed. Regarding the financial cycle,
he/she added that the financial conditions index for
Mexico has trended upwards so far this year, and
therefore financial conditions remain tight, although
at stable levels. **Another member pointed out that**
credit to large issuing firms decelerated in a difficult
environment for issuing securities in foreign markets.
He/she pointed out that this stands in contrast with
the expansion of domestic financing to private firms.

**_Monetary policy_**

**The Governing Board evaluated the magnitude**
**and diversity of the inflationary shocks and their**
**determinants, along with the evolution of**
**medium- and long-term inflation expectations**
**and the price formation process. It considered**
**that the disinflationary process is underway**
**given that diverse pressures have eased.**
**Nevertheless, it deemed that these continue**
**having an incidence on inflation, and thus it**
**remains high. Also, that the inflationary outlook**
**is still very complex. Based on the above, and**
**considering the monetary policy stance already**
**attained, with the presence of all its members, the**
**Board decided unanimously to maintain the**
**target for the overnight interbank interest rate at**
**11.25%. With this decision, the monetary policy**
**stance remains in the trajectory required for**
**inflation to converge to its 3% target within the**
**forecast horizon.**

**The Board will thoroughly monitor inflationary**
**pressures as well as all factors that have an**
**incidence on the foreseen path for inflation and**
**its expectations. It estimates that the inflationary**
**outlook will be complicated and uncertain**
**throughout the entire forecast horizon, with**
**upward risks. Thus, in order to achieve an orderly**
**and sustained convergence of headline inflation**
**to the 3% target, it considers that it will be**
**necessary to maintain the reference rate at its**
**current level for an extended period. The central**
**bank reaffirms its commitment with its primary**
**mandate and the need to continue its efforts to**
**consolidate an environment of low and stable**
**inflation.**

**One** **member considered that caution is required at**
the current stage of disinflation. He/she

acknowledged that since the last monetary policy
meeting, the disinflation process continued moving
forward. However, he/she judged that the outlook
remains complicated. In this context, he/she argued
in favor of keeping the reference rate unchanged at


11.25%. He/she underlined that disinflationary
processes are complex. He/she pointed out that
there is always uncertainty about the pace at which
shocks may dissipate and that some inflation
components may exhibit volatility. He/she highlighted
that the reference rate should be maintained at its
current level for a period that is long enough to
ensure that inflation declines in a sustained manner
and that the upward bias of the balance of risks for
inflation moderates. He/she stated that it is still too
early to consider the possibility of interest rate cuts.
He/she noted that the monetary policy stance
attained needs more time to continue operating.
He/she pointed out that it will be essential to continue
analyzing the observed and forecasted behavior of
inflation and its components, as well as of all its
determinants. Among these, he/she highlighted
inflation expectations, cost-related pressures,

domestic economic activity, labor and financial
market dynamics, as well as external factors such as
world inflation, global economic activity, and
international monetary policy. He/she highlighted
that it is necessary to closely monitor a wide range of
economic and financial variables. He/she argued that
during this inflationary period, monetary policy has
contributed to the anchoring of inflation expectations,
mainly long-term ones. He/she mentioned that,
despite the magnitude of the shocks, they have
remained relatively stable, which has been essential
for the disinflation process to begin. He/she added
that monetary policy has contributed to the resilient
behavior of the Mexican peso. He/she stated that this
has eased inflationary pressures by moderating the
costs of imported inputs used by the productive
sector. He/she noted that it has also contributed to
moderate the rate of expansion of external demand
faced by the export manufacturing sector, which
shows high levels of capacity utilization. He/she
added that monetary tightening has fostered a
process of intertemporal substitution of household
spending. Finally, he/she reiterated that Banco de
México remains firmly committed to its primary
mandate of price stability. He/she stated that this is
to the benefit of the country's population, particularly
those with lower incomes.

**Another** **member considered that, in view of the**
prevailing inflationary pressures, it is essential to
preserve the level of monetary restriction attained in
order to promote the decline of inflation in line with
the central bank's projections and mitigate

inflationary risks. He/she thus considered it

appropriate to maintain the reference rate at its
current level of 11.25%. He/she stated that the high
uncertainty environment regarding the inflationary
process compels Banco de México to act with

7


-----

caution and favor a flexible monetary policy stance
subject to incoming data. He/she noted that
subsequent monetary policy decisions will depend on
incoming data, particularly on headline and core
inflation consolidating their downward trend as
expected, and on domestic pressures not generating
persistence. He/she added that the central bank
must clearly state that it is prepared to respond to the
circumstances. He/she pointed out that it cannot be
ruled out that the level of monetary restriction
attained should be maintained for longer than
anticipated or that a greater or lesser tightening may
be required. He/she stated that, in any case, a
restrictive stance should be maintained throughout
the planning horizon. He/she mentioned that the
monetary policy statement should highlight that the
favorable evolution of inflation has mainly responded
to external factors, while domestic pressures have
persisted and may hinder the convergence of
inflation to its target within the forecast horizon.
Finally, he/she warned that the accumulated lag in
physical investment and lower productivity, both
worsened by the pandemic, may have lowered the
country’s potential growth, which constitutes a risk
factor for inflation that, in his/her opinion, will have
significant implications for monetary policy

conduction in the short and medium terms. He/she
warned that if the country’s potential growth has
fallen and in the absence of a restrictive monetary
policy, the economy could be on its path towards an
equilibrium of low growth and high levels of inflation.
Looking ahead, the possibility of lower potential
growth could make it difficult to observe high growth
rates without inflationary pressures being generated.

**One** **member considered it necessary to maintain**
the reference rate at its current level for an extended
period in order to achieve convergence of inflation to
its target. He/she recalled that this was

communicated since the previous meeting, in which
it was transmitted that, according to the information
available, the terminal rate had already been
attained. He/she considered that, in an environment
of lower external pressures, monetary restriction is
having an effect. He/she pointed out that a necessary
but not sufficient condition to overcome this
inflationary episode was that global pressures would
begin to ease. He/she stated that now domestic
pressures must be contained by maintaining a
restrictive monetary stance. He/she mentioned that
efforts should focus on further reducing core inflation.
He/she stated that the relative monetary policy
stance allows for some room for maneuver to focus
exclusively on the inflationary outlook, even if the US
Federal Reserve were to raise its reference rate on
several occasions. He/she mentioned that, since the


last reference rate increase in March, the ex-ante
real interest rate has risen by 20 basis points due to
the fall in 12-month inflation expectations, which is
equivalent to almost an additional increase in the
reference rate if expectations had not declined.
However, he/she pointed out that the monetary
stance must be prevented from becoming too
restrictive given the expected decline in inflation
expectations. He/she highlighted that the

expectations channel will be crucial in the upcoming
months, together with the materialization of larger
effects on the monetary aggregates and other
transmission channels. He/she underlined that it is
important to continue guiding markets on the
temporality of forward guidance and the nature of any
possible adjustment in the reference rate. He/she
warned that it is too early to believe that the interest
rate cuts which are anticipated by market indicators
for the end of 2023 will materialize. He/she stated
that the term "extended period" should remain
undefined until there is greater certainty about an
improvement in the inflationary outlook. He/she
pointed out that, instead, it will be important to
maintain caution when discussing the desirable
timing to initiate a normalization cycle and underlined
that the environment is still complex and fragile.
He/she highlighted that Banco de México will remain
committed to its primary mandate through a firm
stance until the inflation target is attained.

**Another** **member pointed out that, although inflation**
keeps improving, most of its decline is attributed to
the non-core component and to important base
effects that are unlikely to operate indefinitely.
He/she noted that, although the reference rate has
not been adjusted, the ex-ante real interest rate has
been increasing. He/she estimated that this is
expected to continue occurring, although to a limited
extent, given that inflation expectations tend to
decline slowly. He/she considered that the

effectiveness of the monetary policy stance will
depend on the functioning of the transmission
channels, which, in his/her opinion are operating in
the required direction, particularly with regards to the
exchange rate channel. He/she added that, as in
other monetary cycles, the tightening of financing
conditions and the rise in funding costs have not
increased in the same proportion as the reference
rate, and therefore the magnitude and lag with which
they will influence the behavior of domestic demand
still need to be evaluated. He/she argued that
monetary restriction will require a prolonged period
to be properly transmitted, since the lags with which
different channels operate are ample and differ from
each other. He/she stated that such restriction must
ensure: i) the consolidation of an orderly and

8


-----

sustained trend of headline and core inflation to a
level of 3%; ii) a neutral balance of risks for the
forecast, and iii) inflation expectations adjusting to
their historical averages. He/she considered that, in
view of the complex inflationary scenario, these
conditions are not yet resolved, and therefore it is
necessary to maintain a flexible and data-dependent
approach. He/she expressed the need for

communication to provide clear signals in a timely
manner and to avoid inconsistencies that could
damage the central bank's credibility. He/she warned
that the reference rate foreseen by fixed-income
markets for the end of 2023 and 2024 is below the
level required to guarantee the convergence of
inflation to its target over the forecast horizon. He/she
pointed out that, at this moment, anticipating
changes in the monetary cycle would be premature.
He/she indicated that, in contrast, providing clear
communication on the commitment to the

constitutional mandate of price stability can

contribute to an adequate formation of expectations
and reduce some of the lags with which the
transmission mechanisms operate.

**One** **member considered that the monetary**
tightening attained has contributed to the disinflation
process. He/she argued that given the persistence of
core inflation and a balance of risks biased to the
upside, maintaining the reference rate at its current
level allows to continue evaluating the degree of
absorption of the monetary policy stance in the
economy. He/she added that although the

transmission channels are operating and their effect
will be more noticeable in the coming quarters, the
atypical nature of the shocks and their implications
on inflationary dynamics strengthen the need for an
extended pause. He/she reiterated that, although
domestic pressures tend to be associated with
increases in services inflation, the latter is still
affected by the described shocks and is not
necessarily explained by domestic pressures.
He/she added that if such pressures were present,
these would already be addressed with the monetary
restriction achieved. He/she stated that the

significant adjustment to the inflation forecast at the
beginning of the year in part responded to the
anticipation of greater pressures on services,
including those stemming from the greater dynamism
of the labor market. He/she asserted that the firm and
timely action implemented at that policy meeting also
sought to address such dynamics, although he/she
also highlighted the need to monitor its evolution. On
the other hand, he/she considered it prudent to
refrain from taking actions that could diminish the
effectiveness of the accumulated adjustment or of
communication as a policy tool that would relax the


monetary stance prematurely. For this reason,
he/she stated that currently it is not appropriate to
discuss the possibility of interest rate cuts. He/she
estimated that, although better readings in inflation
expectations are anticipated, which is important to
observe under the inflation targeting regime, the
referred pause will allow said expectations to
continue evolving favorably and contribute to
improve the price formation process. He/she added
that, among a wide range of factors, it is also relevant
to consider the evolution of the balance of risks, the
development of inflation with respect to the forecast,
and the progression of the forecast itself. Finally,
he/she stated that it is essential to continue using
communication as an active tool to strengthen the
monetary policy stance. He/she highlighted that, in
his/her opinion, it is still prudent to communicate that
the pause will continue for a sufficiently long period
to consolidate the convergence of inflation and foster
an orderly adjustment of the economy and markets.

**3. MONETARY POLICY DECISION**

The Governing Board evaluated the magnitude and
diversity of the inflationary shocks and their
determinants, along with the evolution of mediumand long-term inflation expectations and the price
formation process. It considered that the

disinflationary process is underway given that
diverse pressures have eased. Nevertheless, it
deemed that these continue having an incidence on
inflation, and thus it remains high. Also, that the
inflationary outlook is still very complex. Based on the
above, and considering the monetary policy stance
already attained, with the presence of all its
members, the Board decided unanimously to
maintain the target for the overnight interbank
interest rate at 11.25%. With this decision, the
monetary policy stance remains in the trajectory
required for inflation to converge to its 3% target
within the forecast horizon.

The Board will thoroughly monitor inflationary
pressures as well as all factors that have an
incidence on the foreseen path for inflation and its
expectations. It estimates that the inflationary outlook
will be complicated and uncertain throughout the
entire forecast horizon, with upward risks. Thus, in
order to achieve an orderly and sustained

convergence of headline inflation to the 3% target, it
considers that it will be necessary to maintain the
reference rate at its current level for an extended
period. The central bank reaffirms its commitment
with its primary mandate and the need to continue its
efforts to consolidate an environment of low and
stable inflation.

9


-----

**4. VOTING**

Victoria Rodríguez, Galia Borja, Irene Espinosa,
Jonathan Heath and Omar Mejía voted in favor of


maintaining the target for the overnight interbank
interest rate at 11.25%.

10


-----

**ANNEX**

The information in this Annex was prepared for this
meeting by the staff of Banco de México’s
Directorate General of Economic Research and
Directorate General of Central Bank Operations. It
does not necessarily reflect the considerations of the
members of the Governing Board as to the monetary
policy decision.

**A.1. External conditions**

**A.1.1. World economic activity**

Available indicators suggest that during the second
quarter of 2023 global economic activity continued
expanding. Global growth continued being driven by
the fading of disruptions in supply chains and by
lower pressures in energy prices. The pace of
expansion of economic activity is expected to have
accelerated slightly in advanced economies and to
have decelerated in emerging economies.

Purchasing Managers’ Indices point to a greater
expansion of services than that of the manufacturing
sector (Chart 1). Among risks to global economic
activity, the following stand out: the persistence of
inflationary pressures, the intensification of

geopolitical tensions, tighter financial conditions in
some advanced economies and, to a lesser extent,
challenges to financial stability in general.

In the United States, Gross Domestic Product (GDP)
is expected to have continued expanding during the
second quarter of 2023, after having grown at a
seasonally adjusted quarterly rate of 0.3% in the first
quarter of 2023 (Chart 2).[1] Available indicators
suggest that growth in the second quarter was
supported by private consumption and that

nonresidential investment would continue showing
resilience, despite tighter lending conditions. Public
spending and the change in inventories are also
expected to have contributed positively to GDP
growth during that period. This would be tempered
by a negative contribution from net exports.

1 Expressed as a seasonally adjusted annualized quarterly rate,
the change in US GDP was 1.3% in the first quarter of 2023.


**Chart 1**

**Global: Purchasing Managers’ Index:**

**Production Component by Activity**

Diffusion index, s. a.[1/]

60

58

56

54

52

50

Manufacturing

48 Manufacturing (excl. China)

46 Services

Services (excl. China)

44 32.5 39.2

24.8 33.0

42 23.7 35.1

20.7 32.2 May

40

J J J J J J J J J J J J J

2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023

s.a./ Seasonally adjusted figures.
1/ The index varies between 0 and 100 points. A reading above 50 points
is considered an overall increase compared to the previous month and
below 50 points an overall decrease.
Note: Figures in the chart correspond to the minimum level of the indicator.
Source: IHS Markit.

**Chart 2**

**US Real GDP and Components**

Quarterly percentage rate and contribution in

percentage points, s. a.

3.0 Private consumption expenditures

Residential investment

2.5 Nonresidential investment

Change in private inventories

2.0 Net exportsGovernment consumption expenditures

Total

1.5

1.0

0.5

0.0

-0.5

-1.0

-1.5

-2.0

I II III IV I II III IV I II

2021 2022 2023

s.a./ Seasonally adjusted figures.
Note: The shaded area refers to the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta's
GDPNow forecasts.
Source: BEA and Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta.

US industrial production contracted at a monthly rate
of 0.2% in May, after having grown 0.5% in April. The
decline in industrial activity in May reflected lower
electricity and gas generation, due to warmer-thanusual weather conditions and a fall in mining
production. This was partially offset by a 0.1%
growth in manufacturing production. The latter was

11


-----

the result, to a greater extent, of the expansion of
consumer durables, with aerospace and

transportation goods standing out. Purchasing
Managers' Indices point to a moderate expansion of
the manufacturing sector during the second quarter
of the year.

The US labor market continued showing signs of
tightness. The non-farm payroll accelerated its pace
of job creation in May, increasing by 339 thousand
new jobs, figure higher than expected by the
analysts' consensus. After declining during the first
quarter, vacancy and layoff rates increased at the
beginning of the second quarter and remained at
levels that suggest a still tight labor market. Initial
claims for unemployment insurance continued at low
levels. Although it rose to 3.7% in May, the
unemployment rate remains at low levels.

In the euro area, a slight rebound of economic
activity is expected during the second quarter of
2023, after having accumulated two consecutive
quarters of contractions, falling 0.1% at a seasonally
adjusted quarterly rate in each of the two previous
quarters.[2] During the second quarter, economic
activity is expected to have benefited from lower
energy prices, lesser disruptions in supply chains,
tax incentives, and the resilience of the services
sector. In contrast, manufacturing activity would
have been affected by weak external demand and
tight financial conditions. The unemployment rate in
the euro area declined from 6.6% in March to 6.5%
in April.

Economic activity in major emerging economies is
foreseen to have registered a heterogeneous
behavior during the second quarter of 2023. In
Emerging Asia, most economies continued

expanding, although at a slower pace than in the
previous quarter. In the case of China, several
indicators suggest that during the second quarter the
recovery would be lower than anticipated. In
Emerging Europe, most economies are expected to
recover during the second quarter. In Latin America,
economic activity is anticipated to contract or
decelerate in most economies.

Since Mexico's previous monetary policy decision,
international commodity prices have had a mixed
performance. Oil prices were subject to episodes of
volatility throughout the period, ending at levels
similar to those registered in mid-May. Among the

2 Expressed as a seasonally adjusted annualized quarterly rate,
the change in euro area GDP was -0.4% in the fourth quarter of
2022.


factors that contributed to the downward pressure on
prices, the following stood out: a lower impact of the
production cuts announced by the members of the
Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries
and allied countries (OPEC+); the lower-thananticipated recovery of economic activity in China;
the uncertainty surrounding the agreement to
suspend the debt ceiling in the United States which,
if it had not subsequently been achieved, could have
implied a lower demand for oil; and the high levels of
US crude oil production. Meanwhile, prices were
subject to upward pressures, due to, among other
factors, a higher demand in the United States, the
announcement of Saudi Arabia’s production cut, and
the agreement to suspend the US debt ceiling in
early June. Natural gas reference prices in Europe
declined in May due to high inventory levels,
although in June they reversed this trend in light of a
warmer-than-usual weather. In the United States,
natural gas prices exhibited volatility. Prices were
driven upwards by supply issues related to the fires
in Canada, the expectation of increased demand for
air conditioning in view of warmer weather forecasts,
and reduced wind power generation capacity.
Meanwhile, prices were subject to downward
pressures due to record production levels and signs
of weak global demand. Grain prices trended
downwards in May due to the renewal of the Black
Sea security corridor agreement and expectations of
weak demand for cereals. However, prices

rebounded in June due to supply shocks associated
with climate-related factors in China and the United
States. Industrial metal prices overall declined in
mid-May due to weaker-than-anticipated figures
from China and signs of recession in some advanced
economies. However, this trend reversed in June
due to better economic performance expectations in
the United States.

**A.1.2. Monetary policy and international financial**
**markets**

Headline inflation declined in most of the major
economies, both advanced and emerging, although
it remains at elevated levels. The reduction in
inflation was largely associated with lower pressures
on energy prices. The core component has shown
resistance to decline. In some cases, inflation
increased in its most recent readings.

In a large number of advanced economies, headline
inflation declined, although in some cases, the most

12


-----

recent figure increased (Chart 3). Nevertheless,
headline inflation remained at high levels and above
their respective central banks' targets. The core
component showed resistance to decline. In the
particular case of the United States, headline
inflation as measured by the consumer price index in
annual terms decreased from 4.9% in April to 4.0%
in May, as a result of a significant fall in energy
inflation, a decrease in food inflation, and a moderate
decline in annual core inflation. The annual variation
of this last component went from 5.5% to 5.3%
during the same period, mainly as a result of a
decline in services inflation. The monthly variation of
the core component showed greater persistence by
increasing marginally from 0.41 to 0.44% in May,
while headline inflation fell from 0.4% in April to 0.1%
in May. Annual headline inflation as measured by the
personal consumption expenditure index (PCE) rose
from 4.2% in March to 4.4% in April, remaining above
the 2% inflation target. Annual core inflation rose
from 4.6% to 4.7% during the same period.

Analysts' short-term inflation forecasts for most of
the main advanced economies foresee a moderation
in headline inflation in 2023 relative to the levels
registered in 2022. However, they reflect that
average inflation in 2023 would remain above their
central banks' targets. Longer-term inflation

expectations for these economies drawn from
financial instruments, remained relatively stable with
respect to the levels registered in mid-May.

**Chart 3**

**Selected Advanced Economies:**

**Headline Inflation**

Annual percentage change

12

United States PCE 1/

10 United States CPI

Japan

8 Euro area

United Kingdom

6

Canada

4

2 April

May
May

0 May

-2

J J J J J J J J J

2019 2020 2021 2022 2023

1/ The personal consumption expenditure deflator is used.
Source: Bureau of Economic Analysis, Bureau of Labor Statistics, Eurostat,
Bank of Japan, The UK Office for National Statistics and Statistics Canada.

In most of the major emerging economies, annual
headline inflation declined. However, it remained
above most central banks’ targets, except for a few


countries, such as China, Thailand, Indonesia, India,
Russia and Brazil, where inflation lay within the
variability range considered by each central bank or
below its point target. In most emerging economies,
core inflation stabilized or slightly decreased.

In this environment, since Mexico's previous
monetary policy decision, most central banks of the
major advanced economies continued tightening
their monetary policy stances. In particular, the
European Central Bank and the central banks of
New Zealand and Australia continued raising their
reference rates. The Bank of Canada resumed the
hike in its interest rate by increasing it by 25 basis
points (bps) in June, after leaving it unchanged in its
March and April decisions. In this regard, it stated
that the decision to increase it reflected its view that
monetary policy was not sufficiently restrictive to
bring inflation back to its target on a sustained basis.
Other central banks left their interest rates
unchanged, including the US Federal Reserve and
the central banks of Japan and Korea. Regarding
their asset purchase programs, most central banks
in this group of economies continued to gradually
reduce their securities' holdings. Expectations on
reference rates drawn from financial instruments for
most of the major advanced economies increased
during the period. Based on the latest available
information on interest rates implicit in interest rate
swap curves (OIS), no interest rate cuts are
expected for the rest of the year in any of these
economies (Chart 4).

**Chart 4**

**Reference Rates and Trajectories**

**Implied in OIS Curves[1/]**

Percent

76 **――― US Federal Reserve 2/ Bank of England Bank of Japan** End of 2022 End of 2023 End of 2024

**― European Central Bank deposit rate**
**― OIS implicit trajectory Jun 21,2023**

5 **--- OIS implicit trajectory May 18, 2023**

4

3

2

1

Forecasts

0

-1

2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 2024

1/ OIS: Fixed floating interest rate swap where the fixed interest rate is
associated with the effective overnight reference rate.
2/ For the observed reference rate of the US, the average interest rate of
the target range of the federal funds rate (5.00% - 5.25%) is used.
Source: Banco de México with data from Bloomberg.

13

|1 0|Col2|
|---|---|


-----

Regarding recent monetary policy decisions in the
United States and the euro area, the following stand
out:

i) After having increased the target range for the

federal funds rate on 10 consecutive occasions,
the US Federal Reserve left it unchanged at its
June meeting, at 5.00-5.25%. It pointed out that
keeping the target range stable at this meeting
allows the Federal Open Market Committee
(FOMC) to evaluate additional information and its
implications for monetary policy. It stated that in
order to determine what additional policy
tightening might be appropriate, the Committee
will consider the cumulative tightening of
monetary policy, the lags with which it affects
economic activity and inflation, and economic and
financial developments. It also continued

reducing the size of its balance sheet. During a
press conference, the chairman of the Federal
Reserve mentioned that almost all FOMC
members expect that it will be appropriate to raise
interest rates further this year and that none of
them forecast an interest rate cut in 2023. He
pointed out that tighter lending conditions are
likely to affect economic activity, employment and
inflation, although the extent of these effects
remains uncertain. He reiterated that they will
maintain a stance dependent on incoming data.
Regarding adjustments to FOMC forecasts
between March and June, median growth was
revised upwards from 0.4 to 1.0% for the end of
2023, downwards from 1.2 to 1.1% for 2024, and
from 1.9 to 1.8% for 2025. Meanwhile, headline
inflation forecasts anticipate that it will be 3.2% at
the end of 2023, 2.5% in 2024, and 2.1% in 2025.
As for core inflation, the median was modified
upwards from 3.6 to 3.9% for the end of 2023,
remained unchanged at 2.6% for the end of 2024,
and increased from 2.1 to 2.2% for the end of
2025. As for the federal funds rate, the
Committee revised upwards its expectation for
the end of 2023 from 5.1 to 5.6%, for the end of
2024 from 4.3 to 4.6%, and for the end of 2025
from 3.1 to 3.4%. The above contrasts with
expectations drawn from financial instruments,
which, based on the latest available information,
anticipate that the highest interest rate level will
be around 5.35% and that this will be observed in
the fourth quarter of 2023, to subsequently
decrease to levels of 5.0% by the first quarter of
2024 and 4.0% by the end of that same year.

ii) The European Central Bank (ECB) maintained

the pace of its reference rate hikes by announcing
an increase of 25 bps in June. Its refinancing, key


lending and key deposit rates stood at 4.00, 4.25
and 3.50%, respectively. It stated that previous
interest rate hikes are strongly being passed
through to financial conditions and are gradually
impacting the entire economy. It reiterated that
through future decisions, monetary policy rates
will be set at levels sufficiently restrictive to
achieve a timely return of inflation to the 2%
medium-term target and will remain at those
levels for as long as necessary. It stated that the
Governing Council will continue to follow a datadependent approach in determining the

appropriate level and duration of monetary
restriction. During a press conference, the
president of that institution indicated that the
hiking cycle has not yet ended and that it is very
likely that the Council will continue raising interest
rates in July. She added that the Council has not
discussed or begun to think about a pause in
interest rate hikes. Regarding its securities'
holdings, she stated that the Council will suspend
reinvestments under the Asset Purchase

Program (APP) as of July 2023.

Since Mexico’s previous monetary policy decision,
most central banks of the major emerging economies
kept their interest rates unchanged. Some

suggested that they would maintain them at their
current levels for some time at least until inflation
starts to decline steadily, that the hiking cycle has not
necessarily come to an end, or that future
adjustments will depend on the evolution of
indicators. In the particular case of Chile, the central
bank pointed out that, if the current economic trend
continues, it will begin to lower its reference rate in
the short term. Brazil's central bank removed from its
statement the comment that it would not hesitate to
resume monetary tightening if the disinflation
process does not evolve as expected. China
announced a cut of 10 bps in several of its reference
interest rates, due to concerns regarding the pace of
its economic recovery. Other central banks

continued raising their reference rates.

In the context described above, international
financial markets showed greater stability and there
was an increase in global risk appetite stemming
from lesser concerns regarding the stability of
banking systems in some advanced economies and
the agreement regarding the suspension of the debt
ceiling in the United States. Since Mexico's previous
monetary policy decision, global financial conditions
eased slightly (Chart 5). Stock markets in the major
advanced and emerging economies registered a
mixed performance, although with an upward bias.
In foreign exchange markets, the US dollar

14


-----

strengthened slightly against major advanced
economies' currencies in the second half of May,
although this trend reversed in recent weeks.
Emerging economies' currencies registered a mixed
behavior. Interest rates on short-term and, to a lesser
extent, long-term government bonds in most of the
main advanced economies rose (Chart 6). In
emerging economies, long-term interest rates in
most countries were below the level registered in
Mexico's previous monetary policy decision,

although increases were observed in some

countries, particularly in Asia (Chart 7).

In this context, since Mexico’s previous monetary
policy decision, cumulative net inflows to emerging
economies were registered. Flows behaved

differently across asset classes, with cumulative net
inflows to equity assets and moderate outflows from
fixed-income assets.

**Chart 5**

**Financial Conditions Indices[1/]**

Units


**Chart 7**

**Selected Emerging Economies: Financial**

**Assets Performance as of May 12, 2023**

Percent, basis points Percent, basis points


**Chart 6**

**Change in Selected Financial Indicators**

**from May 18 to June 21, 2023**

Percent; basis points

12.5%


150

120


10.0%

7.5%


5.0%

2.5%


90

60


0.0%

-2.5%


30

0


-30


-5.0% -60

Source: Bloomberg and ICE.
1/ MSCI Emerging Markets Index, which includes 24 countries. 2/ DXY: a
weighted average estimated by the Intercontinental Exchange (ICE) of the
nominal exchange rate of the main six currencies operated globally with the
following weights: EUR 57.6%, JPY: 13.6%, GBP: 11.9%, CAD: 9.1%, SEK:
4.2%, and CHF: 3.6%.


103

102

101

100


J J      J      J      J     J      J      J


Financial Conditions Index - Global
Financial Conditions Index - United States
Financial Conditions Index for Euro area 2/

Source: Prepared by Banco de México with data from Bloomberg and
Goldman Sachs.
1/ The financial conditions index is constructed considering the effect of five
variables on economic activity: the reference interest rate, the 10-year
government bond, the spread of investment-grade bonds over the
government debt bond with equivalent maturity, the ratio of a stock index
with 10-year average earnings per share, and the trade-weighted exchange
rate.
2/ In the case of the euro area, the spread between the sovereign bonds of
France, Italy, Spain, the Netherlands, Belgium, Austria, Portugal and
Finland over the German 10-year bond is also considered. The vertical
black line indicates the last calendarized monetary policy meeting of Banco
de México.


Note: An upward adjustment indicates currency appreciation. Interest rates
correspond to swap rates at the specified terms, except for Hungary, where
government securities with 3-year maturities were used as a reference. For
the Philippines, a 2-year swap rate was used, and for Russia, 2-year and
3-year swap rates were used. The latest CDS data for Russia is as of June
Source: Bloomberg.

**A.2. Current situation of the Mexican economy**

**A.2.1. Mexican markets**

In the international context described above, since
Mexico's last monetary policy decision, the Mexican
peso appreciated against the US dollar. Short-term
interest rates decreased while medium- and longterm ones registered limited adjustments (Chart 8).

15


-----

This was accompanied by a decline in volatility
across all asset classes.

**Chart 8**

**Mexican Markets’ Performance**

Percent, MXN/USD and index


26

25

24

23

22

21

20

19

18

17

16

J          J         J        J        J        J        J     J  F M A M J  J  A  S O N D J F M A M J  J  A S O N D J  F M A M J J A S O N D J  F M A M2020 2021

2020 2021

Source: Prepared by Banco de México.


**Chart 9**

**Mexican Peso Exchange Rate**

MXN/USD


11.6

11.2

10.8

10.4

10.0

9.6

9.2

8.8

8.4


48,000


M-bono


5.8

5.5

5.2

4.9

4.6

4.3

4.0

3.7

Inflation-indexed bonds


Range in 2023 Range since previous monetary policy Mar23,2023 May12,2023

decision

Source: Prepared by Banco de México.

The Mexican currency traded in a range of 0.97
pesos, between 17.02 and 17.99 pesos per US dollar
since the previous monetary policy decision. During
the period it appreciated 2.87%, reaching its lowest
level since December 2015 (Chart 9). The above
occurred in a context in which trading conditions,
both realized and prospective, improved.

Interest rates on government securities decreased in
the short-term nodes and slightly increased in the
medium- and long-term nodes (Chart 10). The yield
curve of real rate instruments exhibited generalized
decreases of up to 23 bps. In this context, breakeven
inflation implicit in spreads between nominal and real
interest rates of market instruments increased
slightly for most terms (Chart 11). These movements
took place in an environment in which trading
conditions, despite improving, still have not reached
pre-pandemic levels.

Regarding expectations for the path of the monetary
policy reference rate, information implicit in the
interest rate swaps curve does not incorporate any
adjustment for the June decision (Chart 12). Most
analysts surveyed by Citibanamex anticipate that the
reference rate will remain unchanged in the June
decision and that by the end of 2023 it will be at a
level of 11.00%.


Range in 2023 Range since previous monetary policy Mar23,2023 May12,2023


600

550

500

450

3-year

400 10-year

20-year

350 30-year

3-year average
10-year average

300

20-year average
30-year average

250

J J           J           J           J

2021                     2022                    2023

Source: PIP.


**Chart 10**

**Nominal Yield Curve of Government Securities**

Percent, basis points


Trading range over the period

Source: PIP.


**Chart 11**

**Breakeven Inflation and Inflation Risk**

**Implied in Government Securities’ Yields**

Basis points


16


-----

**Chart 12**

**Interbank Funding Rate Implied in TIIE Swaps**

Percent


**Chart 13**

**Gross Domestic Product**

Quarterly percentage change, s. a.


12.50

11.50

10.50

9.50

8.50

7.50

6.50

5.50

4.50

3.50


Banxico overnight rate (reference rate)

Implied interest rate in TIIE swaps for
06/16/23
Implied interest rate in TIIE swaps for
05/12/23

J J         J J         J        J


2021               2022               2023

Nota: Shaded areas represent the range since the last monetary policy
decision.
Source: Prepared by Banco de México with Bloomberg data.

**A.2.2. Economic activity in Mexico**

Mexico’s economic activity has remained resilient
despite the prevailing complex external environment.
During the first quarter of the year, GDP increased
its rate of expansion (Chart 13). At the end of the first
quarter of 2023, private consumption continued
trending upwards. This indicator rose in March
mainly as a result of the performance of goods, since
services showed a lack of dynamism. Gross fixed
investment continued increasing. Investment in
machinery and equipment continued exhibiting
dynamism, while investment spending on

construction continued showing weakness, after the
reactivation displayed at the end of 2022. At the
beginning of the second quarter, the value of
manufacturing exports contracted at a monthly rate,
reflecting a fall in automotive exports, given that the
rest of manufacturing exports increased (Chart 14).


6

13.17

4

2

0

-2

25/04/2023

-4 24/04/2023

21/04/2023

-17.8120/04/2023 Q-I

-6 19/04/2023

I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV18/04/2023I II III IV I II III IV I

2017 2018 2019 2020 17/04/20232021 2022 2023

s. a. / Seasonally adjusted figures. The chart’s range was adjusted to 14/04/2023
facilitate its reading.
Source: Mexico’s System on National Accounts (SCNM, for its Spanish
acronym), INEGI.


140

Total

Automotive

120 Non-automotive

100

80

60

10.6 April

40

J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A

2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023

s. a. / Seasonally adjusted series and trend series based on data in nominal
US dollars. The former is represented by a solid line and the latter by a
dotted line. The chart’s range was adjusted to facilitate its reading.
Source: Prepared by Banco de México with data from the Tax
Administration Service (SAT, for its Spanish acronym), the Ministry of the
Economy (SE, for its Spanish acronym), Banco de México, the National
Institute of Statistics and Geography (INEGI, for its Spanish acronym).
Mexico’s Merchandise Trade Balance, and the National System of
Statistical and Geographical Information (SNIEG, for its Spanish acronym),
Information of national interest.

On the production side, in March 2023, services
contracted for the second consecutive month (Chart
15). This was the result of a weak performance by
most of its sectors. Industrial activity reactivated
slightly in April, driven by manufacturing, which
expanded significantly (Chart 16). Mining increased
slightly. In contrast, construction and electricity
generation contracted at the margin.

17


**Chart 14**

**Total Manufacturing Exports**

Indices 2019 = 100, s. a.


-----

**Chart 15**

**Global Indicator of Economic Activity**

Indices 2019 = 100, s. a.

110

105

100

95

90 Total IGAE 1/

Industrial production 2/

85 Services IGAE 1/ 80.2

77.8 March

Agriculture IGAE 1/ 70.9 April

80

J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A

2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023

s. a. / Seasonally adjusted and trend series. The former is represented by
a solid line and the latter by a dotted line.
1/ Figures as of February 2023.
2/ Figures as of March 2023 from the Monthly Industrial Activity Indicator.
Source: Mexico’s System of National Accounts (SCNM, for its Spanish
acronym), INEGI.

**Chart 16**

**Industrial Activity [1/]**

Indices 2019 = 100, s. a.

120

110

100

90

Total

80

Mining (22.3%)

Manufacturing (49.7%)

70

Construction (23.3%)

Utilities (4.7%) April

60

J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A

2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023

s. a. / Seasonally adjusted and trend series. The former is represented by
a solid line and the latter by a dotted line.
1/ Figures in parenthesis correspond to their share in the total in 2013.
Source: Mexico’s System of National Accounts (SCNM, for its Spanish
acronym), INEGI.

Regarding the cyclical position of the economy, in
light of the growth of economic activity during the first
quarter of 2023, the negative output gap point
estimate continued closing (Chart 17). During the
first quarter of the year, the national and urban
unemployment rates remained at particularly low
levels (Chart 18). Seasonally adjusted figures for
May show that the creation of IMSS-insured jobs
maintained its dynamism. Finally, in April 2023, unit
labor costs in the manufacturing sector partly
reversed the increases of February and March,
although they remained slightly above the 2022
average level (Chart 19).


s. a. / Calculations based on seasonally adjusted figures.
1/ Output gap estimated with a tail-corrected Hodrick-Prescott filter; see
Banco de México (2009), “Inflation Report, April-June 2009”, p.74.
2/ GDP figures up to Q1-2023 and IGAE implicit up to March 2023,
consistent with said timely figure.
3/ Output gap confidence interval calculated with a method of unobserved
components.
Source: Prepared by Banco de México with INEGI data.

**Chart 18**

**National and Urban Unemployment Rates**

Percent, s. a.

6.5

Urban unemployment rate

6.0

National unemployment rate

5.5

5.0

4.5

4.0

3.5

3.0

April

2.5

J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A

2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023

s. a. / Seasonally adjusted and trend series. The former is represented by
a solid line and the latter by a dotted line.
Source: Prepared by Banco de México with data from ENOE, ETOE (from
April to June 2020), and ENOE new edition (ENOE[N]) from July to date.

18


**Chart 17**

**Output Gap Estimates [1/]**

Percent of potential output, s. a.


12

8

4

0

-4

-8

-12

Global Economic Activity Index

-16 (IGAE) 2/

Gross Domestic Product 2/

-20 Q-I

95% confidence interval 3/ March

-24

J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J M

2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023


-----

125

Unit labor costs 142.9

120

Productivity

115

110

105

100

95

90

April

85

J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A

2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023

a.e. / Seasonally adjusted and trend series. The former is represented by a
solid line and the latter by a dotted line. The range of the chart was
narrowed to make it easier to read.
1/ Productivity based on hours worked.
Source: Prepared by Banco de México with seasonally adjusted data of the
Monthly Manufacturing Industry Survey and industrial activity indicators of
Mexico’s System of National Accounts (Sistema de Cuentas Nacionales de
México, SCNM), INEGI.

In April 2023, domestic financing to non-financial
private firms registered a positive real annual
variation for the tenth consecutive month. The bank
lending component continued increasing, although
its annual growth rate has stabilized (Chart 20). This
occurred in a context in which demand of nonfinancial private firms for loans continued recovering.
Lending standards were more restrictive for large
companies and thus remained tight. These

conditions have tended to ease for smaller private
firms since the second half of 2021.

As for lending to households, in April 2023
commercial bank housing portfolio increased its rate
of expansion. Performing loans to consumption grew
at a faster rate and continued to be the segment with
the highest growth, as a result of the dynamism of
credit cards and payroll loans.

In April 2023, bank lending interest rates increased
consistent with changes in the reference rate. Thus,
they reached levels above those observed at the end
of 2019. Corporate credit intermediation margins
remained, in general, at levels below those of
February 2020, although in April they increased for
large non-issuing private firms. Although interest
rates on mortgages increased from July 2022 to
January of this year and then remained practically
unchanged, their levels continued to be relatively
low. Between June 2021 and June 2022, credit card
interest rates adjusted only slightly to changes in the
reference rate. During the second half of 2022, these


rates increased markedly, although they have
remained significantly unchanged in the first two
months of 2023 for which information is available.
Interest rates for payroll loans have remained
relatively stable since August 2021.

**Chart 20**

**Performing Credit from Commercial Banks to**

**the Non-financial Private Sector**

Annual real percentage change

15

10

5

0

-5

Consumption

-10 Mortgages 1/

Non-financial private firms 2/

-15

April

-20

J J J J J J J J J J J J J

2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023

1/ Adjusted to account for the withdrawal from and the incorporation of nonbank financial intermediaries to the credit statistics.
2/ Adjusted for valuation effects due to movements in the exchange rate.
Source: Banco de México.

As for portfolio quality, in April 2023 corporate and
mortgage delinquency rates remained stable with
respect to those observed in the previous month and
at low levels. Finally, consumer portfolio delinquency
rates did not change significantly for the second
consecutive month and remain below pre-pandemic
levels.

**A.2.3. Development of inflation and inflation**
**outlook**

Between April and the first fortnight of June 2023,
annual headline inflation decreased from 6.25 to
5.18% (Chart 21 and Table 1). This result was due
to the decline in both non-core and core inflation.

19


-----

**Chart 21**

**Consumer Price Index**

Annual percentage change


**Chart 23**

**Merchandise Core Price Subindex**

Annual percentage change


14
13
12
11
10

9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0

-1
-2
-3

J

2017


M S J

2018


M S J

2018


M S J

2019


M S J

2020


M S J

2021


M S J

2022


M S J

2023


M


M S J

2019


M S J

2020


M S J

2021


M S J

2022


M S J

2023


M


Source: INEGI.

Annual core inflation declined from 7.67 to 6.91%
between April and the first fortnight of June 2023.
Within its components, annual merchandise inflation
continued to decrease from 9.54 to 8.33% between
the referred dates (Chart 22). This performance
reflected the reduction from 12.14 to 10.67% in the
annual variation of food merchandise prices and
from 6.59 to 5.65% in non-food merchandise prices
(Chart 23). Annual services inflation decreased from
5.46 to 5.23% during the same period. The annual
variation of prices of services other than education
and housing, while remaining at high levels, declined
from 7.10 to 6.63%, with the decrease of food
preparation services from 11.23 to 10.35% standing
out.

**Chart 22**

**Merchandise and Services Core Price Subindex**

Annual percentage change

12

Merchandise

11 Services

10

9

8

7

6

5

4

3

2

1

F1 June

0

J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M

2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023

Source: INEGI.


16

14

12

10

8

6

4

2

0

J

2017


Source: INEGI.

Annual non-core inflation continued registering
atypically low levels. Between April and the first
fortnight of June 2023, it declined from 2.12 to 0.03%
(Chart 24 and Table 1). This result was influenced by
the decrease from 6.13 to 3.19% in the annual
inflation of agricultural and livestock products,
associated in turn with the reduction from 8.01 to
2.81% in livestock products. The lower levels of noncore inflation were also due to the decrease from
-4.21% to -6.52% in the annual variation of energy
prices, with the decline from 2.43 to 1.53% in the
price of gasoline and from -26.38 to -30.84% in that
of LP gas standing out.

Regarding inflation expectations drawn from the
survey conducted by Banco de México among
private sector specialists, between April and May
2023 the median for headline inflation at the end of
2023 decreased from 5.05 to 5.02%, while that for
the core component moved from 5.36 to 5.40%. The
median for headline inflation expectations for the end
of 2024 declined from 4.10 to 4.07%, while that for
the core component increased from 4.10 to 4.17%.
The medians of headline and core inflation
expectations for the next four years remained at
3.80%. The median of headline inflation

expectations for longer terms (5 to 8 years)
increased from 3.55 to 3.60%, while that for the core
component was adjusted from 3.55 to 3.56%. Finally,
compensation for inflation and inflationary risk rose
since the previous monetary policy decision. Within
it, expectations implied by market instruments
remained stable, while the inflation risk premium
decreased between April and May, although it
increased slightly in June.

20


-----

**Chart 24** Inflation is still projected to converge to the 3% target

**Non-core Price Sub-index** in the fourth quarter of 2024. These projections are

Annual percentage change subject to risks. On the upside: i) persistence of core

25 inflation at high levels; ii) foreign exchange

20 depreciation due to volatility in international financial

markets; iii) greater cost-related pressures, and iv)

15 pressures on energy prices or on agricultural and

10 livestock product prices. On the downside: i) a

greater-than-anticipated slowdown of the world

5

economy; ii) a lower pass-through effect from some

0 cost-related pressures; iii) a better functioning of

-5 production and distribution chains; and, iv) a larger
Non-core than-anticipated effect from the Federal

-10 Agricultural and livestock products Government’s measures to fight elevated prices.

Energy and government-authorized prices F1 June

-15 The balance of risks for the trajectory of inflation

2017J M S 2018J M S 2019J M S 2020J M S 2021J M S 2022J M S 2023J M within the forecast horizon remains biased to the

Source: INEGI. upside.

**Table 1**

**Consumer Price Index and Components**

Annual percentage change

**1st fortnight June**

**Item** **April 2023** **May 2023**
**2023**

**CPI** **6.25** **5.84** **5.18**

**SubyacenteCore** **7.67** **7.39** **6.91**

**Merchandise** **9.54** **9.04** **8.33**

Food, beverages and tobacco 12.14 11.44 10.67

Non-food merchandise 6.59 6.30 5.65

**Services** **5.46** **5.43** **5.23**

Housing 3.67 3.67 3.66

Education (tuitions) 4.88 4.88 4.83

Other services 7.10 7.01 6.63

**No SubyacenteNon-core** **2.12** **1.24** **0.03**

**Agricultural and livestock products** **6.13** **4.95** **3.19**

Fruits and vegetablesFruits abd vegetables 3.73 3.73 3.67

Livestock productsLivestock 8.01 5.91 2.81

**Energy and government-authorized prices Energéticos y Tarifas Aut. por Gobierno** **-1.08** **-1.83** **-2.60**

Energy productsEnergy -4.21 -5.48 -6.52

Government-authorized pricesTarifas Autorizadas por Gobierno 6.78 6.99 6.87

Source: INEGI.

21


-----

-----

