# Minutes of the Monetary Policy

 Committee Meeting

### July 14, 2011

## The Bank of Korea


-----

###### (English version)

#### Minutes of the Monetary Policy Committee Meeting[1)]

##### (July 2011)

 Ⅰ. Outline

###### 1. Date of meeting : July 14, 2011 (Thu)

 2. Place : Monetary Policy Committee Meeting Room

 3. Monetary Policy Committee members present : Kim, Choongsoo, Chairman (Governor, The Bank of Korea) Kim, Dae Sik Choi, Dosoung Kang, Myung Hun Lee, Ju Yeol (Senior Deputy Governor) Lim, Seungtae

 4. Monetary Policy Committee members absent : None

 5. Government representative present : Yim, Jong-ryong, First Vice Minister of Strategy and Finance

 6. Participants : Kang, Tai Hyuk, Auditor Kim, Jae-Chun, Deputy Governor Jang, Byung-Wha, Deputy Governor Lee, Kwang-June, Deputy Governor Jang, Seh-Geun, Deputy Governor Park, Won-Shik, Deputy Governor Kim, Jun Il, Director of Economic Research Institute & Chief Economist Lee, Sang Woo, Director General of Research Department Chung, Hee-Chun, Director General of Monetary Policy Department Min, Sung Kee, Director General of Financial Markets Department Kim Jong Hwa, Director General of International Department Kim, Yun Chul, Director General of Monetary Policy Committee Secretariat Lee, Yong Hoi, Director General of Press Office

1) This English version (summary) of the Monetary Policy Committee meeting minutes was produced at
the working level and is not an official document.

1


-----

##### Ⅱ. Summary of Discussion on Current Economic Situation[2)]

###### After briefings by staff on 'Current Economic Developments in

 Korea' and the 'Financial Markets', the discussions by members of the

 Monetary Policy Committee (MPC) covered the following areas:

 Most members assessed that the global economy was sustaining its

 recovery overall, but that uncertainties were deepening further due to latent

 risk factors. Many members noted that the U.S. economic recovery had

 slowed owing to the sluggish housing market and the delay in the labor

 market improvement, that in Europe the mood was one fraught with

 anxiety as to the possibility of the spread of the sovereign debt problems

 to neighboring countries, and that potential risk factors sat latent including

 an overheating economy and surging consumer and asset prices in the

 emerging market economies.

 The domestic economy was, most members appraised, maintaining its

 upward trend boosted by strong exports and the recovery of domestic

 demand. One member pointed out that manufacturing and services

 production was growing with the current account having remained in

 surplus for 15 straight months, and that the employment situation was

 improving.

 Regarding the future outlook, most members anticipated that the

 domestic economy would sustain its long-term trend level of growth, even

 though July’s revised growth forecast was somewhat lower than previously

 predicted. However, members cautioned that the downside risks to growth

 had slightly increased due to mounting uncertainty surrounding the external

 economic environment.

2) The contents of 'Current Economic Developments in Korea' and the 'Financial Markets' are posted in
English on the Bank of Korea web site.

2


-----

###### As to domestic financial markets, many members attributed the large

 fluctuation in price variables, including interest rates, stock prices and

 exchange rates, to external factors such as the possibility of an escalation

 of the sovereign debt problems in Europe and a slowdown in U.S.

 economic recovery. However, one member commented that foreign

 funding conditions were favorable by and large due mostly to inflows of

 foreign portfolio funds and the current account surplus.

 Members pointed out that consumer prices were exhibiting a rapid

 pace of increase in excess of 4% for six straight months, owing to the

 rapid path-through to general prices of the supply shocks generated by

 higher agricultural product and global oil prices, and to the steady

 build-up of inflation expectations. They also noted that core inflation, too,

 had accelerated to 3.7% in June, after having registered 3.2% in April and

 3.5% in May. Many members forecast that the high rising trend of

 consumer prices would persist for some considerable time, owing primarily

 to the demand-pull pressures arising from sustained growth and inflation

 expectations, and that core inflation would rise at a faster pace than

 headline inflation.

 As to the real estate market, some members evaluated housing sales

 prices as being weak in Seoul and its surrounding areas with the

 dampening of buying sentiment, while exhibiting slower growth in the rest

 of the country.

 Ⅲ. Remarks by Government Representative

 Prior to the members’ discussion regarding the Base Rate, the

 Chairman gave the floor to the 1st Vice Minister of Strategy and Finance,

 the government representative.

 With regard to the current economic situation, the 1st Vice Minister

3


-----

###### commented that, although the economy was regaining momentum for a

 stable recovery with the number of persons employed continuing to grow

 and the employment-to-population ratio improving, uncertainties still

 remained high as external conditions were highly volatile and real

 purchasing power declined.

 As to the government’s economic policy directions for the second

 half of 2011 announced on June 30, the 1st Vice Minister remarked that

 the growth forecast had been revised downward from the initial 5.0% to

 the 4.5% level and the inflation projection had been adjusted upward from

 around 3.0% to 4.0%, in reflection of the many changes in conditions at

 home and abroad since the end of last year, such as the outbreaks of

 foot-and-mouth disease, the run-up in oil prices and the Great East Japan

 Earthquake. He then noted that the government’s policy focus would be

 placed on such areas as price stability, boosting domestic demand and

 expanding the social safety net.

 Regarding prices, the 1st Vice Minister mentioned that the

 government anticipated inflationary pressures would persist for the time

 being, owing to the recent rises in prices of agricultural and livestock

 products following the recent unusually severe rain, and to the increase in

 personal service charges including those for eating-out, and that it was

 considering steps for price stability such as a sliding tariff on pork and

 rice, release of government oil reserves, and incentives to hold eating-out

 prices steady.

 Meanwhile, concerning the Comprehensive Measures on Household

 Debt which the government unveiled on June 29, the 1st Vice Minister

 noted that, in order to manage household debt and enhance the soundness

 of financial institutions, the government would pursue measures to

 accommodate household debt increase at an appropriate level, to encourage

 fixed-rate, non-deferrable, amortizing mortgages not vulnerable to economic

4


-----

###### fluctuations, and to strengthen protection for consumers taking out

 household loans.

 Ⅳ. Discussions Related to Monetary Policy Decision (Summary)

 The main contents of the MPC members’ discussion concerning a

 change in the Bank of Korea Base Rate were as follow:

 Members agreed that, it would be better to keep the Base Rate at its

 current level this month since it was necessary to maintain stability in the

 financial markets following the recent deepening of economic uncertainties

 surrounding foreign economies, although it was desirable to gradually

 normalize the Base Rate ╶ considering the possibility of chronic inflation

 becoming entrenched, with inflation forecasts flirting with the upper bound

 of the inflation target and expected inflation remaining high, at a time

 when the economy continued on a long-term trend level of growth.

 One member voiced the opinion that policy adjustments should be

 made at a consistent pace since a back-to-back Base Rate adjustment

 following the one in June might have to face a heavier-than-necessary

 burden on economic agents, with the risk of market participants perceiving

 that the Bank of Korea’s stance of steady baby step increase in the Base

 Rate maintained for some time had been changed.

 Meanwhile, some members took the view that it was necessary to

 signal appropriately to the markets once again the present policy stance of

 consistently moving forward with Base Rate normalization since putting off

 a hike in the policy rate might cause inflation expectations to rise,

 particularly in the current circumstances where a high rising trend of

 prices was seen to persist for some time.

5


-----

###### In addition, one member made the point that rate normalization must

 be carried forward persistently so as to allow real interest rates to move

 out of negative territory, in that, should a low interest rate stance prevail

 for a long time, there was concern that economic imbalances could deepen

 largely owing to an expansion of household debt and delay in corporate

 restructuring and that the high level of macro leverage could pose a

 potential risk for the Korean economy.

 After the discussions detailed above, members decided unanimously to

 keep the Base Rate at its current level.

6


-----

###### < Ref > Monetary Policy Decision

 □ The Monetary Policy Committee of the Bank of Korea decided today

 to leave the Base Rate unchanged at 3.25% for the intermeeting

 period.

 □ Based on currently available information, the Committee considers

 that, while emerging market economies have continued to show favorable performances, the recoveries in major advanced economies

 including the US have exhibited signs of temporarily faltering. Going

 forward, the Committee forecasts that the global economy will keep

 up its pace of recovery; nevertheless, the Committee recognizes the

 possibility of such factors as the sovereign debt problems in Europe

 and the heightened volatility of economic activity in major countries

 posing downside risks to the global economy.

 □ For Korea, the Committee judges the economy to have maintained its underlying upward trend, given for instance that exports show robust

 growth and that domestic demand is increasing modestly. Labor

 market conditions have also remained on a track of improvement, led

 by the private sector. Going forward, the Committee anticipates that

 the domestic economy will keep up this underlying trend, even in the

 presence of external risks.

 □ Consumer price inflation rose to the 4.4% level in June, due mostly

 to sharp rises in the prices of some agricultural and livestock products. The Committee expects the high level of inflation to

 continue in the coming months, driven largely by demand-side

 pressures resulting from the underlying uptrend in economic activity

 and by inflation expectations. Core inflation meanwhile increased to

 the 3.7% level, as the prices of processed food products and personal

 services continued to rise; this uptrend in core inflation is seen

7


-----

###### persisting for the time being. As for housing prices, those in Seoul

 and its surrounding areas have weakened, while their pace of increase

 in the rest of the country has slowed. The rate of increase in

 leasehold deposits fell in June compared to the previous month,

 affected mostly by seasonal factors.

 □ In the financial markets, the ranges of fluctuation of price variables

 such as interest rates, stock prices and exchange rates have widened, due mainly to the effects of external risk factors including the

 sovereign debt problems in Europe. Mortgage lending has posted a

 steady rise.

 □ Looking ahead, the Committee, while taking overall account of

 financial and economic conditions both at home and abroad, will

 conduct monetary policy with a greater emphasis on ensuring that

 the basis for price stability is firmly anchored while the economy

 continues its sound growth.

8


-----

