**BANK OF ISRAEL**
Office of the Spokesperson and Economic Information

PRESS RELEASE

July 12, 2010

**Report to the public on the Bank of Israel’s discussions prior to setting the**
**interest rate for July 2010**

**The discussions took place on 27 and 28 June 2010**

**General**

Before the Governor makes the monthly interest rate decision, discussions are held at
two levels––the first in a broad forum, and the second in a narrower one.

In the broad-forum discussion, the relevant background economic conditions are
presented, including real, monetary and financial developments in Israel’s economy,
and developments in the global economy. Participants in this discussion include the
Governor, the Deputy Governor, the directors of the Research and Market Operations
Departments of the Bank and economists from various departments who prepare and
present the material for discussion. The data, estimates and assessments in these
minutes are those that were available at the time of the discussions.

In the narrow forum, the directors of the Research and Market Operations
Departments and two other participating members of management present their
recommendations regarding the interest rate and, following a discussion, the Governor
makes his decision.

A. THE BROAD-FORUM DISCUSSION—THE STATE OF THE ECONOMY

**1. Developments on the real side**

_General assessment_

Indicators published in the last month (in the period between the discussions on the
June interest rate held on May 24 and the current discussions on June 28) paint a
mixed picture with regard to the rate of increase of economic activity. The National
Accounts data for the first quarter of the year and initial data from the Bank of Israel's
Companies Survey for the second quarter indicate continued expansion. The
assessments that the rate of expansion is slowing are based on the monthly indices of
private consumption (data for April–May), and on the only modest increase in the

POB 780 Jerusalem 91007 Israel
Tel: 972-2-6552712/3 Fax: 972-2-6528812 www.bankisrael.org.il


-----

composite state-of-the-economy indices for April and May. Concern regarding a
slowdown in activity arises from the fall in exports in April and May (in dollar terms),
from the data in the Companies Survey relating to export orders for the third quarter
of 2010 in the services and manufacturing industries, and from the sharp reduction in
the Manufacturing Purchasing Managers Index in May.

_National Accounts data for the first quarter of 2010_

According to the updated National Accounts estimate, activity continued to expand in
the first quarter, with growth based on increases in exports and private consumption.
According to this estimate, GDP grew by 3.6 percent in the first quarter of 2010
(annual rate, seasonally adjusted, change from previous quarter––compared with the
previous estimate of 3.3 percent). The National Accounts data show an increase of 4.8
percent (annual rate) in business sector product in the first quarter. The figures also
show increases of 4 percent in private consumption, 4.1 percent in public
consumption, 7.4 percent in goods and services exports, and 3.2 percent in investment
in the principal industries.

_The composite state-of-the-economy index_

The May composite state-of-the-economy index rose by 0.1 percent, following a
similar rise in April (each month compared with the previous one). The modest
increases in the last two months strengthen the assessments of a slowdown in the pace
of economic recovery.

The increase in May reflects, among other things, a 1.7 percent increase in
manufacturing production in April, following its 0.3 percent increase in March; a 0.1
percent increase in trade and services revenue in April, following its 1.5 percent
increase in March; and a drop of 0.9 percent in the services exports index in May,
following its 14 percent jump in April. With regard to foreign trade, see below.

_The labor market_

The Manpower Survey data show a decline in the rate of unemployment in the first
quarter of 2010 to 7.2 percent, from 7.3 percent in the last quarter of 2009 (seasonally
adjusted). At the same time the participation rate in the civilian labor force dropped to
56.3 percent, from 56.6 percent in the previous quarter. There was a small increase in
employment in the first quarter––an increase of 0.2 percent in the number of
employees––with an increase of 8.1 percent in the number of those in part-time jobs
and a reduction of 1.6 percent in the number of full-time employees. These changes
were reflected in a decline of 0.5 percent in labor input in terms of work-hours in the
first quarter compared with the previous quarter.

In March the number of Israeli employee posts fell by 0.2 percent from the number in
the February (seasonally adjusted). In the three months January–March the number of


-----

employee posts increased by 2.2 percent compared with the number in the previous
three months (annual rate, seasonally adjusted).

The nominal wage per employee post in the business sector (Israelis only) increased
by 0.3 percent in March compared with the February level. In the three months
January–March the nominal wage per employee post increased by 8.7 percent
compared with the average in the previous three months, and the real wage increased
by 7.1 percent (seasonally adjusted, in annual terms).

The monthly unemployment rate according to trend data was 6.9 percent in April
2010, similar to the March level. The monthly data, however, are based on a relatively
small sample, so that the figures should be treated with caution.

_Foreign trade_

Goods exports (excluding diamonds) dropped by about 4.6 percent in May from their
April level (in dollar terms, seasonally adjusted). In the three months March–May
2010 these exports expanded at an annual rate of about 6.1 percent (in dollar terms,
seasonally adjusted) from their level in the previous three months.

Goods imports (excluding ships, aircraft and diamonds) declined by 0.3 percent in
May from their April level (in dollar terms, seasonally adjusted). In the three months
March–May these imports increased at an annual rate of 30.2 percent (in dollar terms,
seasonally adjusted) from their level in the previous three months.

_The Bank of Israel Companies Survey_

Initial partial data from the Companies Survey for the second quarter (based on
returns from 378 companies out of a total of 600) indicate that total economic activity
continued to expand, albeit with some slowdown in the rate of increase. In total,
companies that responded expect activity to continue to grow in the third quarter as a
result of an increase in orders from the domestic market. In contrast, the returns point
to a drop in export orders for the third quarter, particularly in the services and
manufacturing industries.

**2. Budget data**

An analysis performed by the Bank of Israel Research Department shows that under
the assumption of a 3.7 percent growth rate in 2010 in Israel, the budget deficit is
expected to be significantly lower than the ceiling of 5.5 percent of GDP, at about 4
percent of GDP.

The main reason for the expectation of a deficit below the ceiling is that tax revenues
are in excess of the forecasts made when the budget was prepared.


-----

**3. Developments on the nominal side**

_Inflation_

The Consumer Price Index (CPI) for May rose by 0.4 percent, close to the average of
the private forecasters' predictions and slightly higher than the Bank of Israel's
Research Department forecast of an increase of 0.3 percent. The seasonally adjusted
index for May increased by 0.4 percent.

Since the beginning of the year the CPI has risen by 0.4 percent.

The 3 percent rise in the CPI in the last twelve months places it at the upper limit of
the inflation target range.

The housing component of the CPI increased by 0.7 percent in May, following its 1
percent increase in April. In the last twelve months the housing index increased by a
cumulative 4.8 percent (see below for a more detailed reference to the housing
market).

_Expectations and forecasts of inflation and of the Bank of Israel interest rate_

One-year-forward inflation expectations derived from the capital market ("break-even
inflation") increased in June (the average to 24 June) to 2.9 percent, compared with
the May average of 2.7 percent.

The Israeli forecasters predict on average that inflation in the next twelve price indices
(from June 2010 to May 2011) will be 2.6 percent. They assess that inflation in 2010
measured over the previous twelve months will be 1.9 percent. They expect inflation
(over the previous twelve months) to decline gradually to reach 1.6 percent in August,
and predict that it will then rise, to reach about 2.8 percent in a year's time.

The Israeli forecasters expect, on average, that the CPI will rise by a total of 1 percent
in the three months May to July 2010.

With regard to the interest rate, the Israeli forecasters assess on average that the Bank
of Israel's rate will increase in the next three months by a cumulative 0.4 percentage
points, and that the rate in twelve months' time will be 3.0 percent.

An analysis of the slope of the _makam yield curve indicates that the capital market_
expects the Bank of Israel interest rate one year hence to be about 2.4 percent.

_The makam and bond markets_


-----

The yield to maturity on CPI-indexed five-year government bonds declined slightly in
June (to 24 June) to an average of about 0.9 percent, from an average yield of about
1.1 percent in May. The yield on 5-year unindexed government bonds declined to an
average of about 3.6 percent in June, from about 3.8 percent in May. The yield to
maturity on one-year makam remained unchanged in June at about 2.1 percent, similar
to its May level.

_The interest rate differential and the yield gap between Israel and abroad_

Prior to the current interest rate decision, the Bank of Israel interest rate was 1.25–
1.50 percentage points higher than the US federal funds rate, and 0.5 percentage
points higher than the ECB rate.

The yield gap between local currency unindexed ten-year bonds and ten-year US
Treasury bonds contracted from 163 b.p. on 24 May to 151 b.p. on 25 June.

_The expected real interest rate_

The current Bank of Israel interest rate (in June) _minus twelve-months-forward_
inflation expectations derived from the capital markets in June, prior to these
discussions, averaged minus 1.3 percent, compared with minus 1.2 percent in May.

_The monetary aggregates_

In the twelve months up to and including May 2010 the monetary base measured by
the M1 monetary aggregate (cash held by the public and demand deposits) increased
by 12.2 percent; in May it decreased by about 0.2 percent. In the last twelve months
the M2 aggregate (M1 plus unindexed term deposits of up to one year) increased by
4.2 percent, and in May it decreased by 0.2 percent. The rapid increase in M1 in the
last year was mainly due to the public's switching from term deposits to demand
deposits in light of the low level of the interest rate on term deposits.

_The credit markets_

The outstanding balance of bank credit to the business sector increased in April by 1.1
percent, after declining by 0.1 percent in March. Outstanding bank credit to
households increased in April by 0.2 percent following its 1.3 percent increase in
March.

_The housing market_

Based on the survey of house prices, housing prices (these are not included in the CPI,
which measures the costs of housing rentals) increased in March by 0.9 percent, and
in the twelve months to March (inclusive) by 21 percent, due both to the low rate of
interest and to the slowness of the response of the supply of housing to higher prices.


-----

Outstanding housing credit (mortgages) increased by 0.4 percent in April.

_The Research Department estimate_
This is the first time that in the course of the discussions on the interest rate, the
Research Department presented a quarterly forecast that combines various indicators
derived from models for forecasting inflation and real developments with
discretionary assessments incorporated in an expanded DSGE (dynamic stochastic
general equilibrium) model that brings together the information to obtain a consistent
forecast.

The basic assumptions of the scenario presented were that world trade will increase by
7.4 percent in 2010 and by 6.0 percent in 2011, that interest rates in the major
economies will not increase before the beginning of 2011, and that inflation around
the world will remain low.

The Research Department assessment based on the above analytical framework was
that inflation in the next twelve months will be close to the midpoint of the target
inflation range, at 1.8 percent. Inflation is expected to be 1.3 percent in 2010, and 2.1
percent in 2011. This, based on a derived increase in the Bank of Israel interest rate to
an average of about 1.8 percent in the third quarter of 2010, and to 2.5 percent in a
year's time.

**4. The foreign currency market and the share market**

_The foreign-currency market_

During the period from 24 May to the current discussions (25 June), the shekel
weakened against the dollar, with the exchange rate rising from NIS 3.81 to the dollar
to NIS 3.86, a depreciation of 1.3 percent. In this period the shekel depreciated by 1.1
percent against the euro, from NIS 4.71 to the euro to NIS 4.76. Measured by the
nominal effective exchange rate of the shekel, calculated as the trade-weighted
average shekel exchange rate against 28 currencies (representing 38 of Israel's trading
partners), the shekel depreciated by about 1.9 percent.[1]

_The share market_

The Tel Aviv 25 share price index on 24 June was about 2.6 percent lower than on 24
May. The Dow Jones index rose by about 1 percent in that period.

1
The weight of the dollar in the effective exchange rate is about 25 percent, and that of the euro, about 33 percent.


-----

**5. Israel’s financial risk, the sovereign risk premium**

Israel’s risk premium, as measured by the five-year credit default swap (CDS) spread,
decreased between the previous and the current interest rate discussions, from 1.24
percentage points to 1.13 percentage points. CDS spreads around the world followed a
similar trend of contraction, including those of the peripheral European countries
(except for Greece, whose CDS continued to widen).

**6. Global economic developments (see Appendix for further details)**

In the month between the previous interest rate discussions and the current ones,
growth figures for the first quarter of 2010 became available that indicated that the
global recovery was continuing and that it had even accelerated compared with the
rate in the previous quarter. However, for many advanced economies data relating to
the second quarter point to a slowdown in the rate of expansion in the global
economy. Investment houses around the world expect the global rate of growth to
slow in the second half of 2010, against the background of the ending of the positive
effects of the fiscal aid programs and continuing monetary expansion in some
countries, and against the background of the expected slowdown in growth in Europe.

Many forecasters in investment houses around the world this month reduced their
growth forecasts for 2011, in particular for Europe. At the same time, the weakness of
the euro against most currencies is expected to help Europe's economy.

There is considerable concern among investors regarding countries with high public
debt and/or large budget deficits, and in several European countries, including the
UK, the authorities announced fiscal measures to reduce their budget deficits. That
said, the need for fiscal consolidation in several leading economies and for regulatory
reforms and changes leaves the markets with a large measure of uncertainty. Active
participants in the global financial markets remain very sensitive to any indication of
weakness.

Expectations regarding interest rates in the major central banks in 2010, reflected in
the conduct of financial market traders, are that interest rates in the US, Europe and
Japan will not change before the end of the year. In other words, compared with the
assessments at the beginning of the year, the expected timing of increases in interest
rates by the leading central banks has been postponed.

B. THE NARROW-FORUM DISCUSSION––THE INTEREST RATE DECISION
FOR JULY 2010

In the narrow-forum discussion, four members of management make
recommendations to the Governor regarding the appropriate rate of interest for the


-----

economy. In the discussions on the interest rate for July, all the participating members
of management recommended that the Governor hold the rate unchanged at 1.5
percent.

As stated in the reports of previous interest rate discussions, the Bank of Israel's
policy is to continue with the gradual process of bringing the interest rate back to a
more "normal" level intended to position inflation firmly within the target range, and
to contribute to the further recovery of economic activity, while supporting financial
stability. The path of the interest rate will be determined in accordance with the
inflation environment, the entrenchment of growth in Israel and globally, the rate at
which the major central banks increase their interest rates, and in light of
developments in the exchange rates of the shekel. At the current level of the interest
rate, monetary policy continues to be expansionary.

In the discussion, participants noted that according to the Bank of Israel assessments
and those of the private forecasters, inflation measured over the previous twelve
months will continue to decline, and in the next few months it will be around the
midpoint of the target inflation range or even below it. It was noted that in the basic
scenario of the Research Department assessment, which combines discretionary
assessments and the results of several models, inflation a year hence is expected to be
close to the midpoint of the target inflation range. The assessments of the private
forecasters and inflation expectations derived from the capital market are that inflation
in a year's time will be in the upper part of the inflation target range. The range of
expectations, given the current data, is that the Bank of Israel's interest rate will
increase by between 1 and 1.5 percentage points in the next twelve months.

It was noted in the discussion that inflation expectations one year forward calculated
from the capital market increased in June (average for the month) and were close to
the upper limit of the target range. Some of the participants interpreted this as a rise in
expected inflation, while others stressed the possibility that technical factors unrelated
to changes in inflation expectations a year ahead had affected CPI-indexed bond
prices (according to this view, a drop in the supply of short-term CPI-indexed
government bonds caused a liquidity problem in the CPI-indexed bond market, and
led to a decline in the yield on these bonds relative to the yield on unindexed bonds
with a one-year horizon).

Data published since the previous interest rate discussions indicate that the expansion
in real economic activity in Israel is continuing, with increased uncertainty regarding
the continuation of the rapid rate of growth. Participants noted in particular the greater
uncertainty regarding exports in light of global developments and their implications
for Israel's economy. In addition, the weakness of the euro against the shekel reduces
the profitability of Israel's exports to the eurozone and makes it more difficult for
Israeli exporters to compete with European competitors.


-----

The timing of increases in the interest rate in Israel relative to those in the leading
economies affects the shekel exchange rate. Participants in the discussion noted that
as a result of economic data from around the world published recently and concern
over the debt crises in several European countries, the timing of increases in interest
rates in Europe and most advanced economies will be delayed, and increases in their
interest rates are not expected before the end of 2010.

Taking into consideration the various points made in the discussion, the Governor
decided to keep the interest rate for July unchanged at 1.5 percent.

In its announcement of the decision, the Bank of Israel stressed the following
conditions that led to the decision to leave the interest rate unchanged for July:

- The inflation environment: inflation measured over the previous twelve months is
falling, and is expected to continue to do so, and in the next few months is
expected to be close to the midpoint of the target range or even below it. Inflation
expectations, both of forecasters and those calculated from the capital market, are
that in another year the inflation rate will return to the upper part of the inflation
target range, with a cumulative interest-rate increase of between 1 and 1.5
percentage points in the next twelve months.

- Uncertainty regarding the continuation of rapid growth has increased. Global
economic developments, mainly those in Europe, are likely to have a negative
impact on Israel's growth, and in particular on Israel's exports.

- Interest rates of the central banks of the leading advanced economies are very low,
and are expected to remain so longer than originally anticipated. In addition, the
ECB has reintroduced some of the special instruments of monetary
accommodation.

The Bank of Israel will continue to act to achieve its objectives of price stability, the
encouragement of employment and growth, and support for the stability of the
financial system.

The decision was made and published on June 28, 2010.

**Those participating in the narrow-forum discussion:**
Prof. Stanley Fischer, Governor of the Bank of Israel
Prof. Zvi Eckstein, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Israel
Dr. Karnit Flug, Director of the Research Department
Dr. Edward Offenbacher, Member of Management and Head of the Monetary and
Finance Division, Research Department
Ms Irit Mendelson, Assistant Director of the Market Operations Department
Dr. Ohad Bar-Efrat, Advisor to the Governor and Head of the Information and
International Affairs Division


-----

Mr. Eddy Azoulay, Chief of Staff to the Governor
Dr. Yossi Saadon, Advisor to the Governor and Bank of Israel Spokesperson


-----

**Appendix: Major Global Economic Developments**

**US**

The leading indicators of economic activity point to a slowdown in growth in the
second half of 2010, but not a return to recession. The slowdown is expected against
the background of the ending of the effect of fiscal expansion domestically and abroad
and the increase in stocks in the first half of the year.

The US economy grew by 3 percent, annual rate, in the first quarter of 2010, led by
manufacturing activity and supported by the global recovery and the weakness of the
dollar, which helped US exports, and by the continued rebuilding of stocks and
investment in equipment. Foreign investment houses expect on average that growth
will accelerate in the second quarter to a rate of 3.7 percent, and that it will then ease
to between 2.8 percent and 3.2 percent (annual rates) in the next three quarters.

Some of the economic indicators continue to point to a recovery in economic activity.
The first manufacturing surveys published for May, however, including the Empire
State Manufacturing Survey of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York and those of
the Federal Reserve Banks of Philadelphia and Richmond, indicate signs of a
slowdown. In addition, the New York Fed's survey notes that in May the level of
optimism regarding future business conditions declined, and the Chicago Purchasing
Managers Index showed a slowdown in business activity in May. Moreover, the level
of activity remained below the pre-crisis levels, and reflect a slower recovery in
consumer and business spending than had been expected.

Concern over the risks facing the US economy because of the European debt crisis
and its implications also cast a cloud over the recovery. The planned fiscal cuts in
countries in the eurozone are expected to have a negative impact on US exports to
Europe, and the strengthening of the dollar against the euro too is expected to have a
negative effect on US exports to Europe and to the rest of the world.

Moreover, the growth is not creating a real increase in employment, and the economy
is still confronted by a weak labor market. The number of claims for unemployment
benefit remains high, and the rate of utilization of production capacity increased to
74.7 percent, which is still below the average level of the last four decades.

The weakness in the housing market also persists, and continues to keep growth
down. The latest housing market data show a sharp drop in activity following the
ending of the tax benefit for first-time house buyers, indicating that the market is still
dependent on government support. Thus, the number of building starts fell in May.
The number of mortgage applications also declined.


-----

Against the background of the weakness in the labor market, the low level of
utilization of production capacity, the slow recovery of consumer spending and the
high level of stocks in the housing market, inflation indices remain low, and the risk
of deflation is higher than the risk of inflation. The CPI continued to decline and
dropped by 0.2 percent in May, following a fall in fuel prices. The investment houses
on average expect a decline in the inflation rate in 2010 from 2.3 percent in the first
quarter to 0.9 percent in the fourth quarter.

Against this background, the Fed is expected to leave the interest rate at a low level at
least till the beginning of next year. The investment houses revised their interest rate
predictions, and now expect on average that the interest rate will start to rise only in
2011. Futures contracts price in a similar trend.

**Europe**

The euro bloc economy grew by 0.8 percent (annual rate) in the first quarter of 2010,
with marked differences between the different countries, with Germany and France
showing the strongest growth. On the one hand, the sharp depreciation of the euro
against most other currencies is expected to help Europe's exports. On the other hand,
the consumer confidence index remains low in light of rising unemployment and the
persistent fiscal crisis.

Growing uncertainty over the debt crisis, the stability of the European banking system
and the possible effects of the budget cuts introduced in most countries continue to
cast a shadow over the European economy. The reduction in Greece's credit rating by
Moody's, who reduced Greek bonds to the Ba1 junk rating (Ba1) following the
downgrading by Fitch and S&P, and Germany's announcement prohibiting selling
financial assets short, similar to the announcement by the new government in Hungary
that the fiscal situation was more serious than reported previously, added to the
uncertainty and concern. The reduction of Spain's debt rating by Fitch from AAA to
AA+ and the announcement of the nationalization of a small regional bank in Spain
while four regional banks had to merge caused concern that the crisis in Spain's
banking system was becoming more severe, and led to apprehension of contagion
affecting other European countries. Rumors that Spain would receive support from the
EU and the IMF caused a steep jump in yields on Spanish government bonds, but
following the successful bond issue by the Spanish government the yields fell again,
with the government managing to raise €3.5 billion with a yield of 4.86 percent, lower
than the market yield prior to the issue.

Many governments reacted by announcing programs of cuts and reforms, including
Italy, Spain, France, Germany, Greece and Switzerland. The UK also announced deep
budget cuts that incorporated reduced expenditure, increased taxes and surcharges on
banks, in an attempt to reduce the large budget deficit. In addition, to calm the
markets the Spanish government announced that it would publish the results of banks'


-----

stress tests (measuring banks' resilience), which was followed by a German
government announcement that it would also publish stress test results on the German
banks by the end of July.

The expected reduction in consumer spending in light of increased unemployment and
the budget cuts, in conjunction with the global slowdown expected later in the year
and the effect of the continuing financial pressure related to the debt crisis, are
expected to lead to a slowdown in European growth. The investment houses on
average expect growth of 2.5 percent (annual rate) in the second quarter, slowing to
1.8 percent in the third quarter and 1.5 percent in the fourth.

The investment houses on average base their calculations on the expectation that the
ECB will leave the interest rate unchanged till the end of the first quarter of 2011, and
will then start to increase the rate gradually. Futures contracts price in the probability
of an increase in the interest rate as early as in the fourth quarter of 2010, with an
increase to 1.25 percent by the end of the second quarter of 2011.

**Japan**

Economic growth in Japan accelerated in the first quarter of 2010, mainly due to the
export sector. The investment houses on average predict deflation in the coming year.

This led policy makers to take several measures. As expected the central bank left the
interest rate unchanged at 0.1 percent, and it announced a program of one-year loans
to growth-supporting industries totaling ¥3 trillion ($33 billion), and 0.1 percent
interest, in an attempt to avoid deflation and support the recovery of the Japanese
economy.

The government introduced growth-supporting measures, including cuts in the rate of
corporate taxes and means of opening the economy to foreign companies. It also
announced a program to halt the increase in public debt.

**The emerging markets**

China's economy grew at an annual rate of 11.9 percent in the first quarter of 2010.
The data on activity in May indicate increased consumer spending and exports.
However, there are now signs that the policy measures taken to cool the economy,
particularly in the housing market and public sector investment, are starting to have an
effect. The Purchasing Managers Index declined in May, and manufacturing
production rose by less than expected.

Slower growth in China is likely to have an effect on other Asian economies which
have till now shown high rates of growth.


-----

At the same time, inflation in China accelerated against the background of the rise in
real estate prices. The announcement that China would allow flexibility in fluctuations
in the exchange rate of the yuan is likely to help restrain inflation in China.


-----

