**BANK OF ISRAEL**
Office of the Spokesperson and Economic Information

September 6, 2010

**Report to the public on the Bank of Israel’s discussions prior to setting the**
**interest rate for September 2010**

**The discussions took place on August 22 and 23, 2010**

**General**

Before the Governor makes the monthly interest rate decision,[1] discussions are held at
two levels––the first in a broad forum, and the second in a narrower one.

In the broad-forum discussion, the relevant background economic conditions are
presented, including real, monetary and financial developments in Israel’s economy,
and developments in the global economy. Participants in this discussion include the
Governor, the Deputy Governor, the directors of the Research and Market Operations
Departments of the Bank and economists from various departments who prepare and
present the material for discussion. The data, estimates and assessments in these
minutes are those that were available at the time of the discussions.

In the narrow forum, the directors of the Research and Market Operations
Departments and two other participating members of management present their
recommendations regarding the interest rate and, following a discussion, the Governor
makes his decision.

A. THE BROAD-FORUM DISCUSSION—THE STATE OF THE ECONOMY

**1. Developments on the real side**

_General assessment_

Indicators published in the last month (in the period between the decision on the July
interest rate on July 26 and the current decision on August 23), and in particular the
National Accounts figures, showed that economic activity continued to increase, both
domestic activity and exports. The increase in activity was reflected in the continued
improvement in the labor market, as could be seen in the further decline in the number
of job seekers and rises in indices of the demand for labor.

1 When the Monetary Committee is appointed, in accordance with the new Bank of Israel Law, interest
rate decisions will be made by the Committee.

POB 780 Jerusalem 91007 Israel
Tel: 972-2-6552712/3 Fax: 972-2-6528812 www.bankisrael.org.il


-----

According to the Bank of Israel assessment published in April, GDP will increase by
3.7 percent in 2010, with rapid growth in private consumption, fixed investment, and
exports. Based on the latest National Accounts data, the Bank's assessment is
consistent with some slowdown in the growth rate in the second half of the year.

_The National Accounts_

GDP grew at a rate of 4.7 percent in the second quarter of 2010 (all rates in this
section are for the second quarter, seasonally adjusted, and in annual terms), following
its 3.6 percent increase in the first quarter. Business sector product expanded rapidly,
by 6 percent. Growth was due largely to the 15.8 percent surge in exports, and the
steep 8.7 percent increase in private consumption. For the first time since the outbreak
of the crisis, there were signs of recovery in fixed investment. Nonresidential gross
fixed capital formation grew by about 7 percent, and residential investment by an
impressive 17 percent, following its more modest rises in previous quarters.

_The composite state-of-the-economy index_

The July composite state-of-the-economy index rose by 0.2 percent. In addition, due
mainly to revisions of the export figures, the indices for April, May and June were
revised upwards, so that cumulatively the indices for those months rose by 1 percent,
compared with only 0.1 percent before the adjustments. The rise in the index in the
last few months indicates the continued, albeit more moderate, expansion of economic
activity.

The increase in the index in July resulted from a 4.6 rise in the export index in July
following its 8.3 percent rise in June; a 4.0 percent rise in the consumer goods imports
index in July; a 1.8 percent rise in the index of imports of production inputs in July; a
decline of 0.9 percent in the index of manufacturing production and a drop of 2.1
percent in the trade and services revenue index in June; and a 4.3 percent decline in
the services exports index in July, after its 5.3 percent rise in June.

_The labor market_

The latest labor market data show that the expansionary trend was continuing: the
number of employees increased, the number of job seekers fell, and indices of the
demand for labor also rose. The Central Bureau of Statistics (CBS) Survey of
Vacancies indicates an increase in the number of employees and in the number of
vacant positions in the second quarter compared with the first. The trend data for the
monthly unemployment rate continued to show a downward trend, with a decline in
unemployment to 6.5 percent. (The monthly data, however, are based on a relatively
small sample, so that the figure is significantly less reliable than the quarterly data
which was published on August 31 in the Labor Force Survey for the second quarter.)
National Insurance data show an increase of about 0.5 percent in the number of
employee posts in April–May compared with the number of the first quarter


-----

(seasonally adjusted). The nominal wage per employee post remained unchanged in
this period, and the real wage declined by about 1 percent in April–May compared
with the first quarter, when it increased by 1.3 percent.

_Foreign trade_

Goods exports (excluding ships, planes and diamonds) increased by about 5.7 percent
in July from their June level (in dollar terms, seasonally adjusted), the second
consecutive month with an increase. The increase in exports in July reflects a steep
increase in the exports of the high-tech industries, and in particular of the
pharmaceutical industry, following the rises of the last few months, and renewed
increases in the exports of the medium-high- and medium-low-tech industries after
several months of decline.

Goods imports (excluding ships, aircraft and diamonds) increased by 5.8 percent in
July from their June level (in dollar terms, seasonally adjusted), after remaining level
in the second quarter.

**2. Budget data**

The domestic deficit from January to July 2010 was NIS 9 billion, compared with
NIS 15.5 billion in the equivalent period in 2009. Based on developments to date and
on the assumption of almost complete expenditure of the budget, the total deficit in
2010 is expected to be 4 percent of GDP, or slightly lower. The gap between this
forecast and the deficit in the budget proposal derives from higher than expected tax
revenues and nominal GDP.

Government revenues in July exceeded the seasonal path projected in the budget by
NIS 1.6 billion. Since the beginning of the year revenues have been NIS 5.4 billion
(4.5 percent) higher than the forecast. Tax revenues were 5 percent higher in July than
in June.

**3. Developments on the nominal side**

_Inflation_

The Consumer Price Index (CPI) for July rose by 0.5 percent, less than the 0.8 percent
average rise predicted by the private forecasters. Among the contributing factors was
the steeper decline in clothing and footwear prices than that expected according to the
seasonal path. The seasonally adjusted July index (using the Research Department's
seasonal adjustment method) increased by 0.2 percent.


-----

In the last twelve months the CPI has risen by 1.8 percent: thus the annual rate of
inflation has declined from around the upper limit of the target inflation range to the
middle of the range.

The housing index rose by 1.0 percent in July, and in the last twelve months by a
cumulative 5.6 percent (see below for a more detailed discussion of the housing
market). The CPI excluding housing rose by 0.4 percent in July, and by only 0.8
percent in the last twelve months.

_Expectations and forecasts of inflation and of the Bank of Israel interest rate_

One-year-forward inflation expectations derived from the capital market ("break-even
inflation") decreased slightly since the last interest rate decision on July 26, to 2.8
percent. The Israeli forecasters predict on average that inflation in the next twelve
price indices (from August 2010 to July 2011) will be 2.8 percent, compared with
average predictions of 3.2 percent a month ago. In the three months August–October,
the forecasters expect, on average, that the CPI will rise by a total of 0.5 percent, and
that inflation in 2010 will be 2.1 percent.

None of the forecasters who updated their reports to the Bank of Israel after the
publication of the July CPI expected the Bank to increase the interest rate for
September, and most do not expect an increase for October either. On average they
assess that the interest rate in twelve months' time will be 2.8 percent. An analysis of
the slope of the makam yield curve indicates that the capital market expects the Bank
of Israel interest rate one year hence to be about 2.6 percent.

_The makam and bond markets_

The yield to maturity on government bonds continued to decline along both the
nominal and real yield curves, apart from yields up to three years. The yield to
maturity on CPI-indexed ten-year government bonds declined in August (to August
22) to an average of 1.9 percent, from about 2.1 percent in July. The yield on ten-year
unindexed government bonds declined to an average of about 4.6 percent, from about
4.8 percent in July. The yield to maturity on one-year makam increased to about 2.3
percent, from 2.1 percent in July. The Tel-Bond 20 index showed an increase of 0.8
percent between July 25 (the date of the previous interest rate decision) and August
22, and the Tel-Bond 40 increased by 1.3 percent.

_The interest rate differential and the yield gap between Israel and abroad_

Prior to the current interest rate decision, the Bank of Israel interest rate following the
increase in the rate to 1.75 percent for August was 1.50–1.75 percentage points higher
than the US federal funds rate, and 0.75 percentage points higher than the ECB rate.


-----

Medium- and long-term nominal and real yields on bonds in the eurozone and in the
US continued their decline. In light of a steeper fall in yields in the US than in Israel,
the yield gap between local currency unindexed ten-year bonds and ten-year US
Treasury bonds increased slightly this month.

_The expected real interest rate_

The Bank of Israel interest rate _minus twelve-months-forward inflation expectations_
derived from the capital markets averaged minus 1.0 percent in August (to the date of
the current discussions), compared with _minus 1.4 percent in July. The increase in_
expected real interest reflected the increase in the Bank of Israel interest rate and a
moderate fall in inflation expectations.

_The monetary aggregates_

In the twelve months up to and including July 2010 the monetary base measured by
the M1 monetary aggregate (cash held by the public and demand deposits) increased
by 9.5 percent, reflecting a marked slowdown in the rate of increase of this aggregate,
against the background of the increase in the rate of interest. In July M1 increased by
3.0 percent, partly due also to seasonal factors. In the last twelve months the M2
aggregate (M1 plus unindexed term deposits of up to one year) increased by 3.3
percent, and in July it increased by 0.2 percent.

_The credit markets_

The outstanding balance of bank credit to the business sector increased in June by 1
percent. With a similar increase in nonbank credit and credit from abroad, the total
debt of the business sector grew by 1.1 percent in July. Households' debt increased by
0.7 percent in July due to the continued rapid increase in mortgages, which grew by
2.5 percent in July following their 1.8 percent increase in June.

_The housing market_

The housing component in the CPI (which reflects the costs of housing rentals)
increased by 5.6 percent in the twelve months to July (inclusive). According to the
Central Bureau of Statistics survey of house prices (these are not included in the CPI,
which reflects the cost of rentals), house prices continued to increase in May, with a
rise of 2.2 percent. In the last twelve months house prices have increased by about 22
percent. An assessment prepared in the Bank of Israel expects the rate of increase in
house prices to moderate in the coming year. Nevertheless, the update of the forecast
last month showed a smaller slowdown in the rate of increase in house prices than had
been expected previously.

An up-to-date assessment of the level of house prices relative to the economic
fundamentals that affect them, including the supply of houses relative to the


-----

population, the business cycle, and the level of the interest rate, shows that the price
level does not deviate significantly from the level indicated by those factors. The rate
of increase in house prices, however, cannot be explained fully by those factors alone,
and is reflected by a rapid increase in the real price of houses (i.e., divided by the
CPI), in the ratio of house prices to rents, and in the continued rise in the ratio of
house prices to the average wage. If the current rate of increase in house prices
persists, it will distance them from the level consistent with the economic
fundamentals.

Total mortgages granted in July were 10 percent below the extent of mortgages
granted in June, but still higher than in the previous months. The composition of new
mortgages was similar to that in June: most were unindexed floating-interest-rate
mortgages, with a small increase in indexed floating-rate mortgages. Rates of interest
on indexed fixed- and floating-interest-rate mortgages continued to decline, and those
on unindexed floating-rate mortgages remained stable in the last few months.

_The Research Department assessment_

In the course of the discussions the Research Department presents a quarterly forecast
that uses a medium-scale DSGE (dynamic stochastic general equilibrium) model to
combine indicators derived from a number of models for forecasting inflation with
predicted real developments and judgmental assessments, to develop the staff
forecast.[2]

According to the latest quarterly forecast, as published in the beginning of August in
the Inflation Report for the second quarter, the rate of inflation in the next twelve
months is expected to be 2.5 percent. The forecast also gave a derived gradual
increase in the Bank of Israel interest rate to 3 percent in a year's time (in the third
quarter of 2011).

Since that forecast was prepared, there have been several developments that are likely
to have a bearing on it. A lower global inflation path in the second quarter than
originally predicted, and forecasts of the development of inflation, and more moderate
forecasts of global activity and global interest rates than those on which the forecast
was based are likely to lower the forecast inflation and interest rate paths.
Contrariwise, the revised forecast regarding house prices that predicts a slightly faster
rate of increase than the previous month's forecast is expected to act to increase
expected inflation slightly. A renewed increase in commodity prices around the world,
and in particular increased food prices, are expected to have only a marginal effect on
the forecast.

At this stage it appears that the forces acting to moderate inflation together with those
acting in the opposite direction serving to boost inflation are not likely to have a

2 For a detailed description of the model and its use see the Bank's Inflation Report No. 31, for April–
June 2010.


-----

significant effect on the Research Department's staff forecast of the inflation and
interest rate paths. The next quarterly forecast will be made in September, prior to the
decision on the October interest rate.

**4. The foreign currency market and the share market**

_The foreign-currency market_

During the period from July 26 to the last trading day prior to the current discussions,
August 20, the shekel appreciated by about 1.8 percent––measured by its nominal
effective exchange rate, calculated as the trade-weighted average shekel exchange rate
against 28 currencies (representing 38 of Israel's trading partners).[3] This was due
mainly to the appreciation of the shekel against the euro by about 2.8 percent, and by
about 1.7 percent against the dollar.

_The share market_

Since the previous interest rate discussions, share price indices in Israel and around
the world rose. The Tel Aviv 25 share price index on August 20 was about 4 percent
higher than on July 25, and the Tel Aviv 100 index about 3 percent higher.

**5. Israel’s financial risk, the sovereign risk premium**

Israel’s risk premium, as measured by the five-year credit default swap (CDS) spread,
increased slightly from about 1.15 percentage points to 1.22 percentage points in the
period between the previous and the current interest rate discussions. CDS spreads
around the world remained relatively stable.

**6. Global economic developments (see Appendix for further details)**

Based on the latest economic data, the international economic organizations assess
that the probability of a renewed slowdown in the global economy has increased
recently. The interest rate announcement by the Fed on 10 August was particularly
notable in this regard, as it was less optimistic than previous announcements, and
stressed the slowdown in the growth rate and downside risks. Private consumption,
which is expected to be the main engine driving growth, has not recovered yet in any
of the major economies, and in those countries which showed good rates of growth,
these derived from temporary factors (fiscal stimuli and replenishment of stocks) or
exports. Compared with the US, the assessments regarding European countries are

3
The weight of the dollar in the effective exchange rate is about 25 percent, and that of the euro, about 33 percent.


-----

more positive, against the background of implementation of fiscal tightening in
Greece and relatively good macroeconomic figures, mainly for Germany.

During most of the past month prices in most capital market sectors continued to rise.
Following the Fed's announcement mentioned above, share markets started falling,
and yields on government bonds also declined.

Global inflation remains low, as are inflation forecasts for the coming year. Central
banks' interest rates remain low and expectations are that the rates in the US and
Europe will remain low for a relatively long time.

This month the Chairman of the Federal Reserve announced a modest stimulation
measure in which the Fed's balance sheet would be maintained at its current level, and
repayments from agency debt and agency mortgage backed securities would be
reinvested in Treasury securities.

B. THE NARROW-FORUM DISCUSSION––THE INTEREST RATE DECISION
FOR SEPTEMBER 2010

In the narrow-forum discussion, members of management make recommendations to
the Governor regarding the appropriate rate of interest for the economy. In the
discussions on the interest rate for September, all the participating members of
management recommended that the Governor keep the rate unchanged at 1.75
percent.

As stated in the reports of previous interest rate discussions, the Bank of Israel's
policy is to continue with the gradual process of bringing the interest rate back to a
more "normal" level intended to position inflation firmly within the target range, and
to contribute to the further recovery of economic activity, while supporting financial
stability. The pace of the interest rate increases is not predetermined, but is set in
accordance with the inflation environment, growth in Israel and globally, the
monetary policies of the major central banks, and in light of developments in the
exchange rates of the shekel. Keeping the interest rate for September unchanged is
fully in keeping with this process.

The discussion centered on two major issues. One was the assessment of the
environment of real economic activity, and the other was developments in the housing
market. Inflation developments and inflation expectations were also discussed.

National Accounts figures for the second quarter indicated rapid GDP growth at an
annual rate of 4.7 percent (seasonally adjusted), with a 15.8 percent increase in
exports. In light of concern over the extent and strength of the global economic
recovery, and specially the development of demand for Israel's exports, participants in


-----

the discussion spoke of the uncertainty regarding the expected rate of economic
activity. The point was made that the Research Department's staff forecast of 3.7
percent growth in 2010 published in April was consistent with some slowdown in the
rate of growth in the second half of the year. The forecast would be updated next
month, following the publication of the results of the Labor Force Survey.

The participants also discussed the possible effects of expanded activity on the real
wage, and hence on prices. Till now, despite increased employment, no significant
pressure on the real wage has been felt, they said. Nevertheless, with unemployment
declining, continued increase in activity in the future might result in a reaction on the
wage front.

Developments in the housing market in the last few months were also discussed. It
was noted that the rapid increase in house prices (which are not included in the CPI)
was continuing, and prices had risen by 2.2 percent in May, and by about 22 percent
in the last twelve months. This rapid increase is reflected in the widening gap between
house prices and housing prices (which are measured by rentals and are included in
the CPI), with the latter having increased by 5.6 percent in the last twelve months.

In July the loan-to-value ratio of loans for house purchases rose slightly, while the
number of new mortgages was at a high level, albeit some 10 percent lower than the
peak level it reached in June. From the aspect of borrowers' repayment ability, there
had been no significant change in the risk.

It was also stated that the supply side had shown some response, with an increase in
the number of building starts and in investment in housing, but it was not keeping up
with the increase in demand.

With regard to the macroprudential steps that were implemented in July, it was still
too early to assess their effect, and this could be done when data on the mortgage
market became available for July and August. In light of the persistent trends in the
housing market, it was suggested that further macroprudential measures might be
needed in this area.

Participants in the discussion noted that in addition to the effect of short-term interest
rates on house prices, the decline in medium-term and long-term interest rates related
to the decline in interest rates around the world is reflected in the reduction in the cost
of financing house purchases, thereby boosting demand.

The rate of inflation in the last twelve months has declined, and is currently slightly
below the midpoint of the target range. It was noted that the inflation rate excluding
housing was 0.8 percent in the last twelve months. Private forecasters expect the rate
of inflation to remain at about its current level till the end of 2010, and to rise to the
vicinity of the upper limit of the target range at the beginning of 2011.


-----

Finally, the participants agreed that leaving the interest rate unchanged at 1.75 percent
was consistent with the process of gradually returning it to more "normal" levels
taking economic conditions into account. They emphasized the need for constant
monitoring of developments in the housing market and house prices, including the
mortgage market.

Taking into consideration the points made in the discussion, the Governor decided to
keep the interest rate for September unchanged at 1.75 percent.

In its announcement of the decision, the Bank of Israel stressed the following
conditions that led to the decision to leave the interest rate unchanged for September:

- Inflation in the last twelve months was 1.8 percent, below the midpoint of the
target inflation range, despite the rapid rise of 5.6 percent in the housing index in
that period. Inflation expectations calculated from the capital market for one year
ahead and those of the private forecasters had declined to below the upper limit of
the target inflation range.

- Most indicators of real economic activity published this month point to continued
expansion. Nevertheless, uncertainty persists regarding the rate of growth in
Israel. This is due mainly to the high degree of uncertainty prevailing in the global
economy, reflected in downward adjustments of growth rate forecasts by analysts
and international organizations.

- Interest rates of the central banks of the major advanced economies are at very
low levels, and in light of recent weak data are expected to remain so for an
extended period. Nevertheless central banks in several countries that are already
growing relatively rapidly continued with the process of increasing their interest
rates last month too, and are expected to continue to do so in the near future.

The Bank of Israel will continue to monitor Israeli and worldwide economic and
financial developments, and will use the instruments available to it to achieve its
objectives of price stability, the encouragement of employment and growth, and
support for the stability of the financial system, and in this regard, will continue to
keep a close watch on developments in the housing market, and especially on house
prices.

The decision was made and published on August 23, 2010.

**Participants in the narrow-forum discussion:**
Prof. Stanley Fischer, Governor of the Bank of Israel
Prof. Zvi Eckstein, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Israel
Dr. Edward Offenbacher, Member of Management and Head of the Monetary and
Finance Division, Research Department
Dr. Michel Strawczynski, Head of the Macroeconomic and Policy Division, Research
Department


-----

Mr. Barry Topf, Director of the Market Operations Department
Mr. Rony Hizkiyahu, the Supervisor of Banks
Mr. Eddy Azoulay, Chief of Staff to the Governor
Dr. Yossi Saadon, Advisor to the Governor and Bank of Israel Spokesperson
Dr. Sigal Ribon, Head of the Monetary Analysis Unit, Research Department

**Appendix: Major Global Economic Developments**

US

Second quarter GDP was slightly below the forecast, with a 2.4 percent increase
(annual rate) compared with an expected rate of 2.5 percent. An update of GDP data
for the last few years showed that cumulative growth in the last there years was only
0.7 percent. Other negative data on employment, construction and production were
reflected in the assessment that the economic situation was not as good as had been
expected. The Fed also stated in its August interest rate announcement that the
economic forecast had worsened, and announced a modest stimulation measure.

Three areas seem to be hindering the recovery of the US economy. The first is
housing, with a huge inventory of unsold houses, a record number of foreclosures, and
a large number of problem mortgages. The second is employment. Although
unemployment remained steady at 9.5 percent, this incorporates a decline in the
participation rate and an increase in the share of hard-core unemployed. The third area
is private consumption, against the background of the publication of disappointing
figures of private consumption, personal income, retail sales, and orders for consumer
durables. Nevertheless, a decline in the private sector leverage ratio and an increase in
the saving rate to levels that do not justify a further increase may indicate a chance
that a recovery in consumption lies ahead.

The rate of inflation remains low, 1.2 percent, and it is expected to stay low for the
coming year. The Fed interest rate is close to zero, and is expected to remain in that
area during the next year.

Europe

Data on GDP in the second quarter were positive, with a 1 percent increase (in
quarterly terms), compared with the expectation of only 0.7 percent. Germany led the
field, with 2.2 percent quarterly growth, contributing about 60 percent of the growth
of the whole eurozone. Most of the growth was due to the increase in exports resulting
from the weakness of the euro, with no evidence of an increase in domestic demand.
Other indicators from the eurozone were also better than expected, including retail


-----

sales and most consumer confidence indices. In contrast, manufacturing production
was disappointing, and unemployment rates are still high. The recent strengthening of
the euro raises doubts about whether the increase in activity can be maintained.

The "troika" established to assess Greece's progress in implementing economic
reforms commended its compliance with all the conditions of the loan, so that the next
tranche of the aid is apparently assured. That said, the macroeconomic data of
Greece's economy are still problematic, with negative growth, high unemployment,
and a rise in inflation.

Inflation in the eurozone rose to 1.7 percent in July, but it seems that there is no
genuinely inflationary pressure. The ECB interest rate is still 1 percent, and is
expected to remain at that level until the first quarter of 2011 at least.

Japan

GDP data for the second quarter were disappointing, with an increase of only 0.4
percent compared with an expected 2.3 percent. The growth was based entirely on the
increase in exports, whereas all the other components grew more slowly or even
declined. Even exports expanded mainly at the beginning of the quarter, and leveled
off thereafter. The trade surplus continued to contract, manufacturing production
declined by about 1 percent in July following its fall in June, the number of hours
worked dropped, as did total income. Unemployment increased in June to 5.3 percent,
higher than expected, continuing the upward trend that started in March. Prices in
Japan continued to fall, and deflation is currently 0.7 percent (i.e., inflation of minus
0.7 percent). In August the Bank of Japan kept its interest rate at 0.1 percent, and did
not change its program of purchases.

The emerging markets

In Asia, South America and Eastern Europe the strong growth rates seen in the first
quarter moderated. China and Brazil recorded monthly declines in manufacturing
production, and Russia, which recorded rapid growth in the last period, is likely to be
adversely affected by the heat wave and fires it suffered to an extent estimated at 1
percent of GDP.

The increase in food prices, and in particular wheat prices, is causing a rise in
inflation in the emerging market economies that are highly dependent on food. Thus,
India showed 10 percent inflation as a result of food price increases, which led to an
increase in the interest rate to 5.75 percent.

China is showing the results of the government's efforts to cool the economy.
Manufacturing production dropped in the previous month, new loans were below
market expectations, and although retail sales continued to increase, they did so more
slowly than expected. The government this month imposed further restrictions on


-----

granting housing loans, and this was reflected by a decline in house prices and sales
for the first time in many months. China's exports continued to expand rapidly, and
the trade surplus reached an 18-month peak. Inflation in China rose to 3.3 percent,
mainly due to food price increases.


-----

