**BANK OF ISRAEL**
Office of the Spokesperson and Economic Information

January 10, 2011

**Report to the public on the Bank of Israel’s discussions prior to setting the**
**interest rate for January 2011**

**The discussions took place on December 26 and 27, 2010**

**General**

Before the Governor makes the monthly interest rate decision,[1] discussions are held at
two levels––the first in a broad forum, and the second in a narrower one.

In the broad-forum discussion, the relevant background economic conditions are
presented, including real, monetary and financial developments in Israel’s economy,
and developments in the global economy. Participants in this discussion include the
Governor, the Deputy Governor, the directors of the Research and Market Operations
Departments of the Bank and economists from various departments who prepare and
present the material for discussion. The data, estimates and assessments in these
minutes are those that were available at the time of the discussions.

In the narrow forum, the directors of the Research and Market Operations
Departments and two other participating members of management present their
recommendations regarding the interest rate and, following a discussion, the Governor
makes his decision.

A. THE BROAD-FORUM DISCUSSION—THE STATE OF THE ECONOMY

**1. Developments on the real side**

_General assessment_

Indicators published in the last month (in the period from the decision on the
December interest rate on November 22 till the current decision on December 27),
showed that economic activity continued to increase. The increase resulted mainly
from an increase in consumption of durables and in fixed investment.

1 When the Monetary Committee is appointed, in accordance with the new Bank of Israel Law, interest
rate decisions will be made by the Committee.

POB 780 Jerusalem 91007 Israel


-----

Labor market data for the third quarter of 2010 show a continuation of the positive
trend: although the rate of unemployment rose slightly in the third quarter compared
with the second, this was due to a higher rate of participation on the labor market with
a concurrent increase in the employment rate. Both nominal and real wages increased,
in spite of the rise in labor supply.

The latest figures of goods exports (November–December 2010) show a moderate
upward trend, but in general foreign trade data still reflect weakness, against the
background of a very moderate growth in world trade.

_The National Accounts_

GDP is expected to grow in the fourth quarter of 2010 at an annual rate of 3.9 percent
(seasonally adjusted), and maybe even at a higher rate. The continued GDP growth
derives from a faster increase in private consumption and fixed investment, with a
more moderate increase in exports. Imports are expected to remain unchanged.

The expected increase in private consumption in the forth quarter is based on the rapid
increase in imports of consumer durables. The expected growth of fixed investment is
based on the sharp rise in the Purchasing Managers Index and increased capital goods
imports. In addition, the rise in the index of capital utilization in the third quarter is
also expected to boost investment from the fourth quarter.

Initial partial data from the Bank of Israel Companies Survey for the fourth quarter
support the assessment that economic activity continued to expand buoyantly in all
industries, and this is reflected in companies’ reports of activity in the fourth quarter
of 2010 and in their expectations regarding activity in the first quarter of 2011. The
Purchasing Managers Index also increased in November, and was above 50 percent
for the fourth consecutive month, indicating expansion. Consumer confidence indices
declined this month, but their level still remained relatively high.

_The composite state-of-the-economy index_

The composite state-of-the-economy index for November, which increased by 0.1
percent following similarly moderate increases since July, indicates that economic
activity continued to grow slowly. The moderate rise of the index in November was
the outcome of rises in the indices of manufacturing production, trade and services
revenue and goods exports, which were offset by declines in the indices of consumer
goods imports, raw material imports and services exports.


-----

_The labor market_

The positive developments in the labor market in the first half of the year continued in
the third quarter. The unemployment rate increased to 6.6 percent in the third quarter
from 6.4 percent in the second, but according to the Central Bureau of Statistics
Manpower Survey Labor, this increase was accompanied by a 0.7 percentage point
increase in the participation rate to 57.8 percent, and a 0.6 percentage point increase in
the employment rate to 54 percent. The average real wage per employee post
increased by 0.4 percent in the third quarter compared with the second, and the
nominal wage by 0.7 percent (both seasonally adjusted). Data on Health Tax receipts
in November point to an increase in total wage payments compared with the total in
November 2009.

_Foreign trade_

In November, goods exports remained unchanged, while goods imports fell by 4.5
percent from their October level. The Triple Trade Index[2] and Israel's exports have
been steady for several months, indicating the standstill in both world trade and in
Israel's foreign trade.

**2. Budget data**

The domestic deficit (excluding credit) from the beginning of 2010 until November
was NIS 12.8 billion, compared with NIS 24.1 billion in January–November 2009. On
the basis of the current data, the deficit in 2010, excluding credit, is expected to be
about 3.5 percent of GDP, compared with the deficit ceiling of 5.5 percent of GDP.
Assessments of the costs of the Carmel fire are that from a macroeconomic standpoint
they will not be significant.

**3. Developments on the nominal side**

_Inflation_

The November CPI rose by 0.1 percent, within the range of forecasters' inflation
predictions of an increase of between 0 percent and 0.3 percent. Inflation in the last
twelve months and since the beginning of 2010 stands at 2.3 percent, within the range
of the price stability target. Excluding the housing component, the CPI has increased
by 1.6 percent since the beginning of 2010.

2 This index measures the total foreign trade of the US, Germany and Japan, and it provides an early
indicator of world trade.


-----

The increase in the index in November was due mainly to the clothing and footwear
component, which rose by 2.2 percent, and transport and communications, which rose
1.1 percent .

_Expectations and forecasts of inflation and of the Bank of Israel interest rate_

Market-based one-year-forward inflation expectations ("break-even inflation")
declined to about 3 percent this month, in line with the average of the forecaster’s
assessments.

The forecasters expect, on average, that in the three months December 2010 to
February 2011 the CPI will rise by a total of between –0.1 percent and +0.2 percent.

Most of the forecasters, on average, do not expect the Bank of Israel to change the
rate of interest for January 2011. On average they expect that in twelve months' time
the interest rate will be 3.1 percent.

_The makam and bond markets_

Yields on Israeli indexed and unindexed government bonds increased in this period by
between 10 and 30 basis points (b.p.) along the entire curve, with indexed bonds
showing the greater increase. These developments regarding Israeli government bonds
showed the same general trends as did government bonds abroad, which started with
steep increases in yields in the US, although the increase in Israel was a more
moderate one. Yields on makam increased along the entire curve as it flattened.

_The interest rate differential and the yield gap between Israel and abroad_

Prior to the current interest rate decision, the Bank of Israel interest rate was 1.75–2.0
percentage points higher than the US federal funds rate and 1 percentage point higher
than the ECB rate.

The yield gap, between ten-year unindexed Israeli and US government bonds,
contracted significantly to 128 b.p. as a result of a sharper increase in yields in the US.

_The expected real interest rate_

The Bank of Israel interest rate—deflated by the twelve-months-forward inflation
expectations derived from the capital markets—averaged _minus 1 percent in_
November (to the date of the current discussions), an increase of 0.2 percentage points
from its November level, due to the decline in inflation expectations.


-----

_The monetary aggregates_

The slowdown in the rate of increase in the monetary aggregates continued, and some
aggregates actually decreased. The M1 monetary aggregate (cash held by the public
and demand deposits) decreased in November by 1 percent, further to its 0.7 percent
decline in October. In the twelve months up to (and including) November, M1
increased by 1.7 percent. The M2 aggregate (M1 plus unindexed term deposits of up
to one year) increased by 1 percent in November after remaining unchanged in
October; in the twelve months to November it increased by 2 percent.

_The credit markets_

The total outstanding balance of credit to the business sector decreased by 0.3 percent
in October, after falling at a similar rate in September; since the beginning of the year
it has increased by about 2 percent. The outstanding balance of credit to households
increased by 1 percent in October, due to increases in the outstanding balances of both
mortgages and non-housing loans. Since the beginning of the year the outstanding
balance of credit to households has increased by 10.6 percent.

_The housing market_

House prices, which are not included in the CPI and which are taken from the Central
Bureau of Statistics (CBS) survey of house prices, increased on average by 0.4
percent in September–October, after rising by 1.9 percent a month on average in
August–September. Since the beginning of the year house prices have increased by
12.2 percent, and in the past twelve months by 18.2 percent.

The housing component in the CPI, which is based mainly on the costs of renewed
rental contracts, remained unchanged in November, after declining by 1.1 percent in
October. It should be noted that at this time of year there is a low seasonal factor in
house rentals.

The value of new mortgages granted in November increased by 10 percent compared
with the level in October, but was still at a lower level than in the summer months.
The main increase occurred in CPI-indexed, fixed interest mortgages, although
unindexed floating interest mortgages still constitute the major part of the mortgage
market. The increase in mortgages occurred despite the increases in the rate of interest
on both indexed and unindexed floating interest mortgages.

In December the government increased the rate of purchase tax for 2011 and 2012 on
purchases of houses by multiple-house owners. This measure is expected to reduce the
price of houses for single-house owners, by reducing purchases of houses for
investment purposes. In addition, from January 2011 an exemption from the 20
percent betterment tax will be granted to those owning a house in addition to their


-----

residence if they sell the second property in 2011 or 2012. The exemption will apply
to the sale of up to two houses. At the end of the exemption period, the legal state will
revert to the prior situation. This measure is expected to increase the supply of houses
for sale in the short run.

_The Research Department assessment_

According to the staff forecast, inflation in 2011 is expected to be 2.6 percent, with a
gradual increase in the Bank's interest rate, to about 3.3 percent in the last quarter of
2011.

The main reason for the forecast being above the midpoint of the inflation target range
is the housing component (rentals), which is expected to continue increasing relatively
rapidly, an increase in aggregate demand, and increased energy and commodity
prices. Factors acting in the opposite direction, i.e., to slow the rate of price increases,
include the low rate of inflation in the developed economies and the appreciation of
the shekel in the last few quarters.

The main risks to real economic activity and inflation in Israel derive from
developments abroad and in the housing market. Nevertheless, a renewal of
substantial capital inflows into Israel, should that occur, with the pressures towards
appreciation that they cause, would have a moderating effect on growth and inflation,
and thereby a slowing effect on the pace of interest rate increases.

**4. The foreign currency market and the share market**

_The foreign-currency market_

During the period from November 21 to December 24, the shekel appreciated by
about 1.3 percent against the dollar, and by about 5.5 percent against the euro, similar
to the trend in currencies of countries with high growth rates. In terms of the nominal
effective exchange rate[3] the shekel appreciated by 2.8 percent.

_The share market_

Since the previous interest rate discussions, the Tel Aviv share price indices
increased, in line with the general trends in most stock markets around the world, but

3
Calculated as the trade-weighted average shekel exchange rate against 28 currencies (representing 38 of Israel's
trading partners). The weight of the dollar in the effective exchange rate is about 25 percent, and that of the euro,
about 33 percent.


-----

at a somewhat more moderate rate. The Tel Aviv 25 index increased by 3.2 percent,
and during the period it reached an all-time record level.

**5. Israel’s financial risk, the sovereign risk premium**

Israel’s risk premium, as measured by the five-year credit default swap (CDS) spread,
increased slightly to 116 b.p., similar to the trend in CDS spreads of countries not
related to the debt crisis in Europe.

**6. Global economic developments (see Appendix for further details)**

As in the previous month, most of this month's economic data presented a positive
picture with regard to the economies of the US, China, and some European countries,
prompting investment houses to make significant upward adjustments to their
forecasts of growth in the next two years. In the US the monetary expansion
continues, in the form of QE2, and a new fiscal program was launched, consisting
mainly of tax relief. It seems that the markets brought forward by a few months their
forecast of the timing of an increase in the interest rate in the US. In Europe the debt
crisis spread, with reductions in the ratings and rating outlooks in some European
countries (the PIGS) and doubts about other countries. Europe as a whole,
spearheaded by Germany, generally presented surprisingly buoyant macroeconomic
data, which in the third quarter were based also on domestic demand, and not only
exports. In the emerging market economies, headed by China, rapid growth persisted.
The favorable economic data published on the one hand, and the concern resulting
from the high levels of debt and the European debt crisis on the other, prompted
investors to switch this month from government bonds to risk assets and led to capital
inflows to countries with high growth rates. This resulted in higher yields on
government bonds in the major economies, strengthening of the currencies of
countries with rapid growth, and increases in share prices. Inflation remained low in
the advanced economies. Increased demand for commodities pushed their prices up,
boosting inflation in the emerging markets.

B. THE NARROW-FORUM DISCUSSION––THE INTEREST RATE DECISION
FOR JANUARY 2011

In the narrow-forum discussion, four members of management make
recommendations to the Governor regarding the appropriate rate of interest for the
economy. In the current discussions on the interest rate for January, all the
participating members of management recommended that the Governor leave the
interest rate unchanged, at 2.0 percent.


-----

Leaving the interest rate at 2 percent is consistent with the process of gradually
restoring a more normal interest rate environment—a process aimed at stabilizing
inflation within the target range, and supporting further growth of economic activity
while maintaining financial stability. The pace of interest rate increases depends on
the inflation environment, growth in Israel and globally, the monetary policies of the
major central banks, developments in asset prices, and the exchange rates of the
shekel. At the current rate of interest, monetary policy continuous to be expansionary.

Several issues were discussed, in particular the effect on the exchange rate of the
possible widening of the interest rate differential between Israel and abroad, the effect
of the exchange rate on inflation, and an assessment of the inflation environment.

In the discussion it was noted that the inflation environment is relatively high, at least
in the short term. Inflation expectations derived from the capital market ––break-even
inflation––is at the upper limit of the inflation target range; the average of forecasters’
predictions are at a similar level, and the CPI, seasonally adjusted, shows a constant
increase in inflation since the beginning of the year. Also, the Research Department
forecast of inflation in the next twelve months is 2.6 percent, slightly lower than that
of the forecasters, but the Department’s forecast takes into account an increase in the
Bank of Israel interest rate, to an average of 3.3 percent in the fourth quarter of 2011.
It was also noted, however, that despite expanded economic activity there were no
signs evident as yet of pressure for wage increases, as the supply of labor had also
increased. In addition, although inflation expectations derived from the capital market
for the medium and long terms are above the midpoint of the target inflation range,
the risk premium element they contain is higher than that for short-term inflation
expectations, so that actual expectations are lower. The fact that medium- and longterm inflation expectations are close to the midpoint of the target inflation range
reflects the credibility of monetary policy.

Participants in the discussion said that an increase in the interest rate would further
increase the pressures that already existed at this time for appreciation of the shekel,
as widening the interest rate differential would encourage capital inflows that would
tend to strengthen the shekel. Moreover, the assessment was also put forward that the
appreciation of the shekel in the last few months had helped to moderate inflation, and
if the pressures for appreciation continued, they would continue to hold inflation
down also in the future. Those pressures, if they do come about, will also moderate
the rate of increase of the interest rate. Rapid recovery of activity in the US, however,
would bring forward increases in the interest rate there, would narrow the interest rate
differential, and enable the interest rate in Israel to increase more rapidly. It was noted
that the most recent data regarding the US capital market show market expectations
that the interest rate would rise somewhat earlier than previously expected.

Data since the previous discussions indicate that economic activity continues to
expand, and the moderate increase of exports in the past two months following a
period of decline is consistent with the development of world trade. The recovery in


-----

exports is fragile, however, and the debt crisis hanging over several European
countries is likely to reduce the strength of demand for Israel’s exports and hence also
Israel's rate of growth.

In its announcement of the decision, the Bank of Israel emphasized the following
points for keeping the interest rate for January 2011 unchanged:

- Interest rates of the leading advanced economies' central banks are low, and are
expected to remain low for a long time. Against this background, the differentials
between interest rates in countries with relatively rapid rates of growth, including
Israel, and those in the advanced economies encourage short-term capital flows,
create pressure for the appreciation of the domestic currency, and therefore
present a serious challenge for policy makers.

- Inflation expectations for one year ahead calculated from the capital market and
those of forecasters declined a little and entered the target inflation range, and are
currently slightly below its upper limit. The Bank of Israel Research Department
forecast is that inflation in the coming year will be 2.6 percent, partly due to the
appreciation of the shekel last month. Inflation over the previous twelve months is
expected to be slightly above the upper limit of the inflation target range during
most of 2011, and then to return to within the target range towards the end of the
year.

- House prices increased at a slower rate last month, while the housing component
of the CPI declined in the last two months, partly due to the measures introduced
by the Bank of Israel and the government to cool the real estate market. However,
it is still early to know whether there has been a change in the trend of house
prices. The Bank of Israel will continue to monitor the developments in this
market, and will take whatever steps are needed to underpin financial stability.

- Most of this month's economic indicators support the assessment that economic
activity in Israel continues to expand at a rate of about 4 percent per annum. The
investment houses revised their growth forecasts for the US upwards.
Nevertheless, the debt crisis in several European countries is likely to reduce the
pace of recovery in those countries and accordingly presents a risk to the rate of
growth in Israel.

The Bank of Israel will use the instruments available to it to achieve its objectives of
price stability, the encouragement of employment and growth, and support for the
stability of the financial system, including keeping a close watch on developments in
the assets market, and especially in the housing market.

The decision was made and published on November 22, 2010.


-----

**Participants in the narrow-forum discussion:**
Prof. Stanley Fischer, Governor of the Bank of Israel
Prof. Zvi Eckstein, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Israel
Dr. Karnit Flug, Director of the Research Department
Dr. Edward Offenbacher, Member of Management and Head of the Monetary and
Finance Division, Research Department
Mr. Barry Topf, Director of the Market Operations Department
Mr. Eddy Azoulay, Chief of Staff to the Governor
Dr. Yossi Saadon, Advisor to the Governor and Bank of Israel Spokesperson
Dr. Yossi Yakhin, Economist, Research Department

**Appendix: Major Global Economic Developments**

_The US_

The flow of positive data about the US economy continues. Growth in the third
quarter was 2.6 percent (annual rate, seasonally adjusted), and it is supported mainly
by business investments and government expenditure. The investment houses and
economists increased their growth forecasts for 2011 by up to one percentage point.
The Michigan University Consumer Confidence Index rose in December to its highest
level for six months; the improvement derived in the main from more optimistic
expectations regarding employment, despite the high level of unemployment, 9.8
percent in November, seasonally adjusted. Nonetheless, inflation is still low, the
housing industry is still suffering from low demand, and residential investment is still
weak, with a 27.3 percent drop in the third quarter (annual rate, seasonally adjusted).
It appears that US policy makers consider that it is still necessary to support economic
activity, both by means of monetary expansion (in the form of quantitative easing,
QE2, with hints of increasing it beyond $600 billion), and via a new program of fiscal
incentives totaling $860 billion (compared with $787 billion in the original program),
mainly in the form of tax relief, despite Moody’s reported warning of a possible
downgrade of the US credit rating.

There was renewed optimism in the financial markets that started with the
announcement of the QE2 program, although early in the period reviewed it seemed
that the increasing severity of the European debt crisis was managing to depress it.
The volatility index (VIX) continued to decline, and yields on US government bonds
increased. The negative sentiment about US government bonds led to a net exit by
investors from government bond funds for the first time in two years, and to an
increase in interest on 30-year mortgages to 4.83 percent, its highest level for seven
months, which is likely to constitute a burden to the real estate market, in
contradiction to the Fed’s intention.


-----

At the same time, optimism in the markets enabled the government to sell its Citi
holdings at a profit, and to start issuing parts of GM and AIG and to reduce the cost of
its TARP (Troubled Asset Relief Program) to only $25 billion.

_Europe_

The debt crisis in Europe is still spreading with the reduced ratings and rating
outlooks of the PIGS countries and with the spread of the crisis to Belgium, where the
lack of political stability makes it difficult to take decisions to reduce the debt. Europe
as a whole, however, spearheaded by Germany, generally presented surprisingly
buoyant macroeconomic data, with economic activity based on domestic demand, and
not only exports. The eurozone grew by 1.6 percent (annual rate) in the third quarter,
and the forecasts are for continued growth in the fourth quarter. The OECD expects
the recovery in Europe to be a slow one in the next few years.

BIS data show that in the second quarter foreign financial institutions’ exposure to the
PIGS countries contracted by about $100 billion, but it is still $2.28 trillion, with the
banks in Germany and France having the highest exposure.

In Europe it is planned to carry out new stress tests in February, as the previous tests
which all big Irish banks and most Spanish banks passed successfully did not gain the
confidence of the public.

_Japan_

Japan continues to exhibit impressive recovery in economic activity: GDP grew by
4.5 percent (annual rate) in the third quarter, although this was supported mainly by
private consumption which was itself supported by the government, although in the
previous quarters exports to the West and to China were the main engine of growth.
Japan’s economy, however, is still in the throes of deflation.

The Japanese government recently passed its highest ever budget, $1.1 trillion for the
next budget year. The budget still awaits parliamentary approval before it goes into
effect. The budget is intended to provide a boost to the domestic economy, although
more than half of it is earmarked for repayment of debts. Japan’s public debt/GDP
ratio is the highest of all the advanced economies.

_The emerging markets_

The emerging markets continue to show rapid growth, led by China, and the
increasing demand for commodities boosts their prices and inflation. The annual
inflation rate in China increased this month to 5.1 percent, its highest level in more


-----

than two years, in Brazil it increased to 5.6 percent, in Russia 8.1 percent, and in India
it declined slightly to 9.7 percent, but the central banks hesitate to increase their
interest rates in order to avoid widening the yield gaps vis-à-vis the advanced
economies, which would serve to encourage capital flows to them and strengthen their
currencies. This attitude may be changing, however, in the case of the People’s Bank
of China (PBOC), which this month increased its interest rate for the second time in
three months, after avoiding doing so since the onset of the crisis. Till now the steps
taken by the PBOC focused on increasing the capital requirement, which was raised
this month for the sixth time this year.

In light of the continued moderate level of activity in the advanced economies and the
rapid growth in the emerging market economies, China and India this month decided
to double the trade between them to $100 billion by 2015. This step will help to base
growth in the East on its own resources, and reduce its dependence on recovery in the
advanced economies. The investment houses expect that demand in the BRIC
countries will exceed that of the US within fifteen years.

Despite its positive macroeconomic data, share prices did not increase in Asia in the
period reviewed, due to concern that continued tightening in China would have an
adverse impact on the economies of the region. Nevertheless, according to Ernst and
Young data this is likely to be a record year for new issues to the public around the
world, with the majority of recent flotations taking place in Asia.


-----

