**BANK OF ISRAEL**
Office of the Spokesperson and Economic Information

December 6, 2010

**Report to the public on the Bank of Israel’s discussions prior to setting the**
**interest rate for December 2010**

**The discussions took place on November 21 and 22, 2010**

**General**

Before the Governor makes the monthly interest rate decision,[1] discussions are held at
two levels––the first in a broad forum, and the second in a narrower one.

In the broad-forum discussion, the relevant background economic conditions are
presented, including real, monetary and financial developments in Israel’s economy,
and developments in the global economy. Participants in this discussion include the
Governor, the Deputy Governor, the directors of the Research and Market Operations
Departments of the Bank and economists from various departments who prepare and
present the material for discussion. The data, estimates and assessments in these
minutes are those that were available at the time of the discussions.

In the narrow forum, the directors of the Research and Market Operations
Departments and two other participating members of management present their
recommendations regarding the interest rate and, following a discussion, the Governor
makes his decision.

A. THE BROAD-FORUM DISCUSSION—THE STATE OF THE ECONOMY

**1. Developments on the real side**

_General assessment_

Indicators published in the last month (in the period from the decision on the
November interest rate, on October 25, till the current decision, on November 21),
showed that economic activity continued to increase in the third quarter of 2010, with
a convergence towards full capacity utilization of the production factors.

1 When the Monetary Committee is appointed, in accordance with the new Bank of Israel Law, interest
rate decisions will be made by the Committee.

POB 780 Jerusalem 91007 Israel
Tel: 972-2-6552712/3 Fax: 972-2-6528812 www.bankisrael.org.il


-----

Third quarter data show that the rate of growth slowed relative to that in the three
previous quarters, when there was rapid growth characteristic of an exit from a
recession. The main reason for the slowdown in growth in the third quarter was the
decline in foreign trade, against the background of its rapid increase since the middle
of 2009, and the slowdown in world trade.

Several indicators point to continued economic recovery. The Purchasing Managers
Index increased steeply in October due to the growth in the components of export
demand (namely, export orders received during October, following the decline in the
third quarter) and in production output. The Google search index of the Bank of Israel
Research Department shows that the probability of a recession fell to below 50
percent. Labor market data indicate that the economy is approaching a full
employment environment.

Negative indicators include October data on foreign trade, and third-quarter data from
the Manufacturers Association survey of expectations (see below). Two consumer
confidence indices (Globes and Bank Hapoalim) declined slightly in October, but
remained at a relatively high level. The composite state-of-the-economy index for
October, which increased by 0.1 percent (see details below), also indicates a slower
rate of growth than in the first half of the year.

_The National Accounts_

According to the initial National Accounts estimate for the third quarter of 2010,
published on November 16, GDP grew at an annual rate of 3.8 percent, following a
growth rate of 4.2 percent in the first half of the year. Business sector product
expanded at an annual rate of 3.9 percent in the third quarter, following its 4.9 percent
increase (annual rate) in the first half. Goods and services exports fell by 9.6 percent
in the third quarter, the first decline after four quarters of rapid growth. Investment
continued to grow swiftly in the third quarter, albeit more slowly than in the first two
quarters of the year: fixed investment expanded at an annual rate of 9.7 percent, with
a 13.2 percent surge in residential investment. A 10.2 percent increase in public
consumption also supported GDP growth. Private consumption expanded at an annual
rate of 1.3 percent in the third quarter, compared with a rate of 6.7 percent in the
second quarter. Imports decreased by 4.6 percent in the third quarter, the first drop
after five quarters of rapid increases.

_The composite state-of-the-economy index_

The October composite state-of-the-economy index increased by 0.1 percent from its
September level, and the index for September was adjusted from no change to an


-----

increase of 0.1 percent. The indices for July–October reflect a slowdown in the rapid
growth that typified the exit from the crisis (from summer 2009).

The moderate increase in the October index was the result of the positive effect of
imports (in particular of consumer goods but also of inputs) partially offset by the
negative effects of other components––exports (of goods and services), manufacturing
production, and trade and services revenue.

The index of consumer goods imports rose at a rate of 15.7 in October, and that of
imports of production inputs by 1.8 percent. The index of goods exports fell by 0.5
percent in October, and that of services exports by 3.2 percent. The index of
manufacturing production declined in September by 3.8 percent (the October index is
not yet available), after dropping in August too. The September index of trade and
services revenue fell by 0.7 percent, after rising a bit in August. See below for data on
foreign trade.

_The labor market_

Labor market indicators for the third quarter point to continued improvement and a
convergence towards a full employment environment. Central Bureau of Statistics
(CBS) data show an unusually steep increase in the number of vacancies in October,
68,200, compared with 55,000 in September. The figures for both months are
preliminary, however, and are likely to change.

The total number of business sector employee posts increased by 3.4 percent in June–
August, compared with the same period in 2009. Employment increased in many
industries; in particular in banking and financial services, business services and
transport and communications.

The nominal wage per employee-post in the business sector increased by 4.6 percent
in June–August, from its level in June–August 2009, and the real wage by 2.6 percent.
Health tax revenue in September shows that total wage expenditure continued to
increase rapidly (in September, comparing to August 2010).

The trend data for the monthly unemployment rate showed unemployment at 6.3
percent in the months June–August 2010, similar to but above the rate prior to the
crisis. The monthly figures are based on a relatively small sample, however, so that
the estimate should be treated with caution.

_Foreign trade_

In October, goods exports (excluding ships, aircraft and diamonds) increased by one
percent in dollar terms (seasonally adjusted) from their September level. In terms of


-----

the nominal effective exchange rate, however, they fell by about 2 percent. The
changes in exports, an increase from the middle of 2009 to the middle of 2010 and a
decline in the last few months, parallel those in world trade.

Goods imports (excluding ships, aircraft and diamonds) increased by a buoyant 9.2
percent in dollar terms (seasonally adjusted) in October, from their September level.
In terms of the nominal effective exchange rate they increased 5.9 percent. This was
partly due to an exceptional 50 percent surge in car imports. The increase in imports
of current consumer goods was preceded by several months when they decreased: as
noted above, in the third quarter imports fell at an annual rate of 4.6 percent (in real
terms, seasonally adjusted).

_The "Expectations of manufacturing-sector survey" of the Manufacturers' Association_

The trends evident from the "Expectations of manufacturing-sector survey" of the
Manufacturers' Association carried out in the third quarter are consistent with those
reported in the Bank of Israel Companies Survey. The Manufacturers' Association
survey shows that growth in manufacturing output continued, and even accelerated
somewhat in the third quarter. The growth reflected a sharp increase in activity on the
domestic market, with a reduction in exports. The increase in output was based on
greater equipment utilization, with continued recruitment of labor at a rate similar to
that in the first half of the year. Recruitment efforts met with greater difficulty in
finding skilled staff: about eighty percent of manufacturers reported encountering
such a difficulty, a rate similar to that noted prior to the crisis.

Manufacturers also reported, however, on a marked slowdown in the rate of increase
in export orders in the third quarter, and expectations of a further slowdown in the
fourth quarter.

**2. Budget data**

Tax revenues increased at a faster pace in August–October, except for gross receipts
of VAT on domestic production, which remained steady. Tax revenues in the three
months August–October, seasonally adjusted and allowing for changes in tax
legislation and nonrecurring receipts, were 2.5 percent higher than in May–July.

The domestic deficit in October, excluding credit, was NIS 2.1 billion, NIS 0.5 billion
less than the deficit implied by the seasonal path consistent with the budget. The
deviation from the expected seasonal path derived from tax revenues that exceeded
the expected amount by NIS 2.3 billion, partially offset by expenditure that exceeded
the planned amount by NIS 1.8 billion.


-----

Since the beginning of the year, the domestic deficit (excluding credit) has totaled
NIS 12.9 billion, 1.6 percent of GDP. This is lower than the deficit according to the
seasonal path, mainly because of higher than expected revenues (about 5 percent in
excess of the budget), but also due to under-expenditure of the budget (by 1.6
percent). The under-expenditure was the result of the over-estimate of interest
expenditures. For purposes of comparison, the deficit (excluding credit) in the same
period last year, January–October 2009, was NIS 21.8 billion.

Based on developments to date and on the assumption of almost complete expenditure
of the budget, and assuming the upward trend in tax revenues will persist until the end
of the year, the total deficit (excluding credit) in 2010 is expected to amount to less
than 4 percent of GDP (compared with the ceiling of 5.5 percent of GDP).

**3. Developments on the nominal side**

_Inflation_

The Consumer Price Index (CPI) for October increased by 0.3 percent. Although the
overall index was in line with expectations, this was the net result of surprising
changes in the individual components of the index: the housing index declined by 1.1
percent, while the index excluding housing "compensated" by an increase of 0.7
percent.

Since the beginning of the year, the seasonally adjusted CPI has increased by 1.9
percent, consistent with an annual rate of inflation of 2.1 percent. In the last twelve
months the CPI has increased by 2.5 percent, within the target inflation range.

Despite the surprising decline in the housing rental component of the index in
October, the increase in the overall index since the beginning of the year has been led
by the increase in house rentals, with the other components increasing only
moderately. The housing index has risen by 4.5 percent since the beginning of the
year, while the index excluding housing has increased by only 1.5 percent. Since the
unexpected changes in October––the decline in the housing index and the increase in
the index excluding housing––relate to a single month, it is too soon to consider it as a
turning point.

_Expectations and forecasts of inflation and of the Bank of Israel interest rate_

Market-based one-year-forward inflation expectations ("break-even inflation")
increased to about 3.2 percent in November (the average to November 18), compared
with an average of 3.0 percent in October.


-----

The Israeli forecasters predict on average that inflation in the next twelve price indices
(from November 2010 to October 2011) will be about 2.9 percent. On average they
expect that inflation measured over the previous twelve months will be 2.5 percent in
2010, and 2.8 percent in 2011.

The forecasters expect, on average, that in the three months November 2010 to
January 2011 the CPI will rise by a total of 0.2 percent.

About half of the forecasters had expected the Bank of Israel interest rate to increase
by a quarter of a percentage point for December, while the other half had expected no
change. On average they expect that in twelve months' time the interest rate will be 3
percent.

_The makam and bond markets_

From the beginning of the month to November 18, yields on 5-year CPI-indexed
government bonds were, on average, about 0.7 percent, similar to the average in
October. The yield to maturity on unindexed 5-year government bonds increased
slightly in November, to an average of 3.7 percent, from 3.6 percent in October. The
yield to maturity on one-year _makam was about 2.4 percent, similar to the average_
level in October.

_The interest rate differential and the yield gap between Israel and abroad_

Prior to the current interest rate decision, the Bank of Israel interest rate was 1.75–2.0
percentage points higher than the US federal funds rate and 1 percentage point higher
than the ECB rate.

The yield gap in shekel terms, between ten-year unindexed Israeli and US government
bonds, contracted slightly to 1.7 percentage points from the time of the previous
interest rate decision to the current one.

_The expected real interest rate_

The Bank of Israel interest rate—deflated by the twelve-months-forward inflation
expectations derived from the capital markets—averaged _minus 1.2 percent in_
November (to the date of the current discussions), below the level of minus 1 percent
in October.

_The monetary aggregates_


-----

The marked slowdown in the rate of increase in the monetary aggregates continued,
against the background of the increases in the interest rate in the last few months. In
the previous twelve months up to (and including) October, the monetary base
measured by the M1 monetary aggregate (cash held by the public and demand
deposits) increased by 4.6 percent. In October it decreased by about 1.2 percent
relatively to the previous month. In the last twelve months the M2 aggregate (M1 plus
unindexed term deposits of up to one year) increased by only 0.9 percent, while in
October it declined by 0.2 percent relatively to September.

_The credit markets_

The outstanding balance of credit to households continued to increase (data up to
September), and since the beginning of the year it has increased by about 7 percent,
with a similar increase in total outstanding mortgages. In September households' total
debt increased by 0.3 percent, with outstanding mortgages increasing by 0.7 percent.

The total outstanding balance of bank and nonbank credit to the business sector has
increased by 2.7 percent since the beginning of the year; in September it increased by
only 0.2 percent.

_The housing market_

The housing component in the CPI, which reflects the costs of housing rentals and
accounts for about 20 percent of the total CPI, has increased by 4.5 percent since the
beginning of the year, but in October it declined, by 1.1 percent. However this decline
relates to only one month, and thus cannot be considered the start of a turnaround in
the trend of the price of housing services. One possible explanation, for the sharp
change in the housing component in October, is the characteristic seasonal factor,
with price changes in the winter months generally lower than average. From
December 2009 to February 2010, for example, there was a cumulative fall of 2.1
percent in this component, followed by renewed sharp increases.

House prices, however, which are not included in the CPI and which are taken from
the Central Bureau of Statistics (CBS) survey of house prices, continued to increase,
and on average increased by 1.9 percent in August–September, giving a cumulative
increase of 19.7 percent in the past twelve months. In this case there are conflicting
data: Treasury data, based on the median transaction, suggest that house prices have
been declining for a few months, while the CBS data suggest that house prices
continue to increase at a rapid rate.

The volume of new mortgages granted in October increased by a steep 11 percent
compared with the level in September, to NIS 3.58 billion. All types of mortgage
showing increases, but the most prominent increase, of 27 percent, occurred in CPIindexed mortgages at floating interest rates. It should be noted that in September there


-----

was a sharp decline compared with the previous month, due in part to the period of the
Jewish High Holydays and to the high volume of mortgages in the summer months.
The flow of new mortgages granted in October was similar to the levels in the
summer months. With regard to the different types of mortgages, the sharp increase in
the flow of indexed floating interest mortgages took place against the background of
the reduction in interest on mortgages of that type, alongside increases in the interest
rate on the other two types––unindexed floating interest, and fixed interest.

_The Research Department assessment_

Prior to the interest rate discussions, the Research Department prepares an assessment
of expected economic developments and an analysis of various risks. The assessment
is formulated using a medium-scale DSGE (Dynamic Stochastic General Equilibrium)
model, which helps to integrate the Department's views into a single, coherent, staff
forecast.[2]

According to the staff forecast, inflation in the next twelve months is expected to be
2.5 percent, and the Bank's interest rate is expected to increase gradually to reach
about 3.0 percent in a year's time. The main reason for the forecast being above the
midpoint of the inflation target range is the housing component (rentals), which is
expected to continue increasing relatively quickly, and energy and commodity prices
which have increased considerably in the last few months. Factors acting in the
opposite direction, to slow the rate of price increases, include the low rate of inflation
around the world and the appreciation of the shekel in the last few quarters.

The main risks to real economic activity and inflation in Israel derive from
developments abroad. Nevertheless, a renewal of massive capital inflows into Israel,
should that occur, with the pressures towards appreciation that they cause, would have
a moderating effect on growth and inflation, and a slowing effect on the pace of
interest rate increases.

**4. The foreign currency market and the share market**

_The foreign-currency market_

During the period from October 24 to November 19, the shekel appreciated by about
0.5 percent in terms of the nominal effective exchange rate.[3] This reflected, among

2 For an explanation of the model and its use see the Bank's Inflation Report No. 31, for April–June
2010.
3
Calculated as the trade-weighted average shekel exchange rate against 28 currencies (representing 38 of Israel's
trading partners). The weight of the dollar in the effective exchange rate is about 25 percent, and that of the euro,
about 33 percent.


-----

other things, shekel appreciation of 1.4 percent against the euro, and deprecation of
0.1 percent against the dollar. During this period the Bank of Israel bought foreign
currency.

_The share market_

Since the previous interest rate discussions, the Tel Aviv 25 share price index was
steady––after a few days of reductions, the index increased again to the peak level it
had reached in October following the upward trend that started in the middle of the
year. This was similar to the trends in most stock markets around the world in that
period.

**5. Israel’s financial risk, the sovereign risk premium**

Israel’s risk premium, as measured by the five-year credit default swap (CDS) spread,
decreased slightly to 111 basis points (b.p.), from 116 b.p in the previous month. This
contrasted with the trend in CDS spreads around the world, which showed increases
with the indications of the renewed debt crisis in Europe.

**6. Global economic developments (see Appendix for further details)**

This month's economic data (the data becoming available between the meeting on
October 24 and that on November 22) present a mixed picture, with the US standing
out with its positive performance, and Europe with a negative one. Assessments, both
of the investment houses and of international institutions, are that the process of
recovery of the global economy from the trough it had reached was continuing, and
the probability of another recession had fallen. Some investment houses increased
their forecasts of growth for the coming months; the OECD, in contrast, revised its
forecast downwards. There is great uncertainty regarding the rate of growth of the
global economy, which constitutes a central risk factor for the Israeli economy.
Uncertainty remains high against the general background of the debt crisis in some
European countries, in particular Ireland.

Inflation in the advanced economies remains low, mainly due to their output gaps. In
the emerging market economies, however, inflationary pressures grew, mainly due to
the increases in commodity prices.

Intervention in the foreign currency markets continued in several countries this
month. This included the imposition of restriction on capital movements. Monetary
policy continued to be expansionary in the leading economies, and in the US another
quantitative easing program was launched, known as QE2. The Fed program is
expected to affect the monetary policies of other central banks around the world,


-----

mainly those that have started moving to tighter monetary policies, and to present a
challenge regarding the persistent appreciation of domestic currencies, increasing
capital flows, and increasing inflation. Several central banks, in economies that have
already started growing relatively rapidly, continued increasing interest rates—India,
Sweden, Australia, Chile and South Korea increased their interest rates this month—
against the background of positive macroeconomic performances and the increase in
commodity prices (mainly metals and agricultural commodities). Thereafter, in light
of concern over a possible increase in the interest rate in China, there was a sharp
correction to commodity prices.

B. THE NARROW-FORUM DISCUSSION––THE INTEREST RATE DECISION
FOR DECEMBER 2010

In the narrow-forum discussion, four members of management make
recommendations to the Governor regarding the appropriate rate of interest for the
economy. In the current discussions on the interest rate for December, all the
participating members of management recommended that the Governor leave the
interest rate unchanged, at 2.0 percent. They also recommended that, as part of the
process of normalizing monetary policy, the interest rate corridor around the Bank's
interest rate in the credit window and the commercial banks' deposit window be
widened to ±0.5 percent (during the crisis it had been reduced to ±0.25 percent).

Leaving the interest rate at 2 percent is consistent with the process of gradually
restoring a more normal interest rate environment—a process aimed at stabilizing
inflation within the target range, and supporting further growth of economic activity
while maintaining financial stability. The pace of interest rate increases is not
predetermined, but is set in accordance with the inflation environment, growth in
Israel and globally, the monetary policies of the major central banks, and in light of
developments in the exchange rates of the shekel. At the current rate of interest,
monetary policy continuous to be expansionary.

Several issues were discussed, in particular the global economic environment, real
economic activity, developments in the credit and assets markets and the inflation
environment.

In the discussion it was noted that data published in the month since the previous
interest rate discussions (since the decision on interest rate for November, on October
24, till the last one, on November 21) show that the expansion in economic activity is
continuing, albeit at a slower pace. Special attention was drawn to the decline in
exports in the last few months, following their rapid expansion in the first half of the
year—a decline which was also due to the weakness in world trade. Participants in the


-----

discussion spoke of the risks to economic growth arising from the slowdown in the
recovery of demand in the industrialized countries.

One-year-forward inflation expectations derived from the capital market (break-even
inflation) increased again in November, and averaged (until November 18) 3.2
percent. Private forecasters' expectations for the increases in the next twelve CPIs (the
indices from November 2010 to October 2011) averaged 2.9 percent. The Bank of
Israel Research Department twelve-month inflation forecast, however, is about 2.5
percent. There was discussion of the factors exerting upward pressure on inflation: the
housing market, the approach toward full capacity utilization—as reflected in labor
market data and in investment in fixed assets—and the rise in world commodity
prices. Against this, however, the risks to global growth and the moderating influence
of developments around the world on Israeli inflation in the coming months were also
discussed.

In this discussion, housing featured high on the list of inflationary pressures
discussed. In the last year the housing component of the CPI (based on rentals) was
the main inflationary factor. In the last twelve months the CPI increased by 2.5
percent, and the index excluding housing went up by only 1.4 percent. The point was
made that the sharp and surprising decline of 1.1 percent in the housing component in
October does not give grounds for concluding that there has been a turnaround in the
price of rentals. If anything, it is still the other way around: in light of the gap that has
arisen between the increase in house prices (19.7 percent in the twelve months to
September) and the increase in rentals (4.7 percent in the twelve months to October)
rentals may continue to increase. The (rentals) housing component is the main reason
that inflation is expected to be above the midpoint of the target inflation range in the
coming year.

With regard to financial stability, the contribution of the low interest rate to
developments in the credit markets – especially its contribution to the increase in asset
prices, particularly real estate prices – was discussed. House prices continued to
increase rapidly in the last year, due partly to the slow adjustment of the supply of
apartments, but also due to the fast increase in housing credit arising from the low rate
of interest. In the discussion emphasis was given to the sharp increase in house prices
which itself––and not its indirect effect on inflation––made the Bank introduce
macroprudential measures which were taken recently. Other, even stricter, measures
were discussed, which would be taken as necessary. The need to cool the rapid
expansion of mortgage interest was stressed again, not primarily from the inflation
aspect, but rather from the financial stability aspect.

Developments worldwide were reviewed, including the quantitative easing in several
leading economies (and especially the QE2 program in the US), and their low interest
rates. These present a challenge to monetary policy makers in economies with
relatively buoyant demand, such as Israel's; the challenge of dealing with the
combination of domestic demand and capital inflows on one side, and the weakness of


-----

world trade on the other. The difficulty becomes more acute in light of the interest
rate differentials, the result of the process of increasing interest rate that has started in
countries recovering relatively rapidly, Israel among them.

In light of the indications of a slowdown in the growth rate of the Israeli economy, led
by a decline in exports against the background of greater uncertainty about world
growth, and in light of the macroprudential measures introduced by the Bank of Israel
and their implications for inflation, the Governor decided to keep the rate of interest
unchanged for December, at 2 percent.

In its announcement of the decision, the Bank of Israel emphasized the following
points:

- Inflation in the last twelve months is within the target range, and according to
assessments of the private forecasters and of the Bank of Israel Research
Department it is expected to be slightly above the upper limit of the inflation
target range in the first half of 2011, and then to return to within the target range.
Inflation expectations derived this month from the capital market for one year
ahead were slightly above the upper limit of the target range.

- Most of last month's economic indicators support the assessment that economic
activity continued to expand in the third quarter and in October. The decline in
exports, however––reflecting the effect of the weakness of world trade––
following the rapid increase in exports in the first half of the year, also featured
prominently in the data. The lack of certainty regarding the rate of domestic
growth, deriving from uncertainty about global demand, still constitutes a
significant risk factor.

- Interest rates of the leading advanced economies' central banks are low, and are
expected to remain low for a long time; the Fed reintroduced instruments of
quantitative easing. Against this background, the differentials between interest
rates in countries with relatively rapid rates of growth, including Israel, and those
in the advanced economies present a serious challenge for policy makers in the
rapidly growing economies, who need to strike a balance between domestic
pressures to increase the interest rate on the one hand, and the effect such an
increase may have with regard to appreciation of their currency and, in turn, on
exports and economic activity, on the other.

As part of the process of normalizing monetary policy, the Bank of Israel decided to
widen the interest rate corridor around its interest rate in the credit window and the
commercial banks' deposit window from ±0.25 percent to ±0.5 percent.

The Bank of Israel stated that it will continue to use the instruments available to it in
order to achieve its objectives of price stability, the encouragement of employment


-----

and growth, and support for the stability of the financial system, including keeping a
close watch on developments in the housing market, and especially on house prices.

The decision was made and published on November 22, 2010.

**Participants in the narrow-forum discussion:**
Prof. Stanley Fischer, Governor of the Bank of Israel
Prof. Zvi Eckstein, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Israel
Dr. Karnit Flug, Director of the Research Department
Dr. Edward Offenbacher, Member of Management and Head of the Monetary and
Finance Division, Research Department
Mr. Barry Topf, Director of the Market Operations Department
Mr. Rony Hizkiyahu, the Supervisor of Banks
Mr. Eddy Azoulay, Chief of Staff to the Governor
Dr. Yossi Saadon, Advisor to the Governor and Bank of Israel Spokesperson
Mr. Alon Binyamini, Economist, Research Department

**Appendix: Major Global Economic Developments**

**The US**

The macroeconomic data for last month show a faster rate of recovery than that in the
last few months. The improvement was noted in problematic sectors as well (real
estate, employment and credit), with surprisingly positive developments in various
confidence indices. Against this background investment houses revised their forecasts
of US growth upwards. Nevertheless, in the labor market the broad unemployment
rate still stood at about 17 percent, and the Case-Shiller index real estate index
dropped again in August for the second consecutive month. Thus, even after the
upward revision of the forecasts, the expected rate of recovery remains slow, with
some concern over deflation (the Core PCE index for September was 0 percent, and
the PPI for October was minus 0.6 percent).

Against this background, the Fed introduced another quantitative easing program,
QE2. Unlike the original QE1 program, which was intended to prevent financial
collapse, QE2 is directed towards dealing with the problem of the slow rate of growth.
Some commentators expect the program to be augmented in 2011. Others, however,
do not expect the Fed to implement the program in full. On the fiscal side, in light of
the Republican majority resulting from the congressional elections, President Obama
may encounter difficulties in trying to continue with the plan to boost the economy.

Most forecasts do not expect the Fed to start increasing the interest rate before 2012.


-----

**Europe**

The EU continues to confront the problems of the imbalance between member
countries, high deficits, and high unemployment (an average of 10.1 percent, with
about 21 percent in Spain). Quarterly growth in the third quarter was 0.4 percent,
slightly below the expectations which were 0.5 percent. This low growth occurred
against the background of tight fiscal measures and the strengthening of the euro that
impacted negatively on exports. The monthly indicators for October also fell short of
expectations, mainly in Germany, with weak manufacturing production and a steep
drop in retail sales. Inflation in October was 0.1 percent, and in the last twelve months
was 1.9 percent. In most of the other member countries, the trend of broad fiscal cuts
continued. The markets reflect expectations of no increase in the ECB interest rate
before the third quarter of 2010.

The crisis in Ireland continues to stand out, alongside the crises that the PIGS
countries (Portugal, Italy, Greece and Spain) are contending with. Bond yield in the
PIGS countries, as well as in Ireland, rose sharply in the last month, in light of the
persistent crisis in the banking sector (the yield gap between Germany and Ireland
widened to 550 basis points). This was followed by some improvement, against the
background of Ireland's announcement that it agreed to accept aid from the EU rescue
fund.

In the UK, growth in the third quarter was 0.8 percent, surprising in light of the
expectations of 0.4 percent. The Bank of England expects growth in the next quarters
to exceed the long-term trend, but to be moderate compared with the rate in 2010.
Thus the chances of a second quantitative easing program in the UK in the near future
have receded significantly. Inflation is expected to remain above 2 percent next year,
with the expected increase in VAT and the continued increase in commodity prices.

**Japan**

Third-quarter growth in Japan exceeded expectations––0.7 percent compared with 0.4
percent, mainly due to the increase in domestic demand. There are signs, however, of
a slowdown in the next few months, particularly in light of the continued
strengthening of the yen (exports made a zero contribution to growth in the third
quarter), and the assessment that the steep increase in domestic demand was a one-off
occurrence that derived from the ending of certain tax reliefs (on vehicles and
cigarettes) in October, and that was known in advance.

**China**

China's rapid growth continued this month, and various indicators suggest that it will
continue in the coming quarters too.


-----

China's government continues to introduce tightening measures. The central bank
imposed additional capital adequacy requirements on various investments, with the
largest four banks ceasing to grant credit to the real estate sector till the end of the
year. The interest rate is expected to continue to increase in the near future, in light of
the acceleration in inflation. The increased in the interest rate is expected to contribute
to the appreciation of the yuan. China's foreign trade data for October, that indicate a
continued widening of the trade balance, are expected to add weight to the
international pressure on the Chinese government to enable significant appreciation of
the yuan.

Moody's rating agency raised China's credit rating from A+ to AA.

**The emerging markets**

Strong growth continued in the emerging markets in East Asia. The World Bank
slightly raised its 2010 growth forecast for the Far Eastern economies, from 8.7
percent to 8.9 percent. The forecast also emphasizes the risks arising from the
continued capital inflow into those countries, together with the gradual rise in
inflation.

One of the factors contributing to growth in these markets is the increase in inter-zone
trade and the increase in domestic demand. In light of the confirmation of the US QE2
program, the probability of further regulatory and monetary measures to slow the
inflow of capital increased this month. Thus, in the course of the month, Taiwan
imposed restrictions on investment by nonresidents, also on trade in long-term
government bonds (restrictions on short-term assets are already in force). Turkey
increased the reserve requirement on deposits to 6 percent (its level prior to the crisis),
in light of the persistent inflow of capital, having already raised it once in September.
In India the interest rate was increased (the sixth rise since the beginning of the year),
and also in South Korea and Chile, against the background of increased indications of
faster inflation.


-----

