-----

**FOREWARNING**
This document is provided for the reader’s convenience only.
The translation from the official Spanish version was made
by Banco de México’s staff. Discrepancies may arise
between the original document in Spanish and its English
translation. For this reason, the original Spanish version is
the only official document.


**1. PLACE, DATE, AND PARTICIPANTS**

**1.1 Place: Av. Cinco de Mayo street no.2, 5[th] floor,**
Col. Centro, Mexico City.

**1.2. Date of Governing Board meeting: August 14,**
2019.

**1.3. Participants:**
Alejandro Díaz de León-Carrillo, Governor.
Irene Espinosa-Cantellano, Deputy Governor.
Gerardo Esquivel-Hernández, Deputy Governor.
Javier Eduardo Guzmán-Calafell, Deputy Governor.
Jonathan Ernest Heath-Constable, Deputy

Governor.
Arturo Herrera-Gutiérrez, Secretary of Finance and
Public Credit.
Gabriel Yorio-González, Undersecretary of Finance
and Public Credit.
Elías Villanueva-Ochoa, Secretary of the Governing
Board.

Prior to this meeting, preliminary work by Banco de
México’s staff analyzing the economic and financial
environment, together with the developments in
inflation and the determinants and outlook for
inflation, was conducted and presented to the
Governing Board (see annex).

**2. ANALYSIS AND RATIONALE BEHIND THE**
**GOVERNING BOARD’S VOTING**

All members noted that during the second quarter of
the year the world economy decelerated, reflecting
the lower growth of the main advanced and emerging
economies. In this sense, most members added that
this deceleration has been widespread and greater
than anticipated. The majority mentioned that there
were tensions between the U.S. and other
economies, related both to trade as well as to issues
associated with migration, technology and exchange
rate policy. They emphasized that the areas most
affected by this environment are world trade,
manufacturing production, investment and business
confidence, and that the outlook for growth for the
world economy for 2019 and 2020 has been revised
downwards once more.


Most members highlighted that risks to global growth
have increased and thus the balance of risks has
deteriorated. The majority highlighted that among
the main risks those that stand out are: i) an
escalation of trade disputes; ii) a disorderly Brexit;
and, iii) political and geopolitical risks. As an
additional risk, one member also considered
episodes of financial stress in emerging economies,
while another added the possibility of a sharp
slowdown of the Chinese economy.

Delving into advanced economies, one member
mentioned that in the United States industrial
production, exports as well as imports have
remained relatively stagnant since late 2018. He/she
added that this has already started to be reflected in
job creation, although this indicator still remains at
satisfactory levels. Another member considered that
economic activity in that country has started to be
affected by the escalation of trade tensions,
especially in manufacturing activity and in corporate
investment. Some members pointed out that
different indicators suggest the possibility of an
economic deceleration which, in an extreme case,
could become a recession. Regarding the euro area,
one member indicated that GDP growth in the first
semester has been lower than in previous years and
that business confidence indicators and the
Purchasing Managers’ Index (PMI) continued to
worsen, highlighting the case of Germany.

Most members noted the absence of widespread
inflationary pressures worldwide and pointed out that
this has been partly a consequence of the weakening
of economic activity and of lower commodity prices,
highlighting one of them, the case of energy
products. Most members mentioned that as to the
main advanced economies, both headline and core
inflation continue to be below their respective central
banks’ targets. In this regard, one member
emphasized that such indicators are expected to
remain below their target levels for a prolonged
period. In this sense, most members added that
inflation expectations remain weak and have even
deteriorated in some of these economies. One
member stated that differences between goods’ and
services’ inflation continue to be present, with the
latter sector continuing to expand, and thus
strengthening the labor market. He/she added that
this situation has been characterized by an absence
of inflationary pressures, despite the increases
observed in recent wage revisions. The same
member analyzed the different factors that have kept
inflation structurally low and with a lesser response
to the lower labor slack in advanced economies. In

1


-----

this respect, he/she mentioned technological change
and the incorporation of countries with an abundant
labor force into globalization, arguing that this has
contributed to greater productivity gains and to more
competitive markets and, thus, to lower inflationary
pressures. Regarding inflation in emerging

economies, another member mentioned that the
absence of inflationary pressures is evidenced by the
downward trend followed by core inflation in these
economies.

All members noted that, given an environment of
greater uncertainty, global economic slowdown and
lower inflationary pressures –in most cases at levels
below their targets– a large number of central banks
have adopted more accommodative monetary policy
stances. One member highlighted that some central
banks have cut their reference rates in magnitudes
even greater than expected and other member
emphasized the major change in the direction
followed by monetary policy worldwide over the last
eight months. Most members mentioned that central
banks in advanced economies are assessing the
possibility of implementing additional non
conventional measures. As for the US Federal
Reserve, all members indicated that in its July
meeting it cut its target range for the federal funds
rate by 25 basis points (bps) and brought forward the
end of its balance sheet reduction. One member
highlighted that this occurred under conditions of
greater uncertainty. Some members underlined that
in its communications the US Federal Reserve made
it clear that this adjustment does not imply the
beginning of an easing cycle, although the possibility
of future adjustments, if required, was not ruled out.
One member added that market expectations
continue to differ from the statements by some
Federal Reserve officials, and another member
emphasized that despite the strength of the economy
and the labor market, the Federal Reserve cut its
rates in a preventive way. In this sense, one member
pointed out that markets envisage a further reduction
of 50 and 25 basis points in 2019 and 2020,
respectively. Meanwhile, all members mentioned
that although the European Central Bank left its
policy rate unchanged, it modified its forward
guidance about the trajectory of interest rates
towards a more accommodative policy stance and
announced that it would consider additional
monetary easing measures. Some members

mentioned that various emerging economies have
also adopted monetary policy easing measures,
emphasizing the cases of Brazil, Chile, Russia,
South Korea and India among a large list of
countries. One member considered that the central


banks of emerging economies that have not modified
their interest rates, have tightened their monetary
policy stances in relative terms. Another member
argued that the observed cuts have generated
concern among analysts regarding the beginning of
a possible currency war.

Most members mentioned the presence of volatility
episodes in international financial markets,

associated with US-China tensions and with the
greater-than-anticipated deceleration of some

economies. One member pointed out that risk
aversion sentiment and the search for safe haven
assets over the last weeks led to significant falls in
stock markets, a reduction in bond yields in
advanced economies, which reached historically low
levels, and to a widespread appreciation of the US
dollar. Another member mentioned the decrease in
interest rates for all maturities, both in advanced and
emerging economies. Another member stressed that,
given the outlook of a greater monetary policy easing, risk
premia of most countries remained unchanged or
decreased. Another member mentioned that in the case
of the U.S., considerable downward adjustments have
been observed in the yield curve of Treasury bonds in all
maturities. In addition, he/she argued that the recent
performance of markets, given the escalating trade
tensions, has had considerable impacts, especially
across countries and regions integrated to world trade and
with episodes of volatility in emerging markets. As to
capital flows to these economies, some members
emphasized that, although investment flows to their debt
markets continue registering inflows, stock markets have
been accumulating outflows for 16 consecutive weeks.
One member stressed the negative implications of
outflows from the equity market for the valuation of
currencies and other assets of these economies.

Most members pointed out that risks that could affect
global financial markets persist. In addition to the
risks to global growth mentioned above, one member
highlighted the possibility of periods of political
instability in Italy, and other countries. In this regard,
another member stressed that, given the

intensification or materialization of some of these
risks, the main economies’ central banks may be
expected to take action to improve global financial
conditions, just as it has happened during 2019.
Therefore, he/she considered that, despite the global
uncertainty, the balance of risks for global financial
markets remains stable. In contrast, another
member indicated that the foreseen scenario of a
greater loosening in financing conditions implies the
risk of monetary stimulus measures being of a lesser
magnitude than anticipated or insufficient to contain

2


-----

a greater-than-expected deceleration of economic
activity. He/she also mentioned the greater

challenges to financial stability that could result from
a longer period of global monetary policy easing.

As for emerging economies, one member indicated
that these are also subject to different idiosyncratic
risk factors and that, in some cases, for example in
Mexico, such factors have reinforced the impact of
the lower growth trend worldwide, as well as the
uncertainty that has hindered investment. He/she
pointed out that the current environment affects
these economies in two ways. On the one hand,
he/she mentioned the slowdown of world trade and
lower commodity prices, which imply a deterioration
in the terms of trade and give rise to lower economic
growth and lower inflationary pressures. On the other
hand, he/she stated that such economies can be
affected by episodes of portfolio rebalancing towards
lower-risk assets, thus putting pressure on their
currencies, risk premia and interest rates. As a
consequence, the environment they face is complex
and uncertain.

All members mentioned that the latest information
suggests that during the second quarter of 2019, the
stagnation that economic activity in Mexico had been
showing in the previous quarters continued. One
member specified that the GDP flash estimate for
this quarter registered its first negative annual rate
since late 2009 and that the average quarterly rate
of the last five quarters is 0.04%. Some members
specified that the deceleration was greater than
anticipated. One member pointed out that it was
greater than that suggested by the weak global
economy and another member added that it is
worrisome that this has taken place in a context
where the US economy is growing above potential.
One member mentioned that timely indicators
suggest the possibility of a downward revision to the
quarterly growth figures for the second quarter of the
year. He/she stressed the weakening of the
economic cycle, given that different indicators
estimated by INEGI, such as the Coincident and
Leading Composite Indicators System (SICCA, for
its acronym in Spanish) and the Coincident Indicator
of the Cyclical Indicators System (SIC, for its
acronym in Spanish) reached their lowest level in
May 2019, and noted that this weakening applies to
most components of these indicators, which is
consistent with a situation of recession. He/she
added that during the last nine months the negative
gap widened with respect to its long-term trend,
which is also consistent with of the existence of a
recession.


All members emphasized that stagnation of
economic activity reflects a greater weakness in
most components of aggregate demand, standing
out among those the slowdown of consumption and
lackluster investment. In the same vein, one member
mentioned the delays in government spending.
Regarding the weakness of consumption, another
member highlighted that the average annual
percentage change has been 4.3% in 2016, 3.1% in
2017, and 2.3% in 2018, and that the latest data
corresponding to May 2019 was 0%. He/she
specified that consumption of durable goods already
registers negative annual changes. Another member
added that the trend-cycle measure of the private
consumption index seems to have reached an
inflection point at the end of the previous year,
without reversing its downward trend since then.
Another indicated that this weakness has taken
place despite the fact that remittances and the wage
bill continue growing. As to investment, most
members mentioned that both public and private
investment continue to exhibit a downward

trajectory. One member specified that its different
components show clear negative trends since mid2018. In this respect, most members highlighted the
sharp fall in construction and mentioned the decline
in purchases of imported machinery and equipment.
One of them pointed out that, with seasonally
adjusted data, investment in construction is at levels
unseen since early 2006. Regarding external
demand, most members stated that manufacturing
exports performed better in the second quarter of the
year, as compared to the previous one. One member
pointed out that this is explained by the dynamism of
the US economy and another member stated that
this is taking place despite the slowdown of world
trade.

From a medium-term perspective, one member
mentioned his/her concern over the secular
slowdown in the growth rate of private consumption
that has been observed since 2016. In the same
way, he/she indicated that private investment has
remained stagnant during the same period and that
in the last months it is already following a negative
trend. He/she indicated that the cost of financing to
households and firms has been growing constantly
since 2016 and that the growth rate of credit granted
by commercial banks has declined since then.
He/she pointed out that, although consumption and
investment respond to different factors, interest rates
are a key factor in their evolution. The same member
considered that this shows that the transmission
mechanism of a tight monetary policy implies costs
and that the risks associated with maintaining a high

3


-----

interest rate for a long period should not be
minimized. Another member expressed that the
evolution of investment is a reason for concern.
He/she pointed out that after having been stagnant
from mid-2015 to mid-2018, investment is

increasingly showing a marked downward trend,
recently reaching levels similar to those observed in
July 2014. He/she added that this performance,
which affects potential growth, partly derives from
the strong decline in public investment. He/she
added that private investment has been curbed by
the high uncertainty prevailing in the country, due
partly to external factors, but apparently, to a greater
extent, to the insufficient clarity of certain public
policies and a domestic environment that is generally
perceived as unfavorable for investment. In this
respect, he/she noted that over three quarters of
private sector analysts surveyed by Banco de
México consider that the current juncture is not
favorable for investment, and that the main obstacles
to growth are attributed to domestic economic
conditions, as well as to governance problems, some
of which are the uncertainty over the political
situation, and the problems of public insecurity and
absence of rule of law. He/she added that, in
contrast, the relevance given by analysts to
monetary policy is much lower.

On the supply side, most members mentioned the
weakness of the industrial and services’ sectors.
One member emphasized that the Global Economic
Activity Indicator (IGAE, for its acronym in Spanish)
shows that deceleration is already present in all
sectors. Delving into industrial activity, he/she
indicated that it shows a negative trend since mid2018, which already allows for speaking of a
recession in this sector. Some members

emphasized the contraction of primary activities,
while one member pointed out that construction has
fallen more rapidly in the last months.

All members mentioned that growth expectations for
this year have been adjusted to the downside. Some
members highlighted that the median of analysts’
expectations has declined and that in most recent
surveys it lies at 0.6%. On the other hand, most
members indicated that it is possible to estimate that
GDP growth in 2019 will lie with a high probability in
a range below the one foreseen in the Quarterly
Report January – March 2019. Regarding growth
expectations for 2020, some members noted that
these have also been adjusted to the downside. One
of them specified that the most optimistic scenario
now points to growth below 2%. One member
mentioned that timely information allows to


anticipate that investment will continue declining.
Another member noted that indicators of demand for
money for transactional purposes, along with the
slope of the yield curve, suggest that the probability
of economic contraction in the next two quarters has
reached levels similar to those observed during
previous episodes of significant falls in output.

All members indicated that, in an environment of
significant uncertainty, the balance of risks for growth
remains biased to the downside. One member
indicated that this bias has increased with respect to
previous decisions. Some members pointed out that
growth is subject to both external and domestic risks.
Among external risks, in addition to the global risks
previously described, some members mentioned the
possibility of delays in the ratification of USMCA.
One of them added the risk of new US threats to
impose tariffs on Mexico or complications in the
bilateral relationship between these two countries.
Another member mentioned the risk of a

deceleration in the U.S. in the next years and noted
that this scenario stresses the urgency to correct the
domestic factors that inhibit growth. As for domestic
risks, most members highlighted the persistence of
an environment of uncertainty that has affected
private investment, and which has stemmed from the
public policy decisions taken by the new

administration and by concerns over insecurity and
corruption. Another member highlighted a greater
reduction of public revenues. Finally, one member
emphasized the risk of maintaining an overly
restrictive monetary policy stance.

Most members mentioned that slack conditions in
the economy continued to loosen, even more than
anticipated, thus the negative output gap widened.
As to the labor market, one member argued that it
has presented a lower rate of job creation, thus the
unemployment gaps have eased somewhat with
respect to the levels reached in 2018. In this regard,
another member noted that sluggish economic
activity has been reflected in the behavior of the
labor market and, more clearly, in formal

employment. This member mentioned that, although
the number of IMSS-insured workers has increased
over the last year, the increment with respect to the
previous year went down by over 40% between July
2018 and July 2019. He/she added that the
unemployment rate has increased moderately, albeit
accompanied by greater informal employment and
by increases in the underemployment rate. He/she
added that, despite the weakening of the labor
market, the most recent indicators continue showing
adjustments in earnings above productivity, which

4


-----

could be impacting employment. He/she specified
that the impact on formal employment has been
particularly large in the Northern border free zone,
where the minimum wage increased considerably.
Finally, he/she stated that the downward adjustment
in growth expectations for 2019 and 2020
strengthens expectations that during this period a
negative output gap will continue to be observed,
albeit lower than estimated, considering the probable
decline of potential growth. Meanwhile, another
member noted that the risk of a widening of
economic slack conditions persists.

Most members mentioned that between June and
July, headline inflation fell from 3.95% to 3.78%. The
majority indicated that this evolution was due mainly
to a decline in the non-core component, since the
core component has continued to exhibit

persistence. One member noted that annual inflation
has been showing a clear downward trend since
September 2018 and that since then it has declined
over 120 basis points. Such member argued that an
indicator showing that inflation is not only

decreasing, but also that the price formation process
has remained under control, is that headline inflation
accumulated so far this year is only 0.65%, the third
lowest figure for a similar period this century. He/she
stated that the trajectory of has been better than
forecasted in previous months both by the Central
Bank and by analysts. He/she added that in the latter
case, in December they expected accumulated
headline inflation as of July to amount to 1.19%.
Nevertheless, it has been barely above half that
figure. He/she stressed that despite that, analysts
adjusted their inflation expectations to the upside
and currently expect inflation to close the year at
3.66%. He/she stated that if their month-to-month
inflation expectations remained at the level they had
in December, their expected inflation for the end of
2019 would be 3.17%. He/she mentioned that the
upward adjustment of inflation expectations is
surprising, given that inflation has been below
expectations and various inflationary risks have
decreased.

As for the non-core component, most members
stressed that it declined from 4.19% in June to 3.64%
in July. They added that this dynamics especially
reflected the lower increases in energy prices, as
well as in fruits and vegetable prices, while the
growth rate of livestock products’ prices rose at the
margin. One member highlighted that non-core
inflation accumulated during the first seven months
of the year was -3.82%, the lowest figure in the last
20 years. As for core inflation, most members noted


that it has remained persistent around 3.8%. In this
context, some members emphasized that it has
remained at relatively high levels. They added that it
should be acknowledged that it still does not show a
trajectory visibly converging to the 3% target. In this
respect, one of them mentioned that its persistence
in the last 16 months is noteworthy, considering the
weakening of economic activity and the evolution of
the exchange rate, which, although having

undergone fluctuations, has slightly depreciated
during that period. In this regard, some members
agreed that its evolution seems to be determined by
supply shocks, driven by the behavior of wages, food
prices, and, until recently, energy prices. One of
them highlighted that in the last two Quarterly
Reports, average core inflation forecasts for the third
quarter of 2019 were 3.4 and 3.6%, respectively, and
that for July, the data came in at 3.82%, having
remained around that level for a long period. Finally,
another member noted that core and non-core
inflation are already within the variability interval of
plus/minus one percentage point around 3%.

Most members mentioned that inflation expectations
at different terms drawn from surveys and financial
markets have remained relatively stable, although at
levels above the 3% target. In this regard, one
member highlighted that this is observed for both
headline and core inflation and despite a significant
downward adjustment of economic growth forecasts.
He/she added that breakeven inflation drawn form
market instruments has decreased, although it
continues to suggest the persistence of upward risks
for medium- and long-term inflation. In this regard,
another member pointed out that exogenous factors
that impact the non-core component, which will
probably pick up to their historic averages, might
explain why the inflation risk premium is still at
relatively high levels. One member noted that it
cannot be ruled out that the pessimistic tone of
recent communiqués may be one the reasons
behind the recent increase in inflation expectations.

Most members noted that, Banco de México’s
baseline scenario for headline inflation may improve
to some degree, mainly due to lower pressures on
non-core inflation. One member stated that, despite
the volatility of the latter, given the world economic
deceleration there are likely to be lower pressures on
the prices of energy products and, consequently, on
non-core inflation. As for the outlook for core
inflation, the majority of members noted that it is
expected to start decreasing given the dissipation of
the shock arising from energy product prices. One
member explained that, in contrast to what

5


-----

happened in 2017 and 2018, such prices are no
longer a key factor in light of the government’s new
price policy and the decrease of international oil
prices observed in recent months. Most members
highlighted that the downward trend of core inflation
would be influenced by the greater slack in the
economy. One member mentioned that the

dissipation of shocks on the relative prices of food
products would also contribute to lower core inflation.
Another member added that such subindex will also
be influenced by the effects of wages, which have a
lagged impact. In this regard, one member argued
that the effect of wage pressures is conditioned to
firms’ profit margins and to each market’s intrinsic
features. He/she stated that, the greater the slack in
the economy and the stronger the competition in
each sector, the lower the possibilities of a firm
passing through its labor cost increases to consumer
prices and that, so far, evidence reveals that
contagion has been limited and that these pressures
are starting to fade. One member considered that
core inflation is expected to remain on a downward
trend towards the 3% target within the forecast
horizon. Another member expressed that, in his/her
opinion, the outlook for headline and core inflation
implies small upward adjustments to both of their
future trajectories, although it does not modify them
significantly. Some members mentioned that

headline inflation will probably be at levels relatively
close to the 3% target towards the end of the year.
One member pointed out that, although it is still the
case that headline inflation is expected to converge
to the target, in a context of core inflation under
control, this scenario would materialize if non-core
inflation remains below its long-term average, and
the peso exchange rate shows a relatively favorable
behavior. Nevertheless, one of the members
emphasized that there is the risk of meeting the
target in a non-optimal way, that is, on the basis of a
significant decline in non-core inflation, which is the
most volatile one, and persistence of the core
component, which, in his/her opinion, is the most
relevant one.

As to upside risks for inflation, the majority of
members mentioned the possibility of core inflation
continuing to show persistence. One member
pointed out that it is worrisome that the growth rates
of both food merchandise and services prices remain
at levels close to 4% and that, in some
subcategories, such as services other than housing
and education, they lie at around 5%. He/she added
that, despite the greater slack in the economy, core
inflation may remain at high levels. Most members
noted the risk of the peso exchange rate coming


under pressure stemming from external or domestic
factors. In this regard, some members mentioned the
possibility of volatility episodes putting pressure on
the peso exchange rate, due to events such as a
downgrading of the sovereign rating and Pemex’s
loss of investment grade status by a second rating
agency, as well as a deterioration of Mexico’s
relationships with its North American trade partners.
One member added that the risk of the peso
depreciating is partly associated with investors’
concerns regarding several public policies. Another
member considered that the risk of greater inflation
due to a depreciation of the exchange rate is
bounded. He/she argued that the pass-through of
exchange rate fluctuations to prices is relatively low,
noting that it is practically insignificant for economies
with inflation-targeting regimes, an independent
central bank, and a flexible exchange rate regime.

Most members mentioned as an upside risk the
threat by the United States to impose tariffs on
Mexican imports and the adoption of compensatory
measures, although they considered that this risk
has dissipated somewhat. The majority of members
added the risk that energy prices revert their trend or
that agricultural and livestock product prices
increase. One member pointed out the possibility of
non-core inflation registering a reversion to its
historical values, which are significantly higher than
the current ones. Another member highlighted that it
is also important to consider that such component is
volatile. Most members mentioned as a risk weak
public finances. In particular, one member explained
that these may suffer pressures stemming from the
development of economic activity, Pemex´s situation
and international oil prices, among other factors. The
majority of members mentioned as a risk that, given
the magnitude of various wage revisions, costrelated pressures arise, insofar as such revisions
exceed productivity gains. In this regard, one
member considered that available evidence so far
points to a very insignificant impact of minimum
wage increases on inflation and that this is
evidenced by both the inflation observed at the
border zone, which is far below the national average,
as well as the headline inflation in the rest of the
country so far this year. Finally, some members also
added the escalation of protectionist measures
worldwide.

As to downside risks, most members mentioned the
possibility that the peso exchange rate may
appreciate due to the greater financial slack
worldwide, or in case greater certainty arises
regarding the trade relation with the United States.

6


-----

The majority noted that lower rates of change in the
prices of certain goods included in the non-core
subindex, as observed in the case of energy goods
due to the greater weakness exhibited by the world
economy, would also contribute to reduce core
inflation. The majority of members added the
possibility that slack conditions widen more than
anticipated, which would have an impact on the
behavior of core inflation.

In this context, most members agreed that high
uncertainty continues to persist regarding the risks
that might affect inflation. One member noted that
risks have decreased substantially as compared to
those present in December 2018, due to a significant
improvement of global financial conditions, to the
decrease in international commodity prices, and to
the expectation that prices of energy products in
Mexico will remain stable. He/she added that slack
conditions have increased drastically and

considered that the balance of risks for growth is
strongly biased to the downside. Another member
pointed out that in his/her opinion, the balance of
risks for inflation is now slightly tilted to the downside,
particularly in regards to the expected trajectory
within the time frame in which monetary policy
operates. One member considered that, despite the
recent reduction of headline inflation and its
forecasts, high risks and a considerable degree of
uncertainty persist, which makes it difficult to
establish the balance of risks. Another member
expressed that the balance of risks for inflation
continues biased to the upside, although this has
occurred in an environment where there is greater
uncertainty as to the pressures in different directions
that will be exerted on inflation by its determinants,
in particular, the peso exchange rate and the
country’s economic activity. Another member
underlined the persistence of a high degree of
uncertainty about inflation risks. He/she highlighted
the greater importance that the widening of the slack
in the economy has gained as a downside risk and,
as an upside risk, the possible presence of some risk
factors that would affect domestic financial markets
and the peso exchange rate, such as the imposition
of tariffs or the downgrading of credit ratings.

Most members highlighted that domestic financial
markets have reflected the effects of both lower
interest rates for all terms in the major advanced
economies and episodes of volatility, thus stressing
that, while the peso exchange rate fluctuated during
these episodes, interest rates on government
securities have decreased, including longer term
ones. The majority noted that this behavior is in line


with that observed in other emerging markets.
Delving into interest rates, the majority of members
highlighted that the yield curve in Mexico is inverted
and that such inversion has increased. In this regard,
some members emphasized that this contrasts with
what is observed for most advanced and emerging
economies where the yield curve has a positive
slope. One member argued that the inversion of the
yield curve reflects concerns about the economic
deceleration. Another member added that interest
rates of government bonds are at their lowest levels
of the year, with the decline in ten-year yields
standing out. In this regard, one member considered
that it is important to analyze the yield curve
behavior. Such member pointed out that long-term
interest rates can be decomposed into: i) short-term
interest rate expectations, which are associated with
the monetary policy stance, which, in turn, is related
to the economy’s cyclical position and to other
inflationary pressures; and, ii) a term premium that
rewards investors for inflationary, duration and
liquidity risks, among others. The same member
noted that nominal and real yield curves are currently
inverted vis-à-vis the overnight interbank rate,
underlining that both the component of short-term
interest rate expectations and the term premium
have exhibited significant reductions over the last
months. As to the peso exchange rate, another
member stated that it has appreciated vis-à-vis the
levels observed at the end of 2018, in contrast with
the depreciation registered by most currencies of
emerging economies. He/she attributed this

behavior to both the tight monetary policy stance as
well as other domestic factors, among which the
fulfillment so far of fiscal commitments by the current
administration stands out. In this regard, one
member highlighted that the peso exchange rate has
exhibited volatility associated with episodes of
escalation of trade tensions, different idiosyncratic
factors, and even contagion from other emerging
economies, such as China and Argentina. Another
member noted that the Mexican peso depreciated
since Banco de México’s last monetary policy
decision, in line with the evolution observed in other
emerging currencies, despite Mexico’s favorable
interest rate spread. Most members mentioned the
deterioration of credit risk premia, while some added
the higher domestic financial market stress. One
member pointed out that the indicators of Pemex’s
credit risk are showing a higher risk premium, due to
the strong deterioration of its fundamentals. As to the
stock market, the majority of members stated that it
fell significantly. One member argued that among the
determinants of the performance of such market,
interest rates offered by short-term fixed income

7


-----

instruments should be considered, since they are an
alternative to riskier equity instruments. Some
members mentioned that the fall observed in the
stock market was due to lower economic activity and
to local uncertainty factors. One member underlined
that the accumulated flow in equity instruments from
foreign investors remains positive during the year,
while such flow is practically null in the case of
government instruments. Furthermore, another
member pointed out that there was a marginal
outflow in the positions of the external sector in
government securities, despite the wide relative
monetary stance and the maturity restructuring
towards long-term positions.

Regarding the risks that may affect the performance
of financial assets in Mexico, all members mentioned
that uncertainty persists with respect to the credit
rating outlook for both Pemex’s debt and Mexico’s
sovereign debt. Most members also pointed out the
uncertainty regarding the bilateral relationship
between Mexico and the United States. With regards
to the risk of credit rating revisions, one member
argued that, despite the fact that several instruments
already include such revisions, their materialization
may increase markets’ volatility and reduce the
financing capacity of the economy. In this regard,
another member stated that it is important to address
the factors that gave rise to such revisions, avoid an
additional downgrading of credit ratings, and seek to
improve the current ratings in order to contribute to
an orderly adjustment of domestic financial markets
and to preserve the elements that allow them to
remain as an attractive investment destination.
Finally, one member considered that the measures
taken by several central banks of the major
economies mitigate the external risks. He/she added
that, in his/her opinion, several domestic risks
associated with public policies have faded away
throughout the year.

Most members agreed that Pemex’s situation is still
a risk factor. They stated that Pemex’s business plan
announced in mid-July has failed to reestablish
confidence in its financial outlook due to doubts
regarding the viability of increasing crude oil
production. One member added the impossibility to
reach adequate oil reserve replacement levels as set
out in the plan. Another member mentioned that such
rescue program demands, in the short- and mediumterms, the continued and essential support of the
federal government, which is in an overly

constrained fiscal position. He/she considered that it
would be desirable to resume bidding rounds with


public-private partnerships, as well as oil auctions.
He/she also highlighted that analysts have stated
that the proposed business plan does not include an
explicit strategic plan that considers the international
oil demand environment within the framework of the
foreseen economic deceleration nor the increasing
use of renewable energies. Most members pointed
out that the increase of Pemex’s default premia
observed in previous months has not reversed and
that markets continue to discount an additional
downgrading of Pemex’s credit rating. One member
added that the above may generate forced sales of
Pemex’s debt and, in general, turmoil in domestic
financial markets. The majority of members
considered that Pemex’s situation may affect public
finances and Mexico’s sovereign debt rating.
Nevertheless, another member argued that the
indirect impact on the financial cost of the sovereign
debt has been limited so far. He/she added that,
although it cannot be ruled out that Pemex may lose
its investment grade relatively soon, this should not
necessarily give rise to disorderly adjustments in
markets, taking into account that an important
segment of the market already discounts this
possibility.

Most members mentioned that the current

environment continues to pose significant mediumand long-term risks that could affect the country’s
macroeconomic conditions, its capacity to grow, and
the economy’s price formation process. In this
regard, they highlighted that, in addition to a prudent
and firm monetary policy, it is particularly important
to adopt measures that foster an environment of
confidence and certainty for investment and higher
productivity, and that public finances are

consolidated in a sustainable manner. In this context,
they noted that addressing the deterioration of both
the sovereign’s and Pemex’s credit ratings and
achieving the fiscal targets for 2019 is necessary,
and added that it is also important that the Economic
Package for 2020 generates confidence. The
majority of members stated that strengthening the
rule of law, tackling corruption, and fighting insecurity
are equally imperative. Finally, one member pointed
out the need to increase productivity through the
adoption of new technologies and the strengthening
of human capital.

Most members warned that the perception of weak
public finances persists. In particular, one member
underlined that, to date, budgetary revenues fall
short with respect to the programmed and that this
situation may worsen in the following three years due
to the financial support granted to Pemex, which will

8


-----

imply a reduction of fiscal revenues, while at the
same time oil revenues might also be lower. Most
members highlighted that the aforementioned may
represent a challenge for public finances given that
the shortfalls in resources will need to be offset with
expenditure cuts, greater capacity to raise revenue,
and, in 2019, with the use of resources from the
Budgetary Revenues Stabilization Fund (FEIP, for its
acronym in Spanish). Some members mentioned
that the authorities recently announced a set of
measures aimed at boosting economic activity. One
member noted that these measures do not
necessarily involve injecting additional resources to
the economy, while another member emphasized
that, although such measures may help to improve
the situation, it is essential that fiscal policy fulfills the
goals announced for the primary balance. He/she
pointed out that if doubts regarding the strength of
public finances worsen there would be greater
uncertainty, with a negative impact on economic
activity. As for the use of part of the resources of the
FEIP, some members considered that it is important
to keep in mind the challenges arising from this
decision in an environment characterized by
significant risks. Such members warned about the
weakness of investors’ confidence on the Mexican
economy. One member noted that among other
decisions of the new administration that have
contributed to this situation are the cancellation of
the New Mexico City International Airport (NAIM, for
its acronym in Spanish), the suspension of bidding
rounds with public-private partnership, and the
beginning of international arbitration processes
related with gas pipelines. Such measures, in
addition to public insecurity and the absence of rule
of law, reduce the country’s level of competitiveness
and undermine the legal certainty to the trade
relations between Mexico and its trading partners in
North America, which could contribute to the delay in
the ratification and implementation of the USMCA.
Another member highlighted that, although the
complicated external environment has affected the
performance of emerging economies overall, it is
important to consider that the perception of risk in the
case of Mexico has been greater, in general, thus
reflecting the simultaneous effect of idiosyncratic
factors. In this regard, he/she underlined the
weakening of some indicators, such as: i) the Credit
Default Swap (CDS) premium, which has been more
unfavorable in Mexico than in other emerging
economies with similar or even lower credit ratings;
and, ii) the Mexican Stock Exchange index
expressed in US dollars, which from mid-2018 to
date has exhibited one of the worst performances
among this group of economies. Such member


added that during the last months, the main rating
agencies have downgraded the sovereign debt
credit rating or its outlook.

As for Mexico’s monetary policy, most members
stated that, considering that headline inflation has
decreased as foreseen by Banco de México, that
slack conditions in the economy have widened more
than expected, and the recent behavior of external
and domestic yield curves, lowering the target for
Mexico’s overnight interbank interest rate by 25
basis points to 8% is appropriate. The majority
considered that this adjustment is consistent with the
convergence of headline inflation to the 3% target
within the time frame in which monetary policy
operates.

One member added that the fact that the risks faced
by the economy have not increased recently
provides margin to lower the policy rate. He/she
noted that, since May 2017, policy rate adjustments
in Mexico have been synchronized with those carried
out by the US Federal Reserve, in such a way as to
keeping a spread in Mexican and US rates of around
575 basis points and that such spread represented
the tightest relative monetary policy stance since
early 2008. The same member added that such
monetary policy stance was restrictive enough to
fight the inflation increase observed during 20172018 and the risks that inflation faced. He/she
considered that, given the latest conditions regarding
the path of inflation, economic growth, and financial
stability risks, widening this spread cannot be
justified. He/she added that, considering the recent
cut in interest rates by the US Federal Reserve, the
interest rate spread between both countries has
widened to 600 basis points, thus intensifying
Mexico’s monetary policy restrictive stance relative
to that of the United States. Such member stated
that, in real terms, the policy rate is at its highest
levels in eleven years, adding that this level, in a
moment in which the economy is close to a recession
and headline inflation being below the upper limit of
the variability interval and with a trajectory of
convergence to the 3% target, reflects that the
current monetary policy stance is highly restrictive,
not only in relation to other economies but also in
absolute terms. He/she pointed out that one of the
reasons why Banco de Mexico has maintained a
tight policy stance is that it has sought to keep a
prudent and cautious stance given the many external
and domestic risks the Mexican economy has faced.
He/she mentioned that, despite the above, the
Governing Board should also take into account in its
decision-making the effects of the behavior of

9


-----

economic activity. He/she emphasized that, for
Banco de México it is extremely important to seek
price stability, and that this is monetary policy’s best
contribution to the country’s development given its
limitations to stimulate the potential growth of the
economy. However, he/she acknowledged that, at a
time when the economy is on the edge of a
recession, maintaining a tight policy stance for a long
time is not advisable. Such member added that, in
other words, this Central Bank will continue to
procure the stability of the peso’s purchasing power,
but not at any price. Another member emphasized
that for various reasons both monetary and fiscal
policy face important limitations to stimulate the
economy under current circumstances. He/she
pointed out that to reach such objective it is
necessary to tackle the fundamental causes of the
current weakness, that is, a situation of uncertainty
and insufficient clarity of public policies in diverse
areas, which does not generate appropriate
conditions for investment, in addition to actions that
directly hinder private investment.

One member considered that the most important risk
for domestic financial markets nowadays is

maintaining an overly tight monetary policy stance.
He/she argued that, although high interest rates are
typically considered to contribute to an environment
of greater stability, keeping interest rates high for a
long period could contribute to generate unbalances
and may have a negative effect on markets. As an
example of the above, such member mentioned the
negative slope that Mexico’s yield curve currently
registers, as a result of short-term interest rates
being highly sensitive to adjustments to the policy
rate. In this regard, he/she compared the recent
experience of Colombia and Mexico, stating that
both countries share a similar target and have similar
levels of inflation and have kept their policy rates
unchanged in 2019; however, in Colombia the policy
rate is lower and lies at 4.25%, while its economy is
expanding at higher rates of around 3%, which
indicates that Mexico’s monetary policy stance is
highly restrictive. One member argued that, although
several advanced and emerging economies have
eased their monetary policies, in contrast to what can
be observed for Mexico, in almost all of these
countries inflation lies at levels close to or even
below the target.

This same member stated that the policy rate should
be left unchanged, arguing that: i) although the 3%
inflation target refers to the behavior of headline
inflation; given the volatility of the non-core
component, to accurately assess inflationary


pressures on the economy as well as the
sustainability of the trajectory of inflation, it is
essential that at the same time the behavior of the
core component be analyzed carefully; ii) despite the
significant downward adjustment of economic
growth forecasts, both headline and core inflation
expectations for all terms remain above Banco de
México’s expectations and the 3% target,

highlighting that the latter is a point target rather than
a +/- 1% interval around such figure; iii) the lack of
credibility of Banco de México’s inflation forecasts,
stemming partly from core inflation remaining above
projections; iv) the positive effect on the peso
exchange rate of the widening interest rate spread
between Mexico and the United States was more
than offset by several domestic and external
economic and political shocks; v) uncertainty
persists as to different aspects of public policies and
the deterioration of economic fundamentals, which
has been reflected in a higher country risk perception
and demand a cautious stance; vi) more information
is needed on the main elements of the fiscal policy
for 2020, as it is an essential input for monetary
policy implementation. He/she considered that,
under an environment of uncertainty as the current
one, prioritizing the trustworthiness of Banco de
México’s messages is of paramount importance
since, under the above mentioned circumstances,
the potential for confusion and for adverse effects
generated by surprises in the implementation of
monetary policy increases. Nevertheless, the same
member noted that monetary policy’s margins for
maneuver may widen in the short term if, as
expected, headline inflation continues to decrease
and core inflation starts to follow a downward trend
in the next weeks, a solid fiscal package is
announced for 2020, and if no significant shocks
occur.

One member pointed out that, on this occasion, the
monetary policy statement plays a particularly crucial
role since the policy rate had not been lowered in five
years and a wide segment of the market was not
anticipating a downward adjustment in this decision,
thus an adequate message is important to avoid
generating uncertainty and affecting monetary
policy’s effectiveness. He/she added that this
requires caution and acting with prudence. Likewise,
such member pointed out that this monetary policy
action must not be interpreted as the start of an
easing cycle, since future monetary policy decisions
will depend on the development of inflation vis-à-vis
its forecasted trajectory. Another member mentioned
that a decrease in the policy rate together with an
adequate message by Banco de México may send a

10


-----

signal of certainty and confidence. Such member
added that this is possible if the monetary policy
statement highlights the substantial reduction of
inflationary risks throughout the year, the betterthan-expected behavior of inflation, and that inflation
is expected to converge to the target. This would
confirm that inflation is controlled, which allows for
monetary policy easing in order to attain the
convergence of inflation to its target in an effective
way with the lowest costs for economic activity. One
member stated that, even after considering this
downward adjustment in the reference rate, the
monetary policy stance in both relative and absolute
terms remains restrictive, and an analysis of the
underlying risk factors leads to the conclusion that an
accommodative cycle should begin.

One member mentioned that the widening slack
conditions in the economy, along with an external
environment where the outlook of lower interest rates
and lackluster growth expectations has been taking
hold, points to an environment of lower inflationary
pressures within the time frame in which monetary
policy operates. He/she added that, nevertheless,
there are other elements that continue to influence
Mexico’s economy and price formation process and
have contributed to make core inflation remain above
the 3% target and to show resistance to decline, and
that this situation suggests that Banco de México
should act gradually and follow closely the available
information on the economy’s cyclical position, and
on all inflation determinants as well as on their
balance of risks.

Most members highlighted that in the foreseeable
future all factors and elements that have an impact
on both inflation and its outlook should be followed,
and the necessary actions be taken, so that the
policy rate is consistent with the orderly convergence
of headline inflation to Banco de México’s target
within the time frame in which monetary policy
operates.

**3. MONETARY POLICY DECISION**

To guide its monetary policy actions, Banco de
México’s Governing Board follows closely the
development of inflation vis-à-vis its forecasted
trajectory, taking into account the monetary policy
stance and the time frame in which monetary policy
operates. In this process, it uses available
information on all inflation determinants as well as on
medium- and long-term inflation expectations,
including the balance of risks for such factors.
Monetary policy must also respond prudently if for


any reason the uncertainty faced by the economy
increases significantly. In this context, considering
that headline inflation has decreased as foreseen by
Banco de México, the greater than expected
widening in the amount of slack in the economy, and
the recent behavior of the external and domestic
yield curves at various terms, Banco de México’s
Governing Board decided by majority to lower the
target for the overnight interbank interest rate by 25
basis points to 8.00%, considering that under the
current environment such level is consistent with the
convergence of headline inflation to the central
bank’s target within the time frame in which monetary
policy operates. One member voted to maintain the
target at 8.25%. In order to consolidate a low and
stable inflation, in an environment in which price
formation and slack conditions in the economy are
subject to risks, the Governing Board will continue to
follow closely all factors and elements of uncertainty
that have an impact on inflation and its outlook, and
will take the required actions based on incoming
information so that the policy rate is consistent with
the orderly convergence of headline inflation to
Banco de México’s target within the time frame in
which monetary policy operates. Banco de México’s
Governing Board will maintain a prudent monetary
policy stance and, under the current environment of
uncertainty, will follow closely the potential passthrough of exchange rate fluctuations to prices,
Mexico’s monetary policy stance relative to that of
the U.S.-in an external environment that it is still
subject to risks- and the behavior of slack conditions
and cost-related pressures in the economy. In the
presence and possible persistence of factors that, by
their nature, involve risks to both inflation and its
expectations, monetary policy will be adjusted in a
timely and firm manner to achieve the convergence
of inflation to its 3% target and to strengthen the
anchoring of medium- and long-term inflation
expectations so that they attain such target.

**4. VOTING**

Alejandro Díaz de León-Carrillo, Irene EspinosaCantellano, Gerardo Esquivel-Hernández, and

Jonathan Ernest Heath-Constable voted in favor of
lowering the target for the overnight interbank rate to
8.00%.

Javier Eduardo Guzmán-Calafell voted in favor of
maintaining the target for the overnight interbank rate
at 8.25%.

11


-----

**5. DISSENTING VOTES**

**Vote. Javier Eduardo Guzmán-Calafell**

In my judgment, the combined effect of several
factors makes monetary policy easing inadequate.
First, although headline inflation has decreased, its
core component, which reflects inflationary

pressures more accurately, has remained high for a
long period and does not show signs of decreasing.
Second, at the moment there is no information on
fiscal policy for 2020, a fundamental input for
monetary policy implementation. Third, lowering the
policy rate implies surprising the markets, which


creates the risk of an adverse reaction and of making
the central bank’s communication policy confusing.
In an environment of high external and domestic
uncertainty, where the perception of country-risk has
increased significantly, the central bank must be
extremely cautious given the risk of financial market
turmoil. For these reasons, I believe it is preferable
to keep the policy rate unchanged and

simultaneously signal that as some uncertainty
factors dissipate and a more favorable balance of
risks is attained, which is a likely scenario, the central
bank would have more solid bases to take advantage
of the consequent margins of maneuver, even in the
very short term.

12


-----

**ANNEX**

The information in this Annex was prepared for this
meeting by the staff of Banco de México’s General
Directorate of Economic Research and General
Directorate of Central Bank Operations. It does not
necessarily reflect the considerations of the

members of the Governing Board as to the monetary
policy decision.

**A.1. External conditions**

**A.1.1. World economic activity**

World economic activity decelerated during the
second quarter of the year due to a moderation of
growth in the main advanced and emerging
economies (Chart 1). In addition, concerns about the
effects of tensions between the United States and
other economies, not only related to trade but also
those associated with technology, migration, and,
more recently, to exchange rate policy, have
intensified the decline in business confidence, the
weakness of investment, and the slowdown of
manufacturing. As a result, growth expectations for
the world economy were revised downwards once
more. Headline and core inflation in the advanced
economies have remained at low levels and below
their central bank targets. In this context, a large
number of central banks have adopted more
accommodative monetary policy stances. Global
financial markets exhibited high volatility due to the
trade tensions between the United States and China
and the greater than expected slowdown of some
economies. In this environment, the risks faced by
the global economy have increased, among which
the following stand out: an escalation of trade
disputes, a disorderly Brexit, and the deterioration of
some political and geopolitical risks stand out. For
this reason, the balance of risks for world economic
activity is considered to have deteriorated.


**Chart 1**

**World GDP Growth**

Annual percentage change, s. a.

12

10

8

6

4

2

0

-2

World

-4 Advanced economies

Emerging and developing economies Q2

-6

2001 2003 2005 2007 2009 2011 2013 2015 2017 2019

s. a. / Seasonally adjusted figures.
Note: GDP calculations for Q2 2019 include estimates for some countries.
The sample of countries used in the calculations accounts for 85.6% of
world GDP measured by purchasing power parity.
Source: Prepared by Banco de México with data from Haver Analytics, J.P.
Morgan and International Monetary Fund (IMF).

In the United States, economic activity decelerated
during the second quarter of the year, growing at a
seasonally adjusted annual quarterly rate of 2.1%,
after having grown 3.1% during the first quarter. The
fall in the growth rate occurred despite the higher
contribution of public spending to growth and the
rebound of private consumption driven by the still
high levels of consumer confidence and the strength
of the labor market. Thus, the weakness of economic
activity is associated with the greater sluggishness
exhibited by business fixed investment, the strong
inventory decumulation, and the negative

contribution of net exports (Chart 2).

US industrial production continued to exhibit lack of
vigor in July, by falling 0.2% at a monthly rate after
having recovered slightly in May and June. This
contraction was mainly due to lower mining activity,
especially in in oil extraction and refining, as well as
to the fall in manufacturing, which can be associated
with lower growth in world demand. The decline in
manufacturing activity is consistent with the evolution
of the manufacturing sector Purchasing Managers
Index (PMI), which registered in July its lowest level
in almost a decade. Thus, in an environment of
growing tensions between the United States and
other economies, the weakness of such sector is
expected to persist.

13


-----

**Chart 2**

**United States: Real GDP and Components**

Annualized quarterly percentage change and

contributions in percentage points, s. a.

6

4

2

0

-2 Public spending

Net exports
Inventories

-4 Non-residential investment

Residential investment
Private consumption
Total

-6

I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV I II

2016 2017 2018 2019

s. a. / Seasonally adjusted figures.
Source: Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA), Blue Chip January 2019, and
Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta.

The US labor market continued to strengthen in July,
although at a more moderate rate than in previous
months. In particular, job creation in the non-farm
sector went down from 193,000 new jobs in June to
164,000 in July, still above the level necessary to
absorb the growth of the labor force. The
unemployment rate rose slightly from 3.6% in June
to 3.7% in July, although it remains close to its lowest
level in the last 50 years. In this environment,
average hourly wages continued to increase, albeit
at a slightly more moderate rate.

In the euro area, GDP growth moderated during the
second quarter of the year, registering a seasonally
adjusted annual rate of 0.8%, after having increased
by 1.8% during the first quarter, due to the fading of
transitory adverse factors. Private consumption
remained strong, driven by the increase in
employment, the high levels of consumer confidence,
and more accommodative financial conditions.
Nevertheless, exports and investment remained
weak, due to the lower global dynamism. Industrial
activity in Germany fell further, while in other
economies of the region it appears to be stabilizing.
In this environment, the labor market continued to
strengthen, with unemployment decreasing from 7.6
to 7.5% between March and June.

The Japanese economy continued growing at high
rates during the second quarter. In particular,
Japan’s GDP grew at a seasonally adjusted annual
rate of 1.8%, after having done so by 2.8% during the
first quarter, in both cases driven by temporary
factors. The growth of business fixed investment


picked up significantly, while private consumer
spending was partly driven by the higher number of
holidays and by the preemptive purchases in
anticipation of the VAT increase that is expected in
October. On the other hand, the historical political
tensions between Japan and South Korea spread to
the trade arena in the form of restrictions to some
Japanese exports used by the South Korean
technology industry and a wave of protests against
Japanese business establishments taking place in
the latter country.

In most emerging economies, indicators suggest that
economic activity continued to remain weak during
the second quarter due to both idiosyncratic factors
and the weakening of international trade. In
particular, the Chinese economy continued losing
dynamism during the second quarter of the year,
while in July indicators of investment, retail sales and
industrial production continued to show a gradual
slowdown of that economy. European emerging
economies have been affected by the fall in external
demand and by idiosyncratic factors, while some of
the main Latin American economies have grown
below expectations, partly attributable to

idiosyncratic factors as well.

International commodity prices followed a downward
trend during the last weeks. In particular, oil prices
decreased due to the escalation of trade tensions
between the United States and China, after having
recovered during part of June and July after the
agreement to extend cuts in oil production quotas
among members of the Organization of Petroleum
Exporting Countries (OPEC) and some of the main
oil-producing countries, as well as the intensification
of geopolitical tensions in the Middle East and the
reduction of US crude oil inventories. Industrial metal
prices fell as a result of the deceleration of world
industrial activity and escalating trade tensions
between the United States and China. In contrast,
gold prices have risen significantly reflecting the
increasing risk aversion in global financial markets,
reaching their highest level in six years. Finally, grain
prices fell due to the higher volumes of grain harvest,
particularly in Europe; to better weather conditions in
the United States; and, to a fall in US grain exports
to China given the escalating tensions between both
countries.

**A.1.2. Monetary policy and international financial**
**markets**

Headline and core inflation in the major advanced
economies have remained at low levels and below
their central banks’ targets. Inflation expectations

14


-----

drawn from surveys and market instruments have
also remained at low levels. Particularly, in the United
States, core inflation has been below 2% since the
beginning of the year, while in the euro area and
Japan it has not trended upwards significantly (Chart
3). In most emerging economies, headline inflation
fell due to the lower energy products and food
merchandise prices, remaining below their central
banks’ targets in various cases.

**Chart 3**

**Selected Advanced Economies: Core Inflation**

Annual percentage change

3

2

1


**Chart 4**

**Reference Rates and Implied Trajectories in**

**OIS Curves[1/]**

Percentage


3.0% **―― US Federal Reserve* Bank of England** Forecasts

**― Bank of Japan**

2.5% **― Bank of Canada**

**― ECB deposit rate**
**― OIS implicit trajectory 12 Aug 2019**

2.0% --- OIS implicit trajectory 24 Jun 2019

OIS implicit trajectory 31 Dec 2018

1.5%

1.0%

0.5%

0.0%

-0.5%

-1.0% End of 2018 End of 2019 End of 2020

2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020

|%|Col2|
|---|---|
|||
|||
|||


0

-1


2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019


1/ Refers to the Personal Consumption Expenditure (PCE) deflator index.
2/ Excludes fresh food, energy, and the direct effect of the consumption tax
increase.
3/ Excludes food, energy, and the effect of adjustments on indirect taxes
(CPIX).
Source: Haver Analytics, BEA, Statistical Office of the European Union
(Eurostat), and Statistics Bureau (Japan).

In this context, the central banks of several
economies have started to adopt more

accommodative monetary policy stances given the
low levels of inflation, lower growth expectations and
the greater risks faced by the world economy.
Expectations that many central banks will continue
cutting their reference rates have also strengthened
(Chart 4).


1/ OIS: Fixed floating interest rate swap where the fixed interest rate is the
effective overnight reference rate.

- In the case of the US observed reference rate, the average interest rate of
the federal funds target range is used (2.00% - 2.25%).
Source: Bloomberg.

In its July meeting, as anticipated, the US Federal
Reserve cut the target range for the federal funds
rate by 25 basis points (bps) to 2.00-2.25%, the first
target rate decrease since the financial crisis of 2008.
In its policy statement, this central bank mentioned
that, in light of the implications of global

developments for the economic outlook as well as
muted inflation pressures, it decided to lower the
target range for the federal funds rate. The Fed
highlighted that such action supports the view of a
sustained expansion of economic activity, and
inflation near its symmetric 2% target, although
uncertainties about this scenario prevail. The Fed
also announced that it will conclude the reduction of
its securities holdings in August, two months earlier
than mentioned in its March meeting. In this regard,
the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC)
emphasized that, in determining the path to be
followed by monetary policy, it will continue
monitoring the available information and will take the
appropriate measures to keep a sustained economic
expansion, a strong labor market, and inflation levels
around its target. In his press conference, the
Federal Reserve Chairman highlighted that the
reduction in the federal funds rate does not represent
the beginning of a series of cuts but rather a midcycle adjustment. However, he insisted that the
possibility of additional reductions is not ruled out. In
this regard, market instruments are anticipating four
25 basis point-adjustments during the rest of 2019
and in 2020.

In its July meeting, the European Central Bank (ECB)
left its policy rates unchanged. Nevertheless, the
ECB modified its forward guidance regarding the
trajectory of monetary policy by pointing out that its

15


-----

key interest rates will remain at their present or lower
levels at least throughout the first half of 2020. In that
meeting, it also emphasized the need for keeping a
highly accommodative monetary policy stance for a
long period as inflation rates and expectations have
been persistently below levels that consistent with its
target and highlighted its commitment to symmetry in
attaining the inflation target. This central bank is also
analyzing additional monetary policy measures,
including ways to reinforce its forward guidance on
policy rates, actions to reduce the impact of negative
interest rates, such as the design of a tiered system
for banks’ reserve requirements, and options for
implementing a new asset purchase program.

In its July meeting, the Bank of Japan left its policy
interest rates unchanged, reaffirming that it will keep
them at extremely low levels until at least the spring
of 2020. In its Outlook for Economic Activity and
Prices Report of July, this central bank

acknowledged that external risks to growth have
increased due to the climate of greater protectionism
and emphasized that it will not hesitate to adopt a
more flexible monetary policy stance if the
convergence of inflation to its target is put at risk.

In its July meeting, the Bank of Canada left its policy
interest rate unchanged at 1.75%. In its message,
this central bank mentioned that available figures for
the second quarter suggest that economic activity
recovered given the rebound in oil production and the
fading of transitory factors. However, it highlighted
that the effects of escalating trade and geopolitical
tensions on both trade and investment have been
greater than expected. In this environment, the Bank
of Canada pointed out that risks for growth are
biased to the downside, while those of a higher
inflation have increased given that the greater trade
disputes may be reflected in supply shocks.
Considering the above, this central bank argued that
its accommodative monetary policy stance continues
being appropriate and underlined that it will closely
follow the development of oil markets and trade
policies worldwide.

In its August meeting, the Bank of England left its
policy rate at 0.75% and did not modify the size of its
stock of corporate and UK government bond
purchases. The Bank of England reaffirmed that it will
adjust its monetary policy stance in whichever
direction is necessary if, as a result of the Brexit
negotiations, substantial changes in growth and
inflation expectations were to be observed. It pointed
out that, under the assumption of an orderly Brexit,
the most appropriate monetary policy stance to reach
the 2% target in a sustained manner will be that of a


gradual and limited increase in its policy rate.
Nevertheless, the Bank of England warned that such
adjustment will depend on Brexit conditions and their
impact on aggregate supply and demand and on the
exchange rate. This central bank revised downwards
its growth projections for 2019 and 2020, mainly
reflecting the greater uncertainty about Brexit.

Other central banks of advanced economies, such as
the Reserve Bank of Australia and the Reserve Bank
of New Zealand, also eased their monetary policy
stances, leaving their policy rates at historically low
levels.

In emerging economies, several central banks
adopted more accommodative monetary policy
stances, including those of Saudi Arabia, Brazil,
Costa Rica, United Arab Emirates, the Philippines,
Hong Kong, India, Indonesia, Paraguay, Russia,
South Africa, Thailand, and Ukraine. The case of the
Bank of Turkey stood out, which surprised financial
markets by cutting its reference rate by 425 basis
points in July, in an environment where inflation has
been below what this central bank had expected.

During practically the entire month of July,
international financial markets continued to be
supported by the more accommodative monetary
policy stances of several central banks. In particular,
the stock markets of the major economies reached
historically high levels. Nevertheless, at the

beginning of August, the announcement of new tariffs
on Chinese imports by the United States, as well as
the labeling by US authorities of China as an
exchange rate manipulator, following the yuan
depreciation, increased uncertainty in financial
markets again. This trend intensified given the
greater than expected slowdown exhibited by some
economies, the uncertainty generated in the electoral
process of Argentina, and political tensions in Hong
Kong. The preceding was reflected in a reshuffling of
investment portfolios towards lower-risk assets.
Thus, in advanced economies the main stock
markets fell and interest rates decreased to
historically low levels. In addition, most yield curves
flattened, and some even inverted, which may be
reflecting the lower economic growth outlook, the
lower levels of inflation, and the search for yield in an
environment where a high percentage of fixedincome securities of this group of countries are
traded at negative interest rates. Finally, stock
exchange markets registered significant

appreciations of safe haven currencies, such as the
US dollar, the Swiss franc, and the Japanese yen
(Chart 5).

16


-----

**Chart 5**

**Change in Selected Financial Indicators**

**(June 24, 2019 – August 12, 2019)**

Percent, basis pointsPercentage, basis points

3%


15

0


0%

-3%


-6%

-9%


-15

-30


-45


1/ MSCI Emerging Markets Index (includes 24 countries).
2/ DXY: Weighted average of the nominal exchange rate of the six main
world-traded currencies (calculated by Intercontinental Exchange, ICE) with
the following weights: EUR (57.6%), JPY (13.6%), GBP (11.9%), CAD
(9.1%), SEK (4.2%), and CHF (3.6%).
3/ J.P. Morgan Index constructed from a weighted average of the nominal
exchange rate of emerging economies’ currencies with the following
weights: TRY (8.3%), RUB (8.3%), HUF (8.3%), ZAR (8.3%), BRL (11.1%),
MXN (11.1%), CLP (11.1%), CNH (11.1%), INR (11.1%), and SGD (11.1%).
Source: Bloomberg and ICE.

As to emerging economies, investment inflows to
these countries have exhibited a mixed behavior
since Banco de México’s previous monetary policy
decision. While debt markets registered stable
capital inflows over most of the period, stock markets
continued registering outflows. Nevertheless, in the
latest weeks both have exhibited outflows. In this
context, at the end of period, interest rates of
government securities decreased significantly,

exchange rates depreciated, and stock market
indexes fell (Chart 6).

**Chart 6**

**Emerging Economies: Financial Assets**

**Performance from June 24 to August 12, 2019**

Percent, basis points Percentage, basis points

**Region** **Country** **Currency** **Equity** **Interest Rates 2y** **Interest Rates 10y** **CDS**

**Mexico**

**Brazil**

**Latin America** **Chile** **-68 pb**

**Colombia**

**Argentina** **-29.6%** **-26.6%** **+444 pb** **+2050 pb** **+1059 pb**

**Russia**

**Poland**

**Emerging Europe** **Turkey** **-113 pb** **-413 pb** **-30 pb**

**Czech Rep.**

**Hungary**

**Malaysia**

**India**

**Asia** **Philippines**

**Thailand**

**Indonesia**

**Africa** **South Africa**

-7% 0% 7% -10% 0% 10% -65 0 65 -65 0 65 -25 0 25

Note: Interest rates correspond to interest rate swaps for 2-year/10-year
maturities. In the case of Argentina, rates in US dollars are used since they
are the most liquid ones and those that reflect more adequately the
performance of the fixed income market in that country.
Source: Bloomberg.


Looking ahead, market participants are expected to
remain attentive to the evolution of several risk
factors that may lead to higher volatility and to a
deterioration of international financial market

conditions. Among those that stand out are the
possibility of an intensification of tensions between
the United States and other economies; a sharper
deceleration of economic activity in a context where
the scope of action of central banks is limited; an
intensification of negative idiosyncratic events in
emerging economies, as well as a possible contagion
among its financial assets; and, an escalation of
geopolitical tensions worldwide, mainly in the Middle
East and Asia.

**A.2. Current situation of the Mexican economy**

**A.2.1. Mexican markets**

Since Banco de Mexico’s previous monetary policy
decision to date, the prices of financial assets in
Mexico reflected the effects of both the lower interest
rates at all terms in advanced economies and
episodes of volatility. Thus, the peso/dollar exchange
rate depreciated 2.04% during the period, closing at
19.60 pesos per US dollar (Chart 7). Forward outright
trading conditions for the peso implied in FX spot
options remained relatively stable, although at
deteriorated levels when compared to other
emerging economies (Chart 8).

**Chart 7**

**Mexican Markets’ Performance and Trading**

**Conditions**

Percent, pesos/US dollar, index and basis points


Range in year Range since last monetary policy decision 24-Jun-19 12-Aug-19


Note: For the Mexican peso volatility, the levels implied in 1-month
exchange rate options are considered. For the interest rate, a Garch model
(1,1) of daily fluctuations in all the curve since 2007 is considered. For
exchange rate volatility, the Vimex published by MexDer is considered.
Source: Prepared by Banco de México with Bloomberg and Proveedora
Integral de Precios (PIP) data.

17


9.5

9.0


25

20


46,000

45,000

44,000

43,000

42,000

41,000

40,000

39,000

38,000


400

350

300

250

200

150

100

50

0


8.5

8.0


15

10


7.5

7.0


20.0

19.8

19.6

19.4

19.2

19.0

18.8

18.6

18.4


5

0


M Bono


Volatility

|Col1|Mexico|Col3|Col4|Col5|Col6|Col7|Col8|Col9|Col10|Col11|Col12|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|Latin America|Brazil Chile Colombia Argentina||-29.6%||-26.6%|+444 pb|-68 pb|+2050 pb||+1059 pb||
|Emerging Europe|Russia Poland Turkey Czech Rep. Hungary||||||-113 pb||-413 pb||-30 pb|
|Asia|Malaysia India Philippines Thailand Indonesia|||||||||||
|Africa|South Africa|||||||||||
|||-7% 0% 7%||-10% 0% 10%||-65 0 65||-65 0 65||-25 0 25||


-----

**Chart 8**

**Mexican Foreign Exchange Market Trading**

**Conditions**

Index (5-day moving average) and pesos/US dollar


of low trading volume and in which trading conditions
deteriorated during certain days of the period (Chart
11).

**Chart 10**

**Nominal Yield on Government Securities**

Percent, basis points


90

80


70

60


50

40


30

20


22.0

← Index FIX →

21.5

21.0

20.5

20.0

19.5

19.0

18.5

18.0

17.5

August

17.0

J F M M J J A S O D J F M A J J A S O N J F M A M J A S O N J F M A M J A


2016 2017 2018


2019


Note: Index calculated using the mean, volatility, skewness, kurtosis, bidask spread and mean of simple differentials, all of them related to quotes of
intraday operations, and the total traded volume. After obtaining this data,
the percentiles since 2011 are calculated and the average of the 7
percentiles for each day is considered. The black vertical line represents
Banco de México’s latest monetary policy decision.
Source: Prepared by Banco de México with Reuters data.

Peso exchange rate expectations by forecasters
from several financial institutions were adjusted
downwards from 19.90 to 19.80 pesos per US dollar
for the end of 2019 and from 20.23 to 20.00 pesos
per US dollar for the end of 2020 (Chart 9).

**Chart 9**

**Analysts’ Mexican Peso Exchange Rate**

**Expectations for Each End of Quarter**

Pesos per US dollar


80

70

60

50

40

30

20

10

0


Source: PIP.

**Chart 11**

**Mexican Government Debt Market Trading**

**Conditions and**

**Jun-27 Bond Rate**

Index (10-day moving average), percent


9.5

9.0

8.5

8.0

7.5

7.0

6.5

6.0

5.5

5.0


22.5


J F M A M J A S O N J F M A M J A S O N J F M A M J A S O N D F M A M J A

2016 2017 2018 2019


D M J S D M IIQ 2019J IIIQ 2019 IVQ 2019S D IQ 2020M IIQ 2020J


Bloomberg interquartile range Bloomberg expectations range

Mexican peso 2019 year-end forecast Citibanamex

Bloomberg median


Note: The black vertical line represents Banco de México’s latest monetary
policy decision.
Source: Bloomberg and Citibanamex survey.

Interest rates of government securities decreased by
up to 49 basis points, mainly for the short and
medium terms (Chart 10). This decrease was again
associated with the adjustments observed in most
debt markets worldwide driven by expectations that
the central banks of the main advanced economies
will adopt even more accommodative monetary
policy stances. The preceding occurred in a context


Note: Index calculated with the changes in bonds’ interest rates, volatility of
events, bid-ask spread, the average of the differences in quotes of intra-day
operations, and the daily interbank and customer traded volume.
Considering the aforementioned, percentiles since 2016 and the average of
percentiles for every day are calculated. The vertical line represents the
date of Banco de México’s latest monetary policy decision.
Source: Calculated by Banco de México with data from Bloomberg, PIP and
brokerage firms.

As to expectations regarding the path of the
monetary policy target rate implied in the yield curve
structure, these were adjusted downwards vis-à-vis
the levels observed in the previous period (Chart 12).
In this regard, both expectations of private sector
analysts surveyed by Citibanamex and those implied
by market instruments do not anticipate changes to
the target rate for the monetary policy decision of
August, although in the days prior to the monetary
policy decision some analysts adjusted their
expectations to a cut in August. For the end of 2019,

18


-----

both expectations implied in market rates and the
median of the latest survey among forecasters
anticipate a 50 bp cut in the policy rate.

**Chart 12**

**Banxico Overnight Interbank Rate Implied in**

**TIIE IRS Curve**

PercentPercent

8.75

Banxico overnight rate

8.50 24-Jun-19

Rest of period

8.25 12-Aug-19

8.00

7.75

7.50

7.25

7.00

6.75

abr. 18A            A            D            M            S            J         ago. 18 dic. 18 may. 19 sep. 19 ene. 20 jun. 20J

2018                        2019                              2020

Source: Banco de México with Bloomberg data.

**A.2.2. Economic activity in Mexico**

According to INEGI’s GDP flash estimate, during the
second quarter of 2019, the stagnation that Mexico’s
economic activity has been registering in the
previous quarters continued (Chart 13). Such
behavior was due to the greater weakness of several
components of aggregate demand, in a context of
marked uncertainty stemming from both domestic
and external factors. In particular, gross fixed
investment continued showing an unfavorable
performance, while private consumption remained
weak. In contrast, manufacturing exports recovered.

As for external demand, despite the weakening of
world trade and the escalation of trade tensions,
during the second quarter of 2019 manufacturing
exports recovered relative to the deceleration
displayed in the previous two quarters. In particular,
exports to the United States continued trending
upwards, while those to the rest of the world
registered a slight recovery vis-à-vis the levels
observed during most of 2018 and early 2019 (Chart
14). By type of commodity, automotive exports
continued exhibiting a positive trajectory, while the
rest of manufactures decelerated slightly towards the
end of the period.


2

1

0

-1

-2 Q-II [1/ ]

I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV I II

2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019

s. a. Seasonally adjusted figures.
1/ Figures for the second quarter of 2019 correspond to INEGI’s GDP
quarterly flash estimate.
Source: Mexico’s National Accounts System (SCNM, for its acronym in
Spanish), INEGI.

**Chart 14**

**Total Manufacturing Exports**

Indices 2013 = 100, s. a.

150

Total

140 Rest of the world

United States

130

120

110

100

90

80

June

70

J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M J

2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019

s. a. / Seasonally adjusted series and trend series based on data in nominal
USD. The former is represented by a solid line and the latter by a dotted
line.
Source: Prepared by Banco de México with data from the Tax
Administration Service (SAT, for its acronym in Spanish), the Ministry of the
Economy (SE, for its acronym in Spanish), Banco de México, the National
Institute of Statistics and Geography (INEGI, for its acronym in Spanish),
Mexico’s Merchandise Trade Balance, and the National System of
Statistical and Geographical Information (SNIEG, for its acronym in
Spanish).

As for domestic demand, according to its monthly
indicator, during April-May 2019 the weakness that
private consumption has been showing since the end
of 2018 continued. This reflected the lackluster
performance that services consumption has been
exhibiting since late 2018, as well as the stagnation
of the consumption of goods, which is largely
explained by the unfavorable behavior of

consumption of imported goods. More timely
indicators of consumption, albeit of less coverage,
exhibited a relatively weak performance during the
second quarter of 2019. In particular, although
retailers’ earnings recovered moderately, the sales of

19


**Chart 13**

**Gross Domestic Product**

Quarterly percentage change, s. a.

.


-----

manufacturing industries that are more correlated
with the consumption of domestically produced
goods remained at a standstill. In turn, sales of light
vehicles continued on a negative trend. Regarding
gross fixed investment, the negative trend it has been
following since early 2018 became more evident,
even reaching its lowest level since August 2014.
Indeed, both investment in construction and in
imported machinery and equipment contracted
significantly during April-May.

As for production, the latest information suggests that
the lackluster growth of Mexico’s economic activity
during the second quarter of 2019 may be associated
with the weakness of secondary activities as well as
with the contraction of primary activities, while
services showed a moderate recovery (Chart 15).
Within industrial activity, the downward trajectory of
construction followed since the early part of 2018
further intensified, while mining continued trending
downwards (Chart 16). Manufacturing exhibited a
certain recovery vis-à-vis the deceleration it had
registered during the second half of 2018 and early
2019. The behavior of services during April-May was
mainly explained by the positive contribution of the
items of transportation, warehousing and

information; accommodation and food services; and
arts, entertainment and other services (except public
administration). In contrast, there was a decline in the
items of retail and wholesale trade; professional,
scientific and technical services; and administrative
and support and waste and management and
remediation services.

**Chart 15**

**Indicators of Economic Activity**

Indices 2013 = 100, s. a.

120 140

Total IGAE 1/

Industrial production 2/

Services IGAE 1/

115 130

Agriculture IGAE 1/

110 120

105 110

100 100

JuneMay

June

95 90

J M M J S N J M M J S N J M M J S N J M M J S N J M M J S N J M M J S N J M MJ

2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019

s. a. / Seasonally adjusted and trend series. The former is represented by a
solid line and the latter by a dotted line.
1/ Figures up to May 2019.
2/ Monthly Industrial Activity Indicator figures up to June 2019.
Source: Mexico’s National Accounts System (SCNM, for its acronym in
Spanish), INEGI.


J M M J S N J M M J S N J M M J S N J M M J S N J M M J S N J M M J S N J M M J

2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019

s. a. / Seasonally adjusted and trend series. The former is represented by a
solid line and the latter by a dotted line.
1/ Figures in parentheses correspond to its share in the total in 2013.
Source: Mexico’s National Accounts System (SCNM, for its acronym in
Spanish), INEGI.

As to the economy’s cyclical position, during the
second quarter of 2019 slack conditions in the
economy continued to loosen even more than
expected, widening the negative output gap (Chart
17). As to labor market conditions, both national and
urban employment rates continued at levels above
those reported during most of 2018 (Chart 18). The
deceleration in the growth rate of the number of
IMSS-insured jobs also persisted. Given the behavior
of productivity and real average earnings, unit labor
costs in the overall economy remained at a level
similar to that reported in the previous quarter. At the
beginning of the second quarter of 2019,

manufacturing unit labor costs continued on a
positive trajectory, reaching relatively high levels
(Chart 19).

20


**Chart 16**

**Industrial Activity [1/]**

Indices 2013 = 100, s. a.


120

110

100

90

80

70


-----

**Chart 17**

**Output Gap Estimates [1/]**

**Excluding Oil Industry [4/ ]**

Potential output percentages, s. a.


8

Global Economic Activity Indicator 2/

6 Gross Domestic Product 2/

95% Confidence Interval 3/

4

2

0

-2

-4

-6

-8

-10

Q-II

June

-12

J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M J

2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019


s. a. / Calculations based on seasonally adjusted figures.
1/ Output gap estimated with a tail-corrected Hodrick-Prescott filter; see
Banco de México (2009), “Inflation Report (April-June 2009)", p.74.
2/ GDP figures up to the second quarter of 2019 and of IGAE implicit up to
June, consistent with timely figures.
3/ Output gap confidence interval calculated with a method of unobserved
components.
4/ Excludes both oil and gas extraction, support activities for mining, and
petroleum and coal products' manufacturing.
Source: Prepared by Banco de México with INEGI data.

**Chart 18**

**National Unemployment Rate and Urban**

**Unemployment Rate**

Percent, s. a.

8.5

Urban unemployment rate

8.0

7.5 National unemployment rate

7.0

6.5

6.0

5.5

5.0

4.5

4.0

3.5

3.0

June

2.5

J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M J

2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019

s. a. / Seasonally adjusted and trend series. The former is represented by a
solid line and the latter by a dotted line.
Source: National Survey of Occupations and Employment (ENOE, for its
acronym in Spanish), INEGI.


**Chart 19**

**Global Indicator of Labor Productivity (IGPLE,**

**for its acronym in Spanish) and Unit Labor**

**Costs [1/]**

Indices 2013 = 100, s. a.

120

Productivity

115 Unit labor costs

110

105

100

95

Q-II e/

90

I II IIIIV I II IIIIV I II IIIIV I II IIIIV I II IIIIV I II IIIIV I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV I II

2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019

s. a. / Seasonally adjusted and trend series. The former is represented by a
solid line and the latter by a dotted line. Trend series estimated by Banco
de México.
1/ Productivity based on hours worked.
e/ Figures for the second quarter of 2019 are estimates of Banco de México
based on SCN-INEGI’s GDP flash indicator.
Source: IGPLE published by INEGI. Unit labor costs prepared by Banco de
México with INEGI data.

In June 2019, domestic financing to the private nonfinancial sector displayed an annual growth rate in
real terms lower than that observed during the first
quarter of the year. As for its components, credit to
private firms slowed down due mainly to the lower
pace of growth of bank credit. In turn, housing credit
continued showing a high dynamism, while

consumer credit kept expanding at a low growth rate.
With regards to interest rates, those related to firm
financing did not change significantly at the margin,
although they remain at high levels. Mortgage
interest rates have remained stable since the second
quarter of 2017, while those of credit cards continue
trending upwards and those related to personal loans
have increased at the margin. Regarding portfolio
quality, firms and mortgage delinquency rates
remained at low levels, while those related to
consumption did not register significant changes,
although they remain at high levels.

**A.2.3. Developments in inflation and inflation**
**outlook**

Between June and July 2019, annual headline
inflation decreased from 3.95 to 3.78%, showing a
downward trend (Chart 20 and Table 1). Between
June and July 2019, annual headline inflation went
down from 3.95 to 3.78%, continuing to trend
downwards vis-à-vis the high levels registered in
2017 (Chart 20 and Table 1). The reduction in annual
headline inflation between these two months was
mainly due to the reduction that non-core inflation
has continued to exhibit.

21


-----

13

12

11

10

9

8

7

6

5

4

3

2

1

0


**Chart 20**

**Consumer Price Index**

Annual percentage change

CPI

Core

Non-core

July

J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J


Source: Banco de México and INEGI.

In June and July 2019, annual core inflation was 3.85
and 3.82%, respectively, maintaining its persistence
at levels around 3.80%. Within this component, the
high annual rates of change of food merchandise
prices –though these have decreased at the margin–
(Chart 21) and services (Chart 22) continue to stand
out. Indeed, although decreases in the annual rates
of change of the prices of some services are
beginning to be observed, this is not a generalized
pattern and several services are still growing at
annual rates above 5%. In contrast, the annual rates
of change of non-food merchandise prices remain at
relatively stable levels below 3%.

**Chart 21**

**Merchandise Core Price Subindex**

Annual percentage change

8

Food, beverages and tobacco

Non-food merchandise

7

6

5

4

3

2

1

July

0

J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J

2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019

Source: Banco de México and INEGI.


**Chart 22**

**Merchandise and Services Core Price Subindex**

Annual percentage change

7

Merchandise

6 Services

5

4

3

2

1

July

0

J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J

2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019

Source: Banco de México and INEGI.

Annual non-core inflation remained on a downward
trend, going from 4.19 to 3.64% between June and
July 2019 (Chart 23 and Table 1). This result is
largely associated with a decline in the growth rate of
energy goods prices. In particular, of the 17 basis
points by which annual headline inflation decreased,
16 can be accounted for by the lower contribution of
gasoline and L.P. gas prices. Although the annual
growth rates of fruit and vegetable prices have also
fallen, those of livestock product prices continue to
increase.

**Chart 23**

**Non-core Price Subindex**
Annual percentage change

20

Non-core
Agriculture
Energy and government-authorized prices

15

10

5

0

July

-5

J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J

2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019

Source: Banco de México and INEGI.

The medians for short-term inflation expectations
drawn from Banco de México’s Survey of Private
Sector Forecasters remained relatively stable,
although some exhibited adjustments. Between May
and July, the median of headline inflation

expectations for the end of 2019 was adjusted
downwards from 3.75 to 3.65%, while that for the
core component increased from 3.60 to 3.66%. At the
same time, the medians for headline and core
inflation for the end of 2020 remained at 3.60 and
3.40%, respectively. Thus, implied non-core inflation

22


-----

expectations for the end of 2019 adjusted

downwards from 4.24 to 3.76%, while those for the
end of 2020 remained at around 4.35%. As to the
medians of headline and core inflation for the
medium-term (next four years), these decreased
from 3.54 to 3.50% and from 3.48 to 3.41% between
May and July, respectively, while those of headline
and core inflation expectations for the longer term
(five to eight years) remained at 3.50 and 3.40%,
respectively. Thus, expectations for both headline
and core inflation remain at levels above the 3%
inflation target. Finally, inflation expectations implicit
in long-term market instruments (drawn from 10-year
government bonds) decreased slightly between May
and July, although they remained at levels close to
3.50%, while the inflation risk premium also
decreased marginally.

As for risks to inflation, the following stand out. To the
upside, that core inflation continues to show
persistence. Also, there is the possibility that the
peso exchange rate comes under pressure

stemming from external or domestic factors.
Additional risks are the threat by the United States to
impose tariffs on Mexican imports and the adoption


of compensatory measures, although these risks
have dissipated somewhat; that energy prices revert
their trend or that agricultural and livestock product
prices exhibit increases; weak public finances; and,
that global protectionist measures escalate. In
addition, given the magnitude of several wage
revisions, that cost-related pressures arise, insofar
as such revisions exceed productivity gains.
Regarding downside risks, the peso exchange rate
may appreciate, possibly associated with a context
of more accommodative monetary policy stances
and lower interest rates worldwide, or in case greater
certainty arises regarding the trade relation with the
United States. Another downside risk is that the
prices of certain goods included in the non-core
subindex register lower rates of change, as observed
in the case of energy goods, due to the greater
weakness exhibited by the world economy, which
would also contribute to reduce core inflation. In
addition, that slack conditions widen more than
anticipated, which would impact the behavior of core
inflation. Given the aforementioned, high uncertainty
still persists regarding the risks that might affect
inflation.


**Table 1**

**Consumer Price Index and Components**

Annual percentage change

**Item** **May 2019** **June 2019** **July 2019**

**CPI** **4.28** **3.95** **3.78**

**SubyacenteCore** **3.77** **3.85** **3.82**

**Merchandise** **3.82** **3.92** **3.85**

Food, beverages and tobacco 4.88 5.01 4.87

Non-food merchandise 2.78 2.84 2.78

**Services** **3.69** **3.75** **3.79**

Housing 2.83 2.84 2.86

Education (tuitions) 4.86 4.86 4.91

Other services 4.30 4.39 4.40

**No SubyacenteNon-core** **5.78** **4.19** **3.64**

**Agriculture** **6.08** **6.23** **6.33**

Fruits and vegetablesFruits abd vegetables 11.26 9.32 5.61

Meats, poultry, fish and eggs Livestock 3.29 4.89 7.06

**Energy and government-authorized prices Energéticos y Tarifas Aut. por Gobierno** **5.50** **2.83** **1.73**

Energy productsEnergy 6.51 2.51 0.76

Government-authorized pricesTarifas Autorizadas por Gobierno 3.64 3.74 4.04

Source: INEGI.


23


-----

-----

-----

