-----

-----

**FOREWARNING**
This document is provided for the reader’s convenience only.
The translation from the official Spanish version was made
by Banco de México’s staff. Discrepancies may arise
between the original document in Spanish and its English
translation. For this reason, the original Spanish version is
the only official document.


**1. PLACE, DATE, AND PARTICIPANTS**

**1.1 Place: Av. Cinco de Mayo street no.2, 5th floor,**
Col. Centro, Mexico City.

**1.2. Date of Governing Board meeting:** May 15,
2019.

**1.3. Participants:**
Alejandro Díaz de León-Carrillo, Governor
Irene Espinosa-Cantellano, Deputy Governor
Gerardo Esquivel-Hernández, Deputy Governor
Javier Eduardo Guzmán-Calafell, Deputy Governor
Jonathan Ernest Heath-Constable, Deputy Governor
Carlos Manuel Urzúa-Macías, Secretary of Finance
and Public Credit.
Arturo Herrera-Gutiérrez, Undersecretary of Finance
and Public Credit.
Elías Villanueva-Ochoa, Secretary of the Governing
Board

Prior to this meeting, preliminary work by Banco de
México’s staff analyzing the economic and financial
environment, together with the developments in
inflation and the determinants and outlook for
inflation, was conducted and presented to the
Governing Board (see annex).

**2. ANALYSIS AND RATIONALE BEHIND THE**
**GOVERNING BOARD’S VOTING**

Most members agreed that since the second half of
2018 world economic activity has exhibited a
downward trend, although it recovered moderately
during the first quarter of 2019 in some economies,
such as the U.S., the U.K, the euro area and China,
largely associated with transitory factors. In
particular, some members claimed that this recovery
was a result of the fiscal and monetary stimuli in such
countries. As for growth expectations, most
members noted that these are still being revised
downwards. One member mentioned that the
International Monetary Fund’s forecasts for 2019
decreased in a generalized manner, and another one
pointed out that the probability of new downward
revisions for this year and the next one apparently
has increased. In this context, most members agreed
that the outlook for investment has deteriorated and
business climate worldwide has worsened. One


member stated that some analysts expect a gradual
deceleration in global economic activity and a low
risk of recession. He/she added that given the more
adverse environment for world trade, manufacturing
has been one of the most affected sectors and that,
on the demand side, investment has been affected
by the impact of this environment on global value
chains. In contrast, he/she stated that services,
which is a more labor intensive sector and is less
exposed to global trade, has continued to expand in
the major economies, supporting consumption and
the labor market. The same member highlighted that
two factors have led to a reallocation of resources
from manufacturing to services: one medium- and
long-term factor, associated with a greater trade
integration and specialization, and a more recent
one, related to technological change and its use in
the services sector.

Most members indicated that the balance of risks to
global growth remains biased to the downside.
Among the risks that still persist the majority
mentioned the escalation of trade tensions between
the U.S. and its trade partners. In this respect, most
members warned that the recent announcements of
protectionist measures between China and the U.S.
affected investors’ sentiment, thus reversing the
optimism that had conveyed stability to global
markets. They also considered that this could lead to
a sharper economic deceleration. Most members
added the following risks: i) a more prolonged
weakening of some of the major economies than
expected; ii) new episodes of volatility in international
financial markets; and iii) the intensification of certain
political and geopolitical risks. Regarding the latter,
some members stressed the possibility of a
disorderly Brexit process, and one of them added the
tensions generated by North Korea and conflicts in
the Persian Gulf. Such member warned that this
could deteriorate consumer confidence, discourage
investment, weaken further the lack of dynamism of
global growth, increase the volatility in markets and
worsen global financial conditions. In this respect,
another member stated that the financial channels
could magnify the economic slowdown.

As to the evolution of labor markets in advanced
economies, one member highlighted the high levels
of job creation and the historically low levels of the
unemployment gaps. In the same line, he/she
emphasized the contrast between the high levels of
consumer confidence and the fast deterioration of
business climate observed since mid-2018. In the
case of the U.S., another member argued that its
anticipated deceleration reflects the fading of the
fiscal stimulus and its protectionist trade policy.
Some members mentioned that such policy could

1


-----

lead to a greater-than-anticipated deceleration. One
member underlined that the probability of a
recession in the U.S. taking place in the following
twelve months has decreased, albeit from relatively
high levels. However, the same member mentioned
his/her concern about the performance of some
financial indicators being similar to those observed in
the months prior to past recessions. In contrast,
another member noted that, although the yield curve
of Treasury bonds has inverted in certain tranches,
the lower term premium suggests that such
performance points more to a deceleration rather
than a recession.

Most members highlighted the lower dynamism in
emerging economies, although stating that some of
these have slightly rebounded recently. One
member pointed out that the tightening of global
financial conditions affected to a greater extent the
more vulnerable economies. Another member
mentioned that economic activity in China seems to
be responding favorably to the implemented stimuli
and stressed that the Chinese authorities have
expressed their intention to use the policy tools at
their disposal to attain an orderly adjustment of their
economy. However, he/she added that there is still
the risk that these actions turn out to be insufficient
and that shocks occur that could contribute to a
greater-than-anticipated slowdown of the economy.
Regarding the outlook for emerging economies,
some members anticipate a decreasing growth
trend. One member specified that this will be more
evident in Asian economies, which already show
signs of weakness after having exhibited a positive
performance in early 2019. Another member
stressed that emerging economies that are more
open to world trade face considerable challenges to
boost investment. In addition, he/she noted that in
some economies, idiosyncratic factors have

increased the uncertainty regarding the economic
outlook and have hindered investment. Some of the
downward risks for growth of emerging economies
that he/she highlighted are: i) the deterioration or
persistence of trade tensions; ii) that these give rise
to a greater deceleration of the Chinese economy
and to lower commodity prices; iii) that, with the aim
of attaining quantitative targets for the bilateral
deficits of larger economies, trade opportunities for
other economies are restrained; and iv) that a
restructuring of investment portfolios towards lowerrisk assets is observed. The same member pointed
out that the environment for these economies has
become more uncertain and that their performance
will be determined by idiosyncratic factors and by the
soundness of their macroeconomic foundations.


Most members mentioned that global inflationary
pressures remain at moderate levels, some of them
pointing out the downward pressures associated to
a lower global demand, although the majority
acknowledged that increases caused by higher
energy prices have also been observed. In the same
vein, most members mentioned that although
headline inflation has rebounded due to the above,
core inflation has decreased in several economies,
in some cases due to transitory factors and
methodological changes. The majority clarified that
in the U.S., the euro area and Japan, core inflation
lies below their central banks’ targets. In this sense,
one member added that in many developed
countries inflation expectations for the end of 2019
have been adjusted downwards, below such targets.
Most members noted that although labor markets in
advanced economies continue to exhibit strength
and certain wage increases, no inflationary

pressures have been detected so far. One member
considered that the performance of labor markets
could contribute to attain their inflation targets, but
he/she also stated that this is still subject to
uncertainty, given the moderate increases in labor
costs and the risks for global economic activity.
However, he/she warned that an unexpected
rebound in inflation cannot be ruled out, as a result
of a greater pass-through of wage increases or of
import tariffs on prices. Another member underlined
that in advanced economies a number of factors
have kept inflationary pressures structurally low,
such as the difficulty for firms to pass on cost
pressures associated with wage-related increases to
goods and services’ prices. He/she pointed out that
technological change and globalization have allowed
the fragmentation of production processes according
to the comparative advantages and to the cost
structure in different countries and regions. He/she
added that this has generated productivity gains and
more competitive markets, making more difficult for
firms to increase their prices. Finally, he/she
underlined that the future performance of inflation will
largely depend on the persistence or weakening of
these factors, and that although inflation in advanced
economies is expected to remain low, this scenario
is not free of upside risks. Regarding inflation in
emerging economies, one member stated that it
followed a slight upward trend, but also pointed out
that core inflation remained relatively stable, once
the effects of the exchange rate depreciation
dissipated and due to a lower global demand.

All members noted that given the environment of
lower inflationary pressures and of lower world
economic dynamism, expectations that the central
banks of the major economies will follow a more
accommodative monetary policy strategy have

2


-----

strengthened. Nevertheless, one member

underlined that the risk of monetary policy surprises
cannot be ruled out. All members mentioned that in
its May meeting the US Federal Reserve left the
target range for the federal funds rate unchanged,
and reiterated its message that it would be patient in
making adjustments to the range. One of them
added that the Fed has also adopted a strategy that
relies more on the most recent information and
without a predetermined direction or bias. Another
member pointed out that market variables are no
longer incorporating increases in the federal funds
rate in 2019.

Regarding international financial markets, most
members stated that the outlook of lower interest
rates in advanced economies led to an easing of
global financial conditions, to greater risk appetite,
and to a better performance of emerging economies’
assets and currencies. One of them highlighted the
gains that have been observed in the main
economies’ stock indices, the decline in government
and corporate bond interest rates, and the pause in
the strengthening of the US dollar. Some members
noted the greater capital flows to emerging
economies and one pointed out that these were
channeled particularly to fixed income assets and, to
a lesser extent, to stock markets, reflecting the
higher uncertainty about economic activity worldwide
and in emerging economies. Most members pointed
out that, more recently, markets were affected by the
escalation of trade tensions. Some members
commented that in this juncture investors sought
refuge in lower risk assets, and one of them
highlighted the moderation in capital flows to
emerging economies, as compared to the beginning
of the year, and even registering outflows of equity
assets in recent weeks. The same member warned
that political and geopolitical risks could aggravate
global financial conditions. In this regard, another
member noted that the recent negative performance
of financial markets could persist or even worsen,
given the resurfacing of different political and
geopolitical tensions. If the above materializes, it
would have an adverse effect particularly on
emerging economies. In addition, he/she warned
that, if upward monetary policy surprises materialize
in the main advanced economies, it would surely
lead to sharp adjustments in international financial
markets. Nevertheless, one member pointed out that
the escalating trade tensions have not reversed the
improvement in global financial conditions, and that
due to the above and to expectations of a continued
monetary policy easing, the risks to economic activity
and international markets remain biased to the
downside.


All members said that timely information suggests
that the weak performance that the Mexican
economy had been exhibiting since the previous
quarter intensified during the first quarter of 2019,
due to both external and domestic factors, some of
which are transitory. Most members noted that,
according to timely estimates, using seasonally
adjusted figures, GDP contracted 0.2% during the
first quarter of the year, and some members
specified that such weakening was greater than
anticipated. Most members indicated that transitory
factors affected economic activity. In this regard,
some of them mentioned the fuel distribution
problems, the blocking of railways, the strikes in
northern Mexico, and the delays at border crossings.
Given the above, one of the members deemed that
the recent growth figures are likely to overestimate
the weakness of economic activity. Another member
mentioned that the economic cycle measured by
INEGI’s Coincident and Leading Composite

Indicators System (SICCA, for its acronym in
Spanish) points to an upward phase covering 119
consecutive months at the end of the first quarter of
2019. The same member added that although this
phase has been the longest in Mexican history since
1980, it has also been characterized by the slowest
growth. He/she mentioned that its current stage
points to a temporary stagnation, without signaling
yet the beginning of a recession. Another member
stated that the Coincident Indicator of INEGI’s
Cyclical Indicators System (SIC, for its acronym in
Spanish) has lay below its long-term trend for 7
consecutive months, registering even more

prolonged negative contributions in certain indicators
related to employment and economic activity.

With regard to economic activity from the demand
side, most members noted that manufacturing
exports have decelerated. Some noted that this has
been associated with the negative impact on global
trade. They stressed that the decline in growth
expectations of US industrial production for 2019
implies a lower dynamism of external demand for
Mexico. One member warned that the slow growth of
non-oil exports has taken place despite certain
dynamism in the US economy and a very favorable
real exchange rate. Specifically, he/she highlighted
the deceleration of automotive exports. As for
domestic demand, most members emphasized the
persistent lack of dynamism of investment and the
recent slowdown of consumption. One member
noted that investment is expected to have continued
decelerating after the rebound observed in January.

Another member commented that a cause of
concern is that private investment has remained
practically stagnant since 2016 and that, since then,

3


-----

the cost of financing to firms has increased and the
growth rate of bank lending to firms, particularly to
small- and medium-size firms, has declined. The
same member added that it is also worrisome that a
secular slowdown in private consumption has been
observed since 2016, while the growth rate of credit
to households has declined considerably, which has
been accompanied by a significant increase in the
costs of such credits. In this regard, he/she indicated
that it is no coincidence that the slowdown in
consumption and the stagnation of investment have
coincided with a period in which the real interest rate
has increased significantly, given that, although
consumption and investment respond to different
determinants, interest rates are a key factor in their
evolution. He/she pointed out that the above shows
that the monetary policy transmission mechanism is
functioning through channels that affect real
variables. Another member stressed that the
weakness of investment has continued for

approximately four years, due to several factors,
such as the fall in public investment, fundamentally
explained by the strategy adopted to strengthen
public finances, and an environment of persisting
uncertainty. He/she specified that the stagnation of
investment has not responded to the adopted
monetary policy stance, since such stagnation
began when the reference rate was at 3%. He/she
added that recent surveys among entrepreneurs and
analysts do not assign a major role to monetary
policy as an explanatory factor of low growth rates.
On the other hand, one member warned that, given
different transitory and idiosyncratic factors, it is
foreseeable that GDP components on the

expenditure side will continue exhibiting negative
growth rates or rates very close to zero in the first
quarter. On the supply side, most members
emphasized that in the first quarter of the year
contractions were observed in the industrial and
services components. As to industrial production,
one member stressed that data up to March show a
downward trend in three out of its four main
components, along with a stagnation of the
manufacturing industry. Another member stressed
that the significant contraction in construction is a
cause of concern, while another one added that the
persistent fall in oil production is also worrisome.

Most members noted that given the GDP figures at
the beginning of 2019, growth expectations for the
year have deteriorated. One member noted that
growth expectations for 2019 by private sector
specialists surveyed by Banco de México have been
decreasing constantly for more than a year.
Nevertheless, some members indicated that a
recovery in the growth rate is expected starting from
the second quarter. One of them pointed out that this


could be driven by consumption, given the higher
real wages, the real increase in credit for
consumption and the increase in the purchasing
power of remittances. He/she commented that
positive, albeit marginal, contributions of private
investment and exports are foreseen. Likewise,
he/she pointed out that, in this scenario, along with
the implementation of the priority programs of the
new administration, a new phase of growth is likely
to begin. Regarding growth expectations for 2020,
another member pointed out that these have been
adjusted downwards from April 2018 to April 2019.
However, most members noted that in recent months
such expectations have recovered somewhat. In this
regard, another member mentioned that this seems
to reflect an arithmetic effect, as there are no
elements that lead to assume a more optimistic view.

All members pointed out that the balance of risks for
growth has become more uncertain and that it
continues biased to the downside, as a result of
external and domestic factors. Among the former, in
addition to the already described global risks, most
members added the possibility of obstacles in the
ratification process of the trade agreement reached
in North America, other actions that can affect trade
in the region and the risk that the US authorities
include Mexico in the list of countries subject to trade
retaliations. One member considered that, if the
ratification of the aforementioned agreement is
delayed, the investment outlook could become more
complicated. Another member added among

external risks the decline in the growth rate of
manufacturing production in the U.S. and the
potential implications of the fall in the Purchasing
Managers’ Indices in both that country and
worldwide. Among domestic risk factors, most
members highlighted the risk of additional reductions
in oil production, which may negatively affect public
revenues. One member added the uncertainty
regarding the direction of public policies in different
sectors, which has contributed to maintain an
adverse environment for investment. Another
member pointed out that greater uncertainty, apart
from undermining private investment, may also curb
consumption. The same member also added the
following downward risks to growth: i) the possibility
of a downgrading of Pemex’s credit rating, coupled
with a reduction in the country’s risk rating; ii) a
further delay in the implementation of the new
government’s priority programs; iii) that the new
government’s austerity program leads to a greater
inactivity of government than anticipated; iv) that the
real exchange rate appreciates and discourages
non-oil exports; v) that the growth of family
remittances starts to fade; and; vi) that the increase
in the purchasing power driven by the recent wage

4


-----

increases dwindles due to the difficulty to abate
inflation. As to medium-term downward risks, such
member noted the possibility of a recession in the
United States.

Some members argued that there are upside risks to
growth, such as the significant increase in consumer
confidence that has persisted for several months, the
increase in the total wage bill, the start of new social
programs aimed at segments of the population with
a high marginal propensity to consume, and a more
favorable performance of remittances. One member
added the following risk factors: i) a greater-thanexpected dynamism of the US economy, an early
ratification of the new trade agreement in North
America as well as an elimination of trade tariff and
non-tariff barriers imposed by US authorities on
Mexico; ii) a greater–than-expected upturn of private
investment due to positive signals from the
government; iii) an early start-up of the new public
investment projects, coupled with a higher-thanexpected return; and iv) the possibility of a higherthan-anticipated rebound effect resulting from a low
base of comparison.

Most members mentioned that the economy’s slack
conditions loosened towards the end of 2018 and
early 2019. One member pointed out that they
remain at a neutral level, while another member
noted that they are expected to widen in the following
quarters. One member stated that, considering the
current real GDP forecasts for the next two years, it
is reasonable to anticipate a negative output gap,
although below the one derived from statistical
estimates, given the probable decline in the country’s
growth potential over the last years. Such member
highlighted the paradox that, in an environment of
economic weakness, there have been increases in
different indicators of wage pressures, such as
contractual wages, IMSS-insured workers’ wages,
and unit labor costs in the manufacturing sector.
He/she stated that the upward trend of the latter has
become more evident since late 2018, due to wage
increases being above labor productivity. The same
member argued that the natural outcome of this
combination of trends has been a fall in formal
employment, an increase in informal labor, and a rise
in the unemployment rate, which has probably been
softened by the higher levels of employment in the
informal sector. He/she added that, naturally, the
contraction of employment has been more marked in
certain regions of the country, such as the northern
border zone, where greater wage adjustments have
been observed, even showing a sharp contrast with
the neighboring municipalities that have not been
affected by such adjustments.


As for the path of headline inflation, most members
mentioned its decline at the beginning of the year.
One member highlighted the unusually low monthly
inflation in January, due to the VAT reduction in the
border zone. Another member emphasized that after
accumulating 44 basis points in the first three
months, it was the lowest inflation for a first quarter
since Mexico’s Consumer Price Index (INPC, for its
acronym in Spanish) exists. Such member added
that, in February, the annual inflation rate lay
marginally below the upper limit of the variability
range for the first time since December 2016. One
member emphasized that inflation showed a clear
downward trend between September and February,
although it rebounded in March and April. The same
member added that cumulative inflation from
December to April has been the second lowest since
2000, as compared with the same period in previous
years. Another member pointed out that core
inflation, which reflects more accurately inflationary
pressures, registered a higher growth during
January-April of this year than in the same period of
the previous year and the second highest figure in
the last 5 years. All members underlined that
headline inflation rose from 4.00% to 4.41% between
March and April. Most members noted that the latter
figure is higher than expected and one member
further stated that headline inflation lay again above
the upper limit of the variability range. Another
member highlighted that inflation was affected by the
impact of major adjustments stemming from the peso
exchange rate and from significant pressures on the
non-core inflation component. One member pointed
out that the possibility of headline inflation turning out
higher during the second quarter of the year vis-à-vis
the first quarter, was expected given the change in
weights from the update of the CPI’s base year
adopted in mid-2018 and due to comparison base
effects.

Most members noted that the recent rise in headline
inflation was due to increases in its two components,
pointing out that the core inflation component
contributed in greater measure to such an increase.
As to this latter component, most members
emphasized that it remains at high levels and
recently rose further than expected, going from
3.55% in March to 3.87% in April. One member
added that this was the highest annual rate in the last
13 months. Some members pointed out that the
behavior of core inflation was due to the variation of
food merchandise prices, which continues to
increase, while that of services prices rebounded
recently. One member explained that the prices of
food merchandise, education and services other
than housing and education have grown at rates
near or above 5%. Most members mentioned that

5


-----

services prices were influenced by the calendar
effect, given that the Easter holiday this year took
place in April, while in 2018 it did so in March.
Nevertheless, they noted that, even after eliminating
this effect, services prices register an increase. One
member underlined that this effect is transitory and
that he/she expects that it would start to revert
starting from the third quarter of the year. Another
member added that services other than tourism are
not registering price increases as significant,
although their growth rate has not decreased either.
Such member pointed out that the rise in food
merchandise prices is worrisome. He/she stated
that, although INEGI reported that food merchandise
inflation was 4.75% in April, Coneval estimated that
the cost of the basic food basket used to measure
extreme poverty, increased 6% in the same period.
In this regard, such member further stated that
preserving the population’s purchasing power and
protecting the poorest sectors of the population
should be the priority. One member said that the
trend of core inflation showing a weak connection
between the price dynamics and the economy’s
cyclical position is of concern. Another member
highlighted that several measures to track trend core
inflation show persistence or even an upward trend.
Such member added that, given the deceleration of
economic activity, no demand pressures on prices
are observed at this moment and that this, in addition
to the performance of the peso exchange rate,
suggests that the recent path of core inflation is
explained mainly by supply shocks, stemming from
the indirect impact of food and energy prices, and by
the behavior of wages, together with a certain degree
of inertia of core inflation. One member pointed out
that it is too soon to draw conclusions about the
persistence of core inflation since it cannot be ruled
out that it may be due to the confluence of supply
shocks that will eventually fade away. As for noncore inflation, most members mentioned that it
increased from 5.47% to 6.08% from March to April,
partly reflecting that since the second fortnight of
February 2019, the downward path in the rate of
change of energy prices reverted.

As for inflation expectations, most members stated
that those for short- and medium-term headline
inflation increased recently. Some members noted
that this was due to the recent increase of headline
inflation and of some of its components.

Nevertheless, one member considered that inflation
expectations for the end of 2019 have been
decreasing after rebounding at the end of 2018, from
a median of 3.90% in November to one of 3.60% in
March and of 3.70% in April. Another member
explained that, between February and April, the
median for headline inflation expectations for 2020


remained at 3.60%. As for headline inflation
expectations for the long term, most members
expressed that they remained unchanged. As for
core inflation expectations, most members pointed
out that those for the short and medium terms
increased. One member added that, between
February and April, the median of such expectations
for the end of 2019 and for 2020 increased from
3.50% to 3.56% and from 3.48% to 3.50%,
respectively. One member considered that the
median of those corresponding to the end of 2019
has not changed significantly over the last months
and remains relatively stable at around 3.50%.
Another member warned that long-term core inflation
expectations have been converging to those of
headline inflation in the last years. In sum, most
members stated that all inflation expectations are
clearly above the 3% permanent target, with one
member specifying that this situation has been
observed for a long period. Some members
underlined that analysts’ inflation expectations for all
terms remain above those projected by Banco de
México. As for information drawn from market
instruments, most members pointed out that, after
having followed a downward trend, the medium- and
long-term inflationary risk premium recently

increased and remains at high levels. One member
considered that this points to a new increase of
inflationary risks in the medium and long terms.

Some members mentioned that the increases in
headline and core inflation and the evolution of their
determinants could lead to revisions to their foreseen
paths. One member highlighted that the future paths
have become more uncertain. Another member
noted that although headline inflation is foreseen to
resume a downward trend in the second half of 2019,
its convergence to the 3% target is expected to be
slower than anticipated, adding that this target
appears to be difficult to attain during the first half of
2020. In contrast, another member pointed out that,
in the absence of other shocks, it is feasible to be
very close to the 3% target towards the first half of
2020, given that the recent developments in inflation
have been according to or even better than what was
foreseen. In this regard, such member pointed out
that average annual headline inflation during the first
quarter of 2019 was in line with the forecast of the
last Quarterly Report.

As for inflation risks, most members highlighted the
possibility that the peso exchange rate comes under
pressure from external or domestic factors. The
majority added that inflation could be affected if
additional pressures on energy prices or on
agricultural and livestock product prices arise, if an
escalation of protectionist and compensatory

6


-----

measures worldwide materializes, or in case public
finances deteriorate. Moreover, most members
agreed that, given the magnitude of the increases to
the minimum wage, in addition to their possible direct
impact, there is the risk that these bring about high
wage revisions in a variety of sectors. Some
members expressed that a possible source of wage
pressures are the labor commitments subscribed
within the framework of the United States-MexicoCanada Agreement (USMCA). Some members
underlined that wage revisions in some sectors have
already exceeded productivity gains, which could
give rise to cost pressures and affect formal
employment. Some members mentioned that
available information suggests that wage revisions
may be putting pressure on core inflation, mainly
through prices of labor-intensive goods and services.
One member considered that although based on
available information it is too early to assess the
lighthouse effect that minimum wage increases may
have on other wages and, subsequently, on the price
level, it is important to monitor the economy’s
absorption capacity to ensure that such increases do
not generate additional inflationary pressures. The
same member stated that it is difficult to analyze this
phenomenon due to the characteristics of the labor
market where minimum wage increases mostly
impact the low income deciles and the informal
sector of the economy. He/she warned that the
analysis is further complicated by the extraordinary
increase in the minimum wage level in the country’s
northern border zone, which could impinge upon
contractual wage negotiations for firms not only at
the border zone but also in the rest of the country.
He/she also highlighted that the increase of tourist
services prices is of concern since, due to their labor
intensive nature, they are more exposed to wage
increases, and that such price increases may be the
result of an undesirable pass-through effect. Another
member emphasized that, up to now, there is no
evidence that increases in the minimum wage, both
at the national level and in the border zone, have
translated into significant inflationary pressures.
He/she noted that, in the case of the northern border
zone, where such pressures may have been greater,
inflation has been even lower than in the rest of the
country.

Some members added the risk that the persistence
shown by core inflation could lead to a greater
resistance to decline of medium- and long-term
inflation expectations. One member stated that the
recent dynamics of core inflation implies the
materialization of some of the upwards risks that had
been mentioned on previous occasions. Finally,
some members highlighted the risk that the widening
of economic slack does not translate into lesser


pressures on inflation, given the factors that have
been putting upward pressure on core inflation. As
for downside risks, the same members mentioned
the possibility that the prices of certain goods
included in the non-core subindex could register
lower variations and that economic slack could widen
more than expected. One member considered that,
in his/her opinion, such balance is relatively stable.
The same member argued that risks have decreased
as compared to those at the beginning of the year,
due to the fact that the improvement of global
financial conditions implies lower pressures on the
peso exchange rate and, eventually, on inflation,
among other factors. He/she added that stable
energy product prices are expected on account of
the price setting policy of the new administration.
Most members pointed out that, although there has
been an intensification of certain downside risk
factors, like the greater slack in the economy, there
are other factors that could make inflation remain at
high levels and, therefore, deviate from its foreseen
path, given the factors that have restrained core
inflation from decreasing. Thus, most members
agreed that, in an environment of high uncertainty, it
is deemed that the balance of risks for inflation
relative to its forecasted trajectory remains biased to
the upside.

As for domestic financial markets, most members
pointed out that the Mexican peso appreciated
compared to the levels observed during the last
monetary policy decision, although it has exhibited
higher volatility. Some members mentioned that
trading conditions in the foreign exchange market
point to an orderly functioning of such market. Most
members stated that Mexico’s relatively high interest
rate spreads with respect to other economies have
contributed to the positive performance of the peso.
Regarding interest rates, the majority noted that
these recently increased, mainly those for the
medium and long terms, which was associated with
the escalation of the trade tensions that affected
international financial markets. Some members
added that the higher-than-expected inflation figures
also contributed to such increase. Notwithstanding
the above, one member highlighted that trading
conditions in the fixed income market are at
adequate levels. Another member pointed out that
the stock market exhibited a marginal increase
during this period. Some members delved into the
performance of domestic financial markets and
analyzed their development throughout a longer
period, particularly since the last quarter of 2018.
One member argued that it is useful to divide the
analysis into two periods. During the first period, from
October to the first half of December 2018, the peso
depreciated significantly, while interest rates on

7


-----

government bonds, risk premia, and the stock
market index exhibited a negative performance.
Such member emphasized that this was due to a
generalized strengthening of the US dollar given the
outlook of a further tightening of monetary policy in
the United States as well as the natural higher
uncertainty present at the beginning of a new federal
administration, and to some controversial public
policy decisions. He/she mentioned that, during the
second period, extending from the second week of
December 2018 to date, the Mexican peso has been
one of the best performing currencies. He/she added
that interest rates on government bonds and risk
premia decreased, while the stock market resumed
a positive trend. He/she noted that this improvement
was due partly to the aforementioned international
factors and also to the fact that the natural
uncertainty associated with the beginning of a new
federal administration has been fading as some key
decisions have been taken. Among these, he/she
highlighted the USMCA, the fiscal discipline included
in the Economic Package for 2019, the successful
negotiation with the bond holders of the New Mexico
City International Airport, and the fight to deter fuel
theft. He/she considered that all of these factors
appear to have contributed to restore, at least
partially, an environment of greater confidence and
certainty. Therefore, this member noted that the risks
for domestic financial markets have been

decreasing. Another member pointed out that these
markets have exhibited a positive performance
despite the uncertainty associated with the

announcement of new public policy measures. Most
members agreed that risks prevail which may affect
the performance of domestic financial markets, and
highlighted the uncertainty regarding the external
environment and the risks regarding the credit
outlook of both Pemex and the overall Mexican
economy. One member underlined the uncertainty
and the risk factors still prevailing have domestic
assets trading at a discount or with an additional risk
premium relative to their behavior in the last years or
with respect to their current credit ratings.

The majority of the members warned that the current
environment continues to pose significant mediumand long-term risks that could affect the country's
macroeconomic conditions, its growth capacity and
the economy’s price formation process. Most
members stressed that it is particularly important, in
addition to maintaining a prudent and firm monetary
policy, to promote the adoption of measures to foster
an environment of confidence and certainty for
investment and higher productivity, and to

consolidate public finances in a sustainable way.
One member noted the importance of promoting the
adoption of new technologies, strengthening human


capital, reducing opportunity gaps and generating
the necessary incentives for growth and

development. In this context, the majority mentioned
that it is particularly relevant that the fiscal targets of
the Economic Package for 2019 are met and that
strengthening the rule of law, tackling corruption and
fighting insecurity are imperative. Delving deeper
into public finances, one member noted that there is
a growing concern about a shortfall in public
revenues, due mainly to lower oil revenues. He/she
warned that this problem could worsen due to the
economic slowdown and to lower tax revenues
derived from the support measures for Pemex. In
addition, he/she stressed that during the current
fiscal year, various factors could put pressure on
public finances, among which the following stand
out: i) expectations of lower revenues, without
considering the decrease in fiscal revenues due to
the support provided to Pemex; ii) the need to reduce
Pemex’s expenditures; and iii) the increase in the
cost of the public debt, which could even increase
further during the rest of the year subject to the
behavior of the sovereign risk and the inflation
premium. Finally, such member warned that public
spending has been reallocated in detriment of public
investment, and that together with the lack of vigor of
private investment, this has adverse effects not only
on economic activity in the short term but also in the
medium and long run by affecting productivity and
the economy’s growth potential. Another member
mentioned that meeting the fiscal targets implies in
the short term addressing in a timely manner the
pressures stemming from the developments in oil
production, the measures to support Pemex, and
from a lower than expected economic growth. In this
regard, most members pointed out the concern
about the persisting reduction in oil production, which
has led to lower-than-budgeted oil revenues, leaving
the federal government with less room for maneuver
to implement its priority projects and meet its fiscal
targets for 2019 and 2020.

Delving into Pemex’s situation, most members
mentioned that the federal government’s efforts to
support this state-owned company, such as the
recent agreements to lessen its tax burden and
refinance its debt, although they point in the right
direction, it is necessary to solve the company’s
structural problems. Such members added that this
company has structural problems and that it is
essential not only that it submits a credible and
functional business plan, which does not jeopardize
the federal government’s fragile fiscal balance, but
also that it offers a permanent solution. In this
context, the majority highlighted that its credit rating
is a risk factor for domestic financial markets and for
the country’s economy. One member underlined that

8


-----

it is important that the actions that are adopted
contribute to generate confidence and to anchor
more effectively the outlook for the Mexican
economy. Another member noted that according to
experts, returns on projects involving oil exploration
and production are far higher than those involving oil
refining. The same member added that neither
Pemex nor the federal government have the
resources to make the necessary investments.
He/she argued that it is also necessary to promote
private investment in this sector as well as to offer
legal certainty to private companies’ contracts and to
improve Pemex’s corporate governance. Some
members mentioned the risks associated with the
decision to build the oil refinery in Dos Bocas. One
member pointed out that the federal government has
had to adjust public spending for 2019, which could
compromise physical investment in Pemex. Finally,
another member underlined that markets’

questioning regarding the institution’s solvency, the
strength of public finances and their possible impact
on the economy, will continue as long as Pemex
does not have a business model that opens the
perspective of a recovery of crude oil production and
of a financially viable institution in the long run.

In addition, one member highlighted that in the last
years the economy and price formation have faced
considerable shocks, both external and domestic,
and that for this reason both fiscal and monetary
policies had to be strengthened. Such member
stated that having a sound macroeconomic policy
contributes to an orderly adjustment of the economy
and to the attainment of the inflation target, and
provides the necessary room to adopt the required
actions to foster greater certainty and confidence. In
this regard, the same member expressed that is
necessary to avoid that economic deceleration
occurs with the adoption of policies that could affect
the economy’s price formation, keeping inflation
under pressure and above its target.

All members considered that the current monetary
policy stance is consistent with the convergence of
inflation to its target within the time frame in which
monetary policy operates. Nevertheless, most
members expressed their concern about the
persistence exhibited by core inflation. One member
stated that the recent increase in core inflation
reflects the challenges to consolidate its

convergence to 3%. Another member mentioned
that expectations of the US Federal Reserve
adopting a more accommodative monetary policy
stance relieves the pressure to synchronize Mexico’s
monetary policy with that of the U.S., providing
greater room for maneuver to Banco de México.
Such member added that this allows the central bank


to focus on its main goal of maintaining price stability
and also meet its additional objectives related with
financial stability, and even center its attention on
how the economy positions itself in the business
cycle. In this regard, such member pointed out that
monetary policy can influence the business cycle
only around the long-term growth trend, but it cannot
influence the trend itself. He/she considered that
monetary policy’s most important contribution to a
country’s economic development is to guarantee
price stability, which is a necessary condition for
sustained economic growth, but which is far from
being a sufficient condition.

The majority of members agreed that the evolution
of inflation expectations is an important factor to
consider for monetary policy conduction. One
member pointed out that despite the tight monetary
policy, analysts estimate that core inflation will not
decline considerably in the next two years,
anticipating a path significantly above Banco de
México’s forecasts. Such member mentioned that
given the decline in inflation in early 2019, inflation
expectations for the end of the year were adjusted
downwards, and several analysts foresaw that
Banco de México would start a cycle of monetary
policy easing. However, just as the central bank had
warned at the time, it was not clear that such
downward trend could be sustained in the short term,
as proven by the recent increase in inflation.
Moreover, he/she also highlighted that the monetary
policy stance does not depend only on the behavior
of a single variable. The same member underlined
that although the growth in the annual inflation rate
in April should not have been surprising, most
analysts did not anticipate it and ended up revising
upwards their expectations for the end of 2019.
He/she considered that the latter suggests that a
shift towards a more accommodative message in the
previous monetary policy statement would have
been very premature. However, he/she emphasized
that the anticipated increase in headline inflation for
the second quarter of the year is a temporary
phenomenon that might fade away as long as the
current monetary policy stance is maintained long
enough to ensure that observed inflation and its
expectations converge clearly to inflation’s

permanent target, as has been forecasted.

One member mentioned that the increase in longterm core inflation expectations is difficult to explain
in a context where inflation has been decreasing,
short-term inflation expectations have remained
relatively stable and the risks to inflation have
diminished. In this regard, he/she argued that the
tone of the monetary policy statement is an
economic policy tool and that, when private agents

9


-----

have imperfect information on the state of the
economy, they use the information provided by the
central bank to update their beliefs about such state.
He/she argued that the tone of the central bank’s
communications may constitute a mechanism for
coordinating or confirming private agents’ beliefs.
He/she considered that the tone of the last three
monetary policy statements has been relatively
pessimistic and has highlighted the potential upward
risks to inflation, which might be one of the reasons
behind the recent increases in short- and long-term
inflation expectations. Another member argued that
the behavior of such expectations is not related with
a pessimistic message by the central bank regarding
the path of inflation, given that the forecasts
published are based on objective criteria and, up to
the last Quarterly Report, they estimated that
inflation would converge to its target in the first half
of 2020.

Most members noted that the current environment
poses a complex outlook and dilemmas for monetary
policy. They argued that, although the weakening of
economic activity and the widening of economic
slack should mitigate inflationary pressures, there
are still significant risks that could increase inflation.
Some members expressed that the central bank
should monitor the evolution of the economy so that
the tight monetary policy does not continue for too
long. One of them warned that this could generate
greater economic slack, lead to an excessive
appreciation of the real exchange rate and to
downward pressures on export activity, and attract
volatile capital flows, which, in the long run, could
increase the instability and vulnerability in the foreign
exchange market. He/she mentioned that, in view of
a stable balance of risks for inflation, the upward
cycle of interest rates should be thought of as
concluded, unless extraordinary events occur.
Nevertheless, he/she acknowledged that it is
important for Banco de México to send a clear signal
of prudence and commitment to complying with its
main mandate. He/she stated that for the monetary
policy decision to contribute to attain the inflation
target and to maintain financial stability, the tone of
the monetary policy statement should be more
neutral than that of previous ones, thus contributing
to anchor inflation expectations. He/she stressed
that inflation has behaved accordingly to the central
bank’s projections, that the inflation target is
expected to be attained in the near future, and that
inflation risks have diminished. Another member
argued that it is key for the monetary policy
statement to emphasize that, despite the weakening
of economic activity, the balance of risks to inflation
has deteriorated in an environment of significant
domestic and external uncertainty. Most members


warned about the risks of easing the monetary policy
stance too early, in an environment where: i)
headline and core inflation have increased; and ii)
the future path of these indicators considers
additional pressures and has become more
uncertain. One member mentioned that this could
lead to higher volatility in domestic financial markets,
undo the progress achieved in granting higher real
wages and even foster a less favorable

macroeconomic environment for sustained

economic growth. Another member pointed out that
although the negative output gap forecast should
contribute to ease inflationary pressures, there is the
risk that supply shocks on inflation and, specifically,
the trends that are being observed in wages, lead to
a de-anchoring of long-term inflation expectations,
especially in an environment of increases in shortterm headline inflation expectations and of a
persisting upward trend in long-term core inflation
expectations. He/she emphasized the risk of core
inflation following an inertial behavior and also added
the importance of exercising extreme caution in light
of the challenges that might arise in a situation of
high domestic and external uncertainty. Some
members noted that under these circumstances, an
easing of the monetary policy stance or a premature
message in this direction would validate the above
mentioned inflation expectations, would call into
question the commitment to the inflation target and
would affect the central bank’s credibility. One
member pointed out that this could even affect
economic activity negatively, as it would be reflected
in upward adjustments of long-term interest rates.
Some members added that the current monetary
policy stance should be maintained for as long as it
is required to guarantee the convergence of inflation,
and one of them stressed that this is the only way for
inflation expectations to begin decreasing. Most
members indicated that the central bank should be
prepared to respond to the extent that is required to
attain such convergence and considered that, given
the environment of both external and domestic
uncertainty, Banco de México should maintain a firm
and cautious policy stance.

**3. MONETARY POLICY DECISION**

To guide its monetary policy actions, Banco de
México’s Governing Board follows closely the
development of inflation vis-à-vis its forecasted
trajectory, taking into account the monetary policy
stance and the time frame in which monetary policy
operates as well as available information on all
inflation determinants and on medium- and longterm inflation expectations, including the balance of
risks for such factors. Monetary policy must respond
prudently if for any reason the uncertainty faced by

10


-----

the economy increases considerably. Although
headline and core inflation have increased, these
developments are considered to be transitory and
the current monetary policy stance consistent with
the convergence of inflation to its target within the
time frame in which monetary policy operates. For
this reason, Banco de México’s Governing Board
decided unanimously to leave the target for the
overnight interbank interest rate unchanged at
8.25%. Considering the risks to consolidate a low
and stable inflation as well as those the economy’s
price formation is subject to, the Governing Board
will continue to follow closely all factors and elements
of uncertainty that have an impact on both inflation
and its outlook, and will take the necessary actions
so that the reference rate is kept at a level consistent
with the convergence of headline inflation to Banco
de México’s target within the period in which
monetary policy operates.

Banco de México’s Governing Board will maintain a
prudent monetary policy stance and, under the
current environment of uncertainty, will follow closely
the potential pass-through of exchange rate
fluctuations to prices, Mexico’s monetary policy
stance relative to that of the U.S.-in an external
environment that it is still subject to risks- and the
behavior of slack conditions and cost-related
pressures in the economy. In the presence and
possible persistence of factors that, by their nature,
involve risks to both inflation and inflation

expectations, monetary policy will be adjusted in a
timely and firm manner to achieve the convergence
of inflation to its 3% target and to strengthen the
anchoring of medium- and long-term inflation
expectations so that they attain such target.


**4. VOTING**

Alejandro Díaz de León-Carrillo, Irene EspinosaCantellano, Gerardo Esquivel-Hernández, Javier
Eduardo Guzmán-Calafell and Jonathan Ernest
Heath-Constable voted in favor of leaving the target
for the overnight interbank interest rate unchanged
at 8.25%.

**5. DISSENTING VOTES**

**Against the Monetary Policy Statement (press**
**release).** Gerardo Esquivel-Hernández

Although I agreed with the decision to keep the target
interest rate level constant, I do not agree with the
press release that informs about such decision.
Specifically, I differ on both the restrictive tone that
characterizes it as well as the conclusion reached
with respect to the balance of risks to inflation. This
is based on the fact that inflation observed
throughout 2019 has behaved in line with (or even
more favorably) than what was expected in late
2018. I consider that the recent change in the
monetary policy stance of several developed
countries as well as the marked deceleration of
Mexico’s economic activity allowed for releasing a
monetary policy statement with a more neutral tone.
I am particularly concerned that inflation

expectations and inflation risk premia are increasing
despite the relatively favorable behavior of inflation
in 2019. It is not totally unlikely that such
expectations are being affected by the central bank’s
communication. I also differ with the emphasis given
to the minimum wage increase as an upward risk to
inflation. After five months of this increase, there is
no convincing evidence that this is in fact occurring.

11


-----

**ANNEX**

The information in this Annex was prepared for this
meeting by the staff of Banco de México’s General
Directorate of Economic Research and General
Directorate of Central Bank Operations and Payment
Systems. It does not necessarily reflect the
considerations of the members of the Governing
Board as to the monetary policy decision.

**A.1. External conditions**

**A.1.1. World economic activity**

Since the second half of 2018, world economic
activity has exhibited a decelerating trend, although
a moderate recovery was observed during the first
quarter of 2019 in some of the major economies such
as the United States, the United Kingdom, the euro
area and China, largely associated with short-run
factors (Chart 1). Although certain risks to world
economic growth decreased due to, among other
factors, stronger expectations that the central banks
of the major economies will adopt a more
accommodative monetary policy stance and China’s
announcement of new fiscal and monetary stimuli
measures, the balance of risks for the global
economy continues biased to the downside. Among
the risks that stand out are the effects of the recent
escalation of trade tensions between the U.S. and
China and the possibility that these tensions spread
to other regions; the possibility that some of the major
economies continue to exhibit lackluster growth; new
episodes of volatility in international financial
markets; and the intensification of certain political
and geopolitical risks.

In the United States, during the first quarter of 2019,
economic activity grew at a seasonally adjusted
annualized quarterly rate of 3.2%, after having
registered a rate of 2.2% during the fourth quarter of
2018 (Chart 2). This rebound was due to the strong
growth of net exports and inventory investment. In
contrast, the growth of domestic demand moderated,
reflecting the slowdown of private consumption
spending and business’ fixed investment, although
the latest indicators point to a recovery of these
components during the second quarter of the year.
For the medium term, expectations that US economic
growth will moderate remain as the effects of the
fiscal stimuli implemented in that country in
December 2017 fade away.


**Chart 1**

**World GDP Growth**

Annual percentage change, s. a.

12

10

8

6

4

2

0

-2

World

-4 Advanced economies

Emerging and developing economies Q1

-6

2001 2003 2005 2007 2009 2011 2013 2015 2017 2019

s. a. / Seasonally adjusted figures.
Note: GDP calculations for Q1 2019 include estimates for some countries.
The sample of countries used in the calculations accounts for 85.5% of
world GDP measured by purchasing power parity.
Source: Prepared by Banco de México with data from Haver Analytics and
International Monetary Fund (IMF).

**Chart 2**

**United States: Real GDP and its Components**

Annualized quarterly percentage change and

contributions in percentage points, s. a.

6

4

2

0

-2 Public spending

Net exports
Inventories
Non-residential investment

-4

Residential investment
Private consumption
Total

-6

I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV I

2016 2017 2018 2019

s. a. / Seasonally adjusted figures.
Source: Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA).

Industrial production in the United States contracted
at a monthly rate of 0.5% in April, after having grown
0.2% in March. This decline was associated with the
monthly fall of 3.5% in electricity and gas production
as well as the 0.5% contraction in manufacturing. In
particular, the poor performance of manufacturing
production has been practically generalized,

reflecting the effects of a weaker global demand, the
appreciation of the US dollar, and the slowing down
of domestic demand in that country. In addition,
forward-looking indicators, such as the component of
new orders of the Purchasing Managers Index (PMI),
continue to suggest that the weakness of

manufacturing production may continue in the short
run.

12


-----

The US labor market tightened further at the
beginning of 2019. In March and April, 226,000 new
jobs were created on average, figure above the one
required to meet the growth of the labor force. The
US unemployment rate decreased again, from 3.8%
in February to 3.6% in April, reaching its lowest level
in nearly five decades. Indicators such as job
openings and initial unemployment claims also
suggest a further tightening of the labor market. In
this context, wages continued registering certain
growth.

In the euro area, GDP growth recovered slowly by
increasing from a seasonally adjusted annualized
quarterly rate of 0.9% during the fourth quarter of
2018 to one of 1.5% during the first quarter of this
year, reflecting the relative strength of domestic
demand, which was driven by the high levels of
consumer confidence, the accommodative monetary
conditions, and fiscal stimuli. The above mentioned
offset the weakness of external demand and the
more prolonged than expected negative effects of
idiosyncratic factors in some of the region’s
economies and sectors. Nevertheless, forwardlooking indicators, such as the PMI and business
confidence suggest that the weakness of certain
economies may extend into the second quarter.
Despite the latter, the labor market remained tight.
Indeed, the unemployment rate decreased from
7.8% in February to 7.7% in March.

In Japan, indicators available on first quarter of 2019
of retail sales, capital orders, industrial production
and imports suggest a weakening of domestic
demand. Certain forward-looking indicators suggest
that economic activity will continue being relatively
weak during the second quarter. In this context, the
labor market continued to remain tight as reflected by
the unemployment rate, which increased from 2.3%
in February to 2.5% in March, due mainly to an
increase in the number of quits while the rate of new
job openings in relation to that of employment
applications remained at its highest levels in the last
46 years.

In emerging economies, economic activity has
shown a heterogeneous performance during the first
quarter of the year. On the one hand, the growth rate
of the Chinese economy recovered, reflecting the
effects of the stimulus measures adopted since the
end of 2018, among which the tax cuts and greater
spending in infrastructure stand out. On the other
hand, other emerging economies, such as Russia,
Hungary, Romania, India, Taiwan, and South Africa,
continued to grow at a slower rate and some of them
even contracted.


International prices of commodities exhibited

different trends during the last weeks. On the one
hand, in most of April, crude oil prices increased as
a result of several factors, such as the previously
agreed cuts in oil production quotas among OPEC
member countries; the fall in oil production in Iran,
Libya and Venezuela due to the escalation of internal
and external conflicts in these countries; and the
announcement by the United States on imposing
again sanctions to Iranian crude oil sales starting in
May. However, towards late April, crude oil prices
decreased due to the guarantees of certain
producers, particularly Saudi Arabia, that they would
raise their production if an unbalance in the supply of
crude oil was observed. The escalation of trade
tensions between the United States and China in
May also contributed to the downward adjustment of
crude oil prices. On the other hand, industrial metal
prices fell, given the uncertainty in financial markets
and the outlook of a lower dynamism in global
economic activity. Finally, grain prices fell as a result
of an increase in supply worldwide, given the betterthan-expected performance of winter crops and
favorable climate conditions.

**A.1.2. Monetary policy and international financial**
**markets**

Although headline inflation in most advanced
economies rebounded due to the increase in energy
prices, core inflation decreased in many of them
(Chart 3). In the United States, core inflation
measured by the personal consumption expenditure
deflator (PCE) moderated from an annual rate of
1.7% in February to 1.6% in March, partly due to
decreases associated with transitory factors and
methodological changes that affected relevant items,
such as clothing and certain financial services. In the
euro area, core inflation increased due to the
arithmetic calendar effect caused by the change of
month in the Easter holiday between 2018 and 2019
on the prices of certain tourist packages, while in
Japan this increase was partly due to the introduction
of new models of domestic appliances. In both
regions, both inflation and inflation expectations
drawn from financial instruments remain

considerably below their central banks’ targets. In
this environment, expectations that the central banks
of major advanced economies will adopt a more
accommodative monetary policy have strengthened
(Chart 4). In most emerging economies, inflation
remained close to their respective central banks’
targets and, in some cases, even below them.

13


-----

**Selected Advanced Economies: Core Inflation**


3 United States
Euro area
Japan 1/
Canada 2/
United Kingdom

2

1


0

-1


2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019


1/ Excludes fresh food, energy, and the direct effect of the consumption tax
increase.
2/ Excludes food, energy, and the effect of adjustments on indirect taxes
(CPI-XFET).
Source: Haver Analytics, BEA, Statistical Office of the European Union
(Eurostat), and Statistics Bureau (Japan).

**Chart 4**

**Reference Rates and Implied Trajectories in**


3.5% **― US Federal Reserve*** Forecasts

**― Bank of England**

3.0% **― Bank of Japan**

**― Bank of Canada**

**― European Central Bank deposit rate**

2.5% **― OIS implicit trajectory 13 May 2019**

**--- OIS implicit trajectory 25 Mar 2019**

2.0% **--- OIS implicit trajectory 31 Dec 2018**

1.5%

1.0%

0.5%

0.0%

-0.5%

-1.0% End of 2018 End of 2019 End of 2020

2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020

|Chart 3 ected Advanced Economies|s: Core|e Inflatio|on|
|---|---|---|---|
|ected Advanced Economie Annual percentage ch United States Euro area Japan 1/ Canada 2/ United Kingdom 2015 2016 2017|s: Core ange|Inflati|on arch pril 19|
||2018|M A 20||
|des fresh food, energy, and the direct eff e. des food, energy, and the effect of adju ET). Haver Analytics, BEA, Statistical Offic at), and Statistics Bureau (Japan). Chart 4 ference Rates and Implied OIS Curves1/ Percent ― US Federal Reserve* ― Bank of England ― Bank of Japan ― Bank of Canada ― European Central Bank deposit rate ― OIS implicit trajectory 13 May 2019 --- OIS implicit trajectory 25 Mar 2019 --- OIS implicit trajectory 31 Dec 2018|ect of the stments o e of the E Trajec Forecasts|consumpti n indirect uropean tories i||
|||||
|||||


1/ OIS: Fixed floating interest rate swap where the fixed interest rate is the
effective overnight reference rate.

- In the case of the US observed reference rate, the average interest rate of
the federal funds target range is used (2.25% - 2.50%).
Source: Bloomberg.

In its May meeting, the US Federal Reserve left the
target range for the federal funds rate unchanged at
2.25-2.5%. In its statement, the Federal Open Market
Committee (FOMC) expressed that, although GDP
growth during the first quarter was higher than
expected, both private consumer spending and gross
fixed investment decelerated. It also noted that
inflation, both headline and core, decreased and is
below its 2% target, while reiterating that it will be
patient in making future adjustments to the policy
rate. On the other hand, although recently most of its
members have expressed their concern about the
low levels of inflation, the Fed’s Chairman considered
that the recent decrease of this indicator is
apparently temporary and that, for this reason, the


current monetary policy stance is still appropriate and
that, for the time being, there are no clear bases to
determine the path that the federal funds rate will
follow. In this context, the federal funds rate futures
continue to suggest a cut of 25 basis points in the
reference rate in 2019 and an additional one in 2020.

In its April meeting, the European Central Bank
(ECB) left its benchmark rate unchanged at 0%, its
key deposit facility rate at -0.4% and its key marginal
lending facility rate at 0.25%. As to its forward
guidance, the ECB reiterated that key interest rates
will remain at the current levels at least until the end
of 2019. This central bank confirmed that it will
continue reinvesting its balance securities for an
extended period of time, past the date of an eventual
increase of its key interest rates, while pointing out
that the details on the precise terms of the targeted
longer-term refinancing operations (TLTRO-III) will
be communicated in the following monetary policy
meetings. Additionally, the ECB has reiterated that it
has sufficient instruments to attain its objectives,
while it will also analyze the need to implement
measures to mitigate the adverse effects that the
negative interest rates may have on banking
intermediation.

In its April meeting, the Bank of Japan left its shortterm policy interest rate unchanged at -0.1% and its
long-term interest rate (indexed to its 10-year bond)
at 0%. Additionally, this central bank modified its
policy rate forward guidance, pointing out that it will
not achieve its 2% inflation target before March 2022
and that it will keep short- and long-term interest
rates at extremely low levels until at least the spring
of 2020.

In its April meeting, the Bank of Canada left its policy
interest rate unchanged at 1.75%. It also reaffirmed
the message regarding the expected path of that rate
by pointing out that the current conditions suggest
that the target rate will remain below its neutral level,
which was revised downwards by 25 basis points,
leaving it at a range of 2.25%-3.25%. This central
bank also adjusted its growth estimates for 2019 to
the downside, highlighting that it will follow closely
the development of household spending, oil markets,
and trade policies worldwide. In this context, market
instruments are reflecting the outlook that there will
not be any rate adjustments in the following two
years.

In its May meeting, the Bank of England left its base
rate (Bank rate) unchanged at 0.75%, highlighting
that economic activity has been stronger than
previously anticipated, driven by the strength of
consumption and higher inventory accumulation,
which appears to have offset the weakness of fixed

14


-----

27

24

21

18

15

12

9

6

3

0

-3

-6

-9

-12

-15


investment stemming from the higher uncertainty
regarding Brexit. In its latest inflation report, this
central bank raised its growth projections from 1.2 to
1.5% for 2019, from 1.5 to 1.6% for 2020, and from
1.9 to 2% for 2021, due mostly to expectations of less
restrictive financial conditions. As to its monetary
policy, the Bank of England reiterated that, although
the monetary policy stance of a gradual and limited
increase of the reference rate continues to be
appropriate, it will be adjusted in whichever direction
is necessary. In particular, it highlighted that this
adjustment will depend on the conditions of the Brexit
and its consequent impact on aggregate supply and
demand and on the pound sterling exchange rate.

In most emerging economies, central banks refrained
from modifying their monetary policy stances,
although with certain exceptions. On the one hand,
the People’s Bank of China adopted measures to
ease its financial conditions by reducing the reserve
requirements of banking institutions and by injecting
liquidity through open market operations. On the
other hand, the central banks of India, Malaysia, and
the Philippines cut their policy rates.

During April, financial markets performed positively,
driven mostly by expectations that the main central
banks will adopt a more accommodative monetary
policy in the foreseeable future. Additionally, some
risk factors associated with concerns about an abrupt
deceleration of the Chinese economy and a
disorderly Brexit moderated.

Notwithstanding the above, during the first fortnight
of May, financial markets reverted the good
performance they had exhibited since late March,
due mainly to the escalation of trade tensions
between the United States and China, which was
reflected in the reciprocal announcements of tariff
increases on several products by these two
countries. In addition, certain geopolitical risks have
resurfaced, particularly those related with missile
tests by North Korea and the continuation of the Iran
nuclear deal.

Thus, since Banco de Mexico’s past monetary policy
meeting, stock indices in several countries posted
mixed results, with the fall of the Chinese stock
exchanges standing out. The interest rates of
government bonds in advanced economies

registered minor changes, while the US dollar
appreciated against most currencies, driven by
higher interest rates than in other countries, the
relatively improved performance of the US economy
as well as the search for safe haven assets after the
escalation of trade tensions between the United
States and China (Chart 5).


1/ MSCI Emerging Markets Index (includes 24 countries).
2/ DXY: Weighted average of the nominal exchange rate of the six main
world-traded currencies (calculated by Intercontinental Exchange, ICE) with
the following weights: EUR (57.6%), JPY (13.6%), GBP (11.9%), CAD
(9.1%), SEK (4.2%), and CHF (3.6%).
3/ J.P. Morgan Index constructed from a weighted average of the nominal
exchange rate of emerging economies’ currencies with the following
weights: TRY (8.3%), RUB (8.3%), HUF (8.3%), ZAR (8.3%), BRL (11.1%),
MXN (11.1%), CLP (11.1%), CNH (11.1%), INR (11.1%), and SGD (11.1%).
Source: Bloomberg and ICE.

Overall, the assets of emerging economies

registered losses as aversion for riskier assets
increased (Chart 6). Certain economies, Argentina
and Turkey in particular, continued to be affected by
idiosyncratic factors, as reflected by the depreciation
of their currencies, the rises in their interest rates and
by the increment in their default risk.

In this context, significant uncertainty factors persist
that may trigger a higher volatility in international
financial markets and a further deterioration of
growth expectations worldwide. Among the factors
that stand out are: the possibility of a more
pronounced deceleration of economic activity; a
greater deterioration of US-China bilateral relations;
the risk of trade tensions spreading to other regions;
a disorderly Brexit; a less gradual normalization of
monetary policy than expected; and an escalation of
political and geopolitical risks.

15


**Graph 5**

**Change in Selected Financial Indicators**

**(March 25, 2019 – May 13, 2019)**

Percent, basis points

14%

**<-- Stock markets** **<-- Currencies** **10-year government bond**

12% **yields-->**

Italy

10%

8%

Canada

6% United Kingdom

DAX (Germany)

4%

2%0% Eurostoxx (Europe)Nikkei (Japan)FTSE-100 (UK)CAC 40 (France)S&P 500 (U.S.) JPYDXY 2/CAD United StatesJapan

-2% IBEX (Spain)FTSE MIB (Italy)EM 1/ EURCHFGBPEM currencies 3/ GermanyFrance

AUD

-4% CNY

Shanghai (China)

NZD

-6% Spain

-8%


-----

**Chart 6**

**Emerging Economies: Financial Assets**

**Performance since March 25, 2019**

Percent, basis points

Region Country Currency Equity Interest Rates   2 years Interest Rates 10 years CDS

Mexico

Brazil

Latin America Chile

Colombia **+137 pb** **+411 pb**

Argentina

Russia

Poland **+135 pb** **+188 pb** **+44 pb**

Emerging Europe Turkey

Czech Rep.

Hungary

South Korea

Malaysia **+59 pb** **+55 pb**

India

Emerging Asia

Philippines

Thailand

Indonesia

Africa South Africa

-10% 0% 10% -10% 0% 10% -50 0 50 -50 0 50 -20 0 20

Note: Interest rates correspond to interest rate swaps for 2-year/10-year
maturities, respectively. In the case of Argentina, rates in US dollars are
used since they are the most liquid ones and those that reflect more
adequately the performance of the fixed income market in that country.
Source: Bloomberg.

**A.2. Current situation of the Mexican economy**

**A.2.1. Mexican markets**

Since Banco de Mexico’s latest monetary policy
decision, the prices of financial assets in Mexico
exhibited a mixed performance by asset class. On
the one hand, the peso exchange rate appreciated
1.32% against the US dollar, reaching 19.12 pesos
per US dollar in a context of relatively stable trading
conditions. On the other hand, interest rates on
government securities increased by up to 32 basis
points, mainly on short- and medium-term

instruments. Finally, the stock market had a marginal
increase of 0.92% during the period, although it stood
out that its main index posted a negative streak
between late April and the first weeks of May.

Thus, the Mexican peso was one of the currencies
that registered the best performance relative to other
emerging economies’ currencies. These results are
basically explained by Mexico’s tighter monetary
policy relative to that of the other central banks.
Nevertheless, volatility increased during the period,
associated with greater risk aversion worldwide
caused by the uncertainty regarding trade

negotiations between the U.S. and China.

Orderly trading conditions continued to prevail in the
foreign exchange market, which registered adequate
levels of liquidity and depth (Chart 7). Similarly,
forward-looking conditions implied by exchange rate
options (FX options), measured using volatility and
depreciation bias, also registered an improvement
vis-à-vis those observed some months ago (Chart 8).


**Chart 7**

**Mexican Markets’ Performance and Trading**

**Conditions**

Percent, pesos/US dollar, index and basis points

Note: For the Mexican peso volatility, the levels implied in 1-month
exchange rate options are considered. For interest rate volatility, a Garch
model (1,1) of daily fluctuations in all the curve since 2007 is considered.
For exchange rate volatility, the Vimex published by MexDer is considered.
Source: Prepared by Banco de México with Bloomberg and Proveedora
Integral de Precios (PIP) data.

**Chart 8**

**Mexican Foreign Exchange Market Trading**

**Conditions**

Index (5-day moving average) and pesos/US dollar

|Mexico Brazil Latin America Chile Colombia Argentina Russia Poland Emerging Europe Turkey Czech Rep. Hungary South Korea Malaysia India Emerging Asia Philippines Thailand Indonesia Africa South Africa|-10% 0% 10%|-10% 0% 10%|+135 p +59 pb -50 0 50|+137 pb b +188 pb +55 pb -50 0 50|+411 pb +44 pb -20 0 20|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|


J F A M J J A O N D J M A M J J S O N D F M A M J A S O N J F M M

2016 2017 2018 2019

Note: Index calculated using the mean, volatility, skewness, kurtosis, bidask spread and mean of simple differentials across quotes, all of them
related to quotes of intraday operations, and the total traded volume. After
obtaining this data, the percentiles since 2011 are calculated and the
average of the 7 percentiles for each day is considered. The black vertical
line represents the date of Banco de México’s latest monetary policy
decision.
Source: Prepared by Banco de México with Reuters data.

Finally, exchange rate expectations by several
financial institutions’ analysts for the end of 2019
were adjusted downwards, from 20.10 to 19.85
pesos per US dollar, while those for the end of 2020
were adjusted from 20.15 to 20.00 pesos per US
dollar (Chart 9).

16


90

80

70

60

50

40

30

20


22.0

21.5

21.0

20.5

20.0

19.5

19.0

18.5

18.0

17.5

17.0


-----

**Chart 9**

**Analysts’ Mexican Peso Exchange Rate**

**Expectations for Each Quarter End**

Pesos per US dollar


9.5

9.0

8.5

8.0

7.5

7.0

6.5

6.0

5.5

5.0


22.5

22.0

21.5

21.0

20.5

20.0

19.5

19.0

18.5

18.0

17.5


D M J S D M J S D M

Bloomberg interquartile range Bloomberg expectations range

Mexican peso 2019 year-end forecast Citibanamex

Bloomberg median

Note: The black vertical line represents the date of Banco de México’s latest
monetary policy decision.
Source: Bloomberg and Citibanamex survey.

Interest rates on government securities increased up
to 32 basis points, mainly for the short and medium
terms (Chart 10). This negative performance partly
reflected the higher trade uncertainty in international
markets, which in turn led to greater risk aversion.
However, the changes observed in the yield curve of
government securities were also associated with
Mexico’s recent inflation figures as well as with
markets’ reaction to Banco de México’s monetary
policy statement of March, which was interpreted as
having a more restrictive tone than anticipated by the
market. All of the above occurred in a context where
trading conditions in this market remained stable
throughout the analyzed period (Chart 11).


J F M A J J A S N D J F A M J J A O N D J M A M J A S O N J F M M

2016 2017 2018 2019

Note: Index calculated with the changes in bonds’ interest rates, volatility of
events, bid-ask spread, the average of the differences in quotes, all of these
of intra-day operations, and the daily interbank and customer traded
volume. Considering the aforementioned, percentiles since 2016 and the
average of percentiles for every day are calculated. The vertical line
represents the date of Banco de México’s latest monetary policy decision.
Source: Calculated by Banco de México with data from Bloomberg, PIP and
brokerage firms.

As to expectations regarding the path of the
monetary policy target rate implied in the yield curve
structure, these were adjusted upwards vis-à-vis the
levels of the previous period (Chart 12). In this
regard, markets are not anticipating adjustments to
the target rate in the monetary decision of May, in line
with expectations of private sector analysts surveyed
by Citibanamex. As for expectations for the target
rate for the end of 2019, markets anticipate that it will
end the year at 8.00%, in line with the median of
economists.


**Chart 11**

**Mexican Government Debt Market Trading**

**Conditions and**

**Jun-27 Bond Rate**

Index (10-day moving average), percent

80

70 Index June-27 →

60

50

40

30

20

10


0


8.60

8.50

8.40

8.30

8.20

8.10

8.00

7.90

7.80

7.70

7.60


35

30

25

20

15

10

5

0


**Chart 12**

**Banxico Overnight Interbank Rate Implied in**

**TIIE IRS Curve**

PercentPercent

8.50

Banxico overnight rate

28-Mar-19

8.25 Rest of period


7.50

7.25


8.00

7.75


0 5 10 15 20 25 30

Term in years


←Mar 25,19 ←May 15, 19 Change (Mar 28th, 19 to May 15th, 19)→

Source: PIP.


7.00

6.75

oct. 17O        M        J        N        A        A        D       M        S    mar. 18 jul. 18 nov. 18 abr. 19 ago. 19 dic. 19 may. 20 sep. 20


2017         2018                 2019                      2020

Source: Banco de México with Bloomberg data.


17


-----

**A.2.2. Economic activity in Mexico**

According to INEGI’s GDP flash estimate, during the
first quarter of 2019 Mexico’s economic activity
contracted vis-à-vis the last quarter of 2018, thus
aggravating the weakness the Mexican economy has
been exhibiting since the previous quarter (Chart 13).
Such performance was due to both a moderation in
global economic growth as well as to a further
deterioration of domestic demand, deepened by
certain transitory factors that took place during the
quarter, such as the fuel distribution problems, the
blocking of railways in Michoacán, and the labor
conflicts in Matamoros.

**Chart 13**

**Gross Domestic Product**

Quarterly percentage change, s. a.

2

1

0

-1

-2 Q-I 1/

I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV I

2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019

s. a. Seasonally adjusted figures.
1/ Figures for the first quarter of 2019 correspond to INEGI’s GDP quarterly
flash estimate.
Source: Mexico’s National Accounts System (SCNM, for its acronym in
Spanish), INEGI.

As to the performance of external demand, during the
last part of the first quarter of 2019, manufacturing
exports decelerated, in a context where world trade
is undergoing a loss of dynamism and trade tensions
persist. In particular, declines were observed in
February and March, mainly due to the contraction of
non-automotive exports, although automotive

exports exhibited a lack of vigor (Chart 14). By
destination, exports to both the United States and the
rest of the world continued registering weak results.


J M M J S N J M M J S N J M M J S N J M M J S N J M M J S N J M M J S N J M

2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019

s. a. / Seasonally adjusted series and trend series based on data in nominal
USD. The former is represented by a solid line and the latter by a dotted
line.
Source: Prepared by Banco de México with data from the Tax
Administration Service (SAT, for its acronym in Spanish), the Ministry of the
Economy (SE, for its acronym in Spanish), Banco de México, the National
Institute of Statistics and Geography (INEGI, for its acronym in Spanish),
Mexico’s Merchandise Trade Balance, and the National System of
Statistical and Geographical Information (SNIEG, for its acronym in
Spanish).

As for domestic demand, according to its monthly
indicator, in the early part of 2019 private
consumption decelerated vis-à-vis the dynamism
observed throughout most of 2018. In particular,
services consumption grew at a lower rate, which
may be associated with the temporary impact of
gasoline supply problems on some sectors, such as
those of transportation, accommodation and food
services. Timely indicators of consumption, albeit of
less coverage, such as those of manufacturing sales
in the domestic market –which are highly correlated
with the consumption of nationally produced goods–
and earnings of retailers have exhibited an incipient
recovery, as compared to the weak performance
observed during the second half of 2018. In contrast,
sales of light vehicles continued showing weakness.
In February 2019, gross fixed investment partially
reversed the rebound observed during the previous
month. Therefore, it continues to exhibit weakness,
particularly in relation to machinery and equipment.

As for production, the decline of economic activity
during the first quarter of 2019, reflected the
contraction of both secondary and tertiary activities,
thus making more evident the weak performance that
industrial activity has been exhibiting for several
years and interrupting the dynamism services
showed in 2018 (Chart 15). In particular,

manufacturing continued to exhibit lack of vigor,
while construction spending continued on the same
negative trend observed during most of 2018 (Chart
16). In turn, mining continued trending downwards,
despite the apparent stabilization of the oil production
platform towards the end of the first quarter of 2019.
The deceleration of tertiary activities can be

18


**Chart 14**

**Total Manufacturing Exports**

Indices 2013 = 100, s. a.


160

150

140

130

120

110

100

90

80


-----

associated with a slight weakness of domestic
demand, partly stemming from the above mentioned
transitory factors. In particular, during January and
February 2019, several services that are more
closely related to consumption –such as those of
arts, entertainment and recreation; accommodation
and food services; and transportation and

warehousing and information– exhibited a weak
performance.

**Chart 15**

**Indicators of Economic Activity**

Indices 2013 = 100, s. a.

120 140

Total IGAE 1/

Industrial production 2/

Services IGAE 1/

115 130

Agriculture IGAE 1/

110 120

105 110

100 100

February

March

95 90

J M M J S N J M M J S N J M M J S N J M M J S N J M M J S N J M M J S N J M

2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019

s. a. / Seasonally adjusted and trend series. The former is represented by a
solid line and the latter by a dotted line.
1/ Figures up to February 2019.
2/ Figures up to March 2019 of the Monthly Indicator of Industrial Activity.
Source: Mexico’s National Accounts System (SCNM, for its acronym in
Spanish), INEGI.

**Chart 16**

**Industrial Activity**

Indices 2013 = 100, s. a.

120

110

100

90 Total

Mining (22.3%)

Manufacturing (49.7%)

80

Construction (23.3%)

Utilities (4.7%)

March

70

J M M J S N J M M J S N J M M J S N J M M J S N J M M J S N J M M J S N J M

2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019

s. a. / Seasonally adjusted and trend series. The former is represented by a
solid line and the latter by a dotted line.
Source: Mexico’s National Accounts System (SCNM, for its acronym in
Spanish), INEGI.

As for the economy’s cyclical position, slack
conditions are deemed to have eased towards the
end of 2018 and during the first quarter of 2019
(Chart 17). As to the evolution of the labor market,
during January-March 2019 both the national and
urban unemployment rates where at levels above
those of the fourth quarter of 2018, trending slightly
upwards (Chart 18). The growth rate of the number


of IMSS-insured jobs continued to slow down. In
particular, in March 2019, this indicator registered its
first fall at a monthly rate with seasonally adjusted
data since 2009. On the other hand, at the beginning
of 2019, unit labor costs in the manufacturing
industry continued trending upwards, reflecting
mostly the increases in real average earnings, that in
several sectors, exceeded productivity gains (Chart
19).

**Chart 17**

**Output Gap Estimates [1/]**

**Excluding Oil Industry [4/ ]**

Potential output percentages, s. a.

8

Global Economic Activity Indicator 2/

6 Gross Domestic Product 2/

95% Confidence Interval 3/

4

2

0

-2

-4

-6

-8

-10

Q-I

-12 March

J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O JM

2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019

s. a. / Seasonally adjusted figures.
1/ Output gap estimated with a tail-corrected Hodrick-Prescott filter; see
Banco de México (2009), “Inflation Report (April-June 2009)", p.74.
2/ GDP flash figures up to the first quarter of 2019; IGAE figures up to March
2019, consistent with timely figures.
3/ Output gap confidence interval calculated with a method of unobserved
components.
4/ Excludes both oil and gas extraction, support activities for mining, and
petroleum and coal products' manufacturing.
Source: Prepared by Banco de México with INEGI data.

**Chart 18**

**National Unemployment Rate and Urban**

**Unemployment Rate**

Percent, s. a.

8.5

Urban unemployment rate

8.0

7.5 National unemployment rate

7.0

6.5

6.0

5.5

5.0

4.5

4.0

3.5

3.0

March

2.5

J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S JM

2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019


s. a. / Seasonally adjusted and trend series. The former is represented by a
solid line and the latter by a dotted line.
Source: National Survey of Occupations and Employment (ENOE, for its
acronym in Spanish), INEGI.

19


-----

**Chart 19**

**Manufacturing Productivity and Unit Labor**

**Costs [1/]**

Indices 2008 = 100, s. a.


110

Unit labor costs

Productivity

105

100

95

February

90

J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J F

2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019


13

12

11

10

9

8

7

6

5

4

3

2

1

0


April

|Chart 20 Consumer Price Index Annual percentage change|Col2|Col3|
|---|---|---|
|CPI|||
|Core|||
|Non-core|||
||||
||||
||||
||||
||||


J


A J O J


A J O J


A J O J


A J O J


A J O J


A J O J


A J O J


A J O J


A J O J


A


s. a. / Seasonally adjusted and trend series. The former is represented by a
solid line and the latter by a dotted line.
1/ Productivity based on hours worked.
Source: Prepared by Banco de México with seasonally adjusted data from
the Monthly Manufacturing Survey and industrial activity indices of INEGI’s
Mexican National Accounts’ System (Sistema de Cuentas Nacionales de
_México)._

During the first quarter of 2019, domestic financing to
the non-financial private sector displayed a growth
rate higher than that registered at the end of the
previous year, which points to an incipient change in
its growth trend as compared to the deceleration
observed during the second half of 2018. Regarding
its components, financing to private firms continued
growing at the same pace than the previous quarter,
while lending to households had a higher real annual
growth rate than in the previous quarter. As for
interest rates, those related to firm financing did not
change significantly vis-à-vis the previous quarter. In
turn, interest rates of housing credit have remained
stable since the second quarter of 2017, whereas the
interest rates of the consumer credit segment have
remained practically unchanged during the same
period, with the exception of those of credit cards,
which have increased. With regards to portfolio
quality, firms and mortgage delinquency rates
remained at low levels, while those related to
consumption have followed a downward trend since
August 2018, although they remain at high levels.

**A.2.3. Developments in inflation and inflation**
**outlook**

Between March and April 2019, annual headline
inflation rose from 4.00 to 4.41%, largely due to core
inflation increases, although non-core inflation also
rose (Chart 20 and Table 1). Indeed, of the 41 basis
point-increase that annual headline inflation

registered during this period, core inflation accounts
for 25 basis points and non-core inflation for 16 basis
points.


2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019

Source: Banco de México and INEGI.

Annual core inflation rose from 3.55% in March to
3.87% in April. Thus, this indicator continues
exhibiting resistance to decline, while risks

associated to its behavior prevail. The latter in
relation to some inputs, such as commodity prices
and wage increases, which might generate costrelated pressures. During this period, the annual rate
of change of merchandise prices rose slightly (Chart
21), although its components exhibited mixed results
(Chart 22). On the one hand, the annual rate of
change of food merchandise prices continued to
increase, while that of non-food merchandise prices
kept on decreasing. In turn, the annual rate of change
of services prices rose during the above mentioned
months, partly influenced by a calendar effect, given
that this year Easter took place in April, while in 2018
it did so in March. Nevertheless, even after
eliminating this effect, the annual variation of
services prices would be registering an increase, in
addition to the fact that prices of several food,
transportation, and entertainment services have
been exhibiting annual rates of change of above 5%
and, in some cases, at increasingly higher rates.
Thus, core inflation has remained at high levels and
has recently increased further.

20


-----

**Chart 21**

**Merchandise and Services Core Price Subindex**

Annual percentage change

7

Merchandise

6 Services

5

4

3

2

1

April

0

J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A

2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019

Source: Banco de México and INEGI.

**Chart 22**

**Merchandise Core Price Subindex**

Annual percentage change

8

Food, beverages and tobacco

Non-food merchandise

7

6

5

4

3

2

1

April

0

J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A

2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019

Source: Banco de México and INEGI.

As to annual non-core inflation, it increased from 5.47
to 6.08% between March and April. This result is
associated mainly with the higher rates of change in
the prices of several agricultural and livestock
products as well as in energy products, such as L.P.
gas and electricity (Chart 23 and Table 1).

**Chart 23**

**Non-core Price Subindex**
Annual percentage change

20

Non-core

Agriculture

Energy and government-authorized prices

15

10

5

0

April

-5

J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A

2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019

Source: Banco de México and INEGI.


The medians for short-term inflation expectations
drawn from Banco de México’s Survey of

Professional Forecasters exhibited mixed

adjustments. In particular, it stands out that, between
February and April, the median of headline
expectations for the end of 2019 was adjusted
upwards from 3.65 to 3.70%, while that for the end of
2020 remained at 3.60%. At the same time, the
medians for core inflation for the end of 2019 and for
2020 increased by 6 and 2 basis points to 3.56 and
3.50%, respectively. The aforementioned led implied
non-core inflation expectations for the end of 2019
and for 2020 to move from 4.11 to 4.13% and from
3.97 to 3.91%, respectively. The median of headline
inflation expectations for the medium term (next four
years) rose from 3.50 to 3.55%, while that for the
longer terms (next five to eight years) remained
stable at 3.50%. It should be noted that the median
of medium- and long-term core inflation expectations
remained at 3.50 and 3.40%, respectively, the latter
having been at 3.30% during most of 2018. Thus,
both headline and core inflation expectations remain
clearly above the 3% headline inflation target. Finally,
inflation expectations implicit in long-term market
instruments (drawn from 10-year government bonds)
remained at levels close to 3.50%, while the inflation
risk premium increased slightly.

The evolution of inflation is subject to risks. Among
those standing out to the upside are that the peso
exchange rate comes under pressure stemming from
external or domestic factors; that additional

pressures on energy prices or on agricultural and
livestock product prices arise, especially in those
prices where their international references have been
under upward pressure; that an escalation of
protectionist and compensatory measures worldwide
materializes or in case public finances deteriorate.
Moreover, given the magnitude of the increases to
the minimum wage, in addition to their possible direct
impact, there is the risk that these bring about high
wage revisions in several sectors. In fact, in some
sectors such increases have exceeded productivity
gains, which could give rise to cost pressures, thus
affecting formal employment and contributing to keep
core inflation at high levels and preventing the
increased slack in the economy from translating into
lesser inflationary pressures. In this sense, the
persistence shown by core inflation could lead to a
greater resistance to decline of medium- and longterm inflation expectations. As for those risks
standing out to the downside are that the prices of
certain goods included in the non-core subindex
register lower variations or that economic slack
widens more than expected. Thus, although there
has been an intensification of certain downside risk
factors, such as the greater slack in the economy,

21


-----

there are others that could make inflation remain at
high levels and, therefore, make it deviate from its
foreseen path, given the factors that have restrained
core inflation from decreasing. For this reason, in an


environment of high uncertainty, it is deemed that the
balance of risks for inflation relative to its forecasted
trajectory still remains to the upside.


**Table 1**

**Consumer Price Index and Components**

Annual percentage change

**Item** **February 2019** **March 2019** **April 2019**

**CPI** **3.94** **4.00** **4.41**

**SubyacenteCore** **3.54** **3.55** **3.87**

**Merchandise** **3.61** **3.71** **3.74**

Food, beverages and tobacco 4.34 4.56 4.75

Non-food merchandise 2.90 2.88 2.77

**Services** **3.43** **3.38** **3.97**

Housing 2.62 2.68 2.78

Education (tuitions) 4.84 4.84 4.84

Other services 4.02 3.79 4.98

**No SubyacenteNon-core** **5.25** **5.47** **6.08**

**Agriculture** **4.80** **3.70** **4.77**

Fruits and vegetablesFruits abd vegetables 10.68 9.65 10.19

Meats, poultry, fish and eggs Livestock 0.77 -0.21 1.38

**Energy and government-authorized prices Energéticos y Tarifas Aut. por Gobierno** **5.73** **6.86** **7.01**

Energy productsEnergy 6.57 8.15 8.58

Government-authorized pricesTarifas Autorizadas por Gobierno 3.43 3.45 3.52

Source: INEGI.


22


-----

-----

-----

