-----

-----

**FOREWARNING**
This document is provided for the reader’s convenience only.
The translation from the official Spanish version was made
by Banco de México’s staff. Discrepancies may arise
between the original document in Spanish and its English
translation. For this reason, the original Spanish version is
the only official document.


**1. PLACE, DATE, AND PARTICIPANTS**

**1.1 Place: Av. Cinco de Mayo street no.2, 5[th] floor,**
Col. Centro, Mexico City.

**1.2. Date of Governing Board meeting:** March 27,
2019.

**1.3. Participants:**
Alejandro Díaz de León-Carrillo, Governor
Irene Espinosa-Cantellano, Deputy Governor
Gerardo Esquivel-Hernández, Deputy Governor
Javier Eduardo Guzmán-Calafell, Deputy Governor
Jonathan Ernest Heath-Constable, Deputy Governor
Carlos Manuel Urzúa-Macías, Secretary of Finance
and Public Credit.
Arturo Herrera-Gutiérrez, Undersecretary of Finance
and Public Credit.
Elías Villanueva-Ochoa, Secretary of the Governing
Board

Prior to this meeting, preliminary work by Banco de
México’s staff analyzing the economic and financial
environment, together with the developments in
inflation and the determinants and outlook for
inflation, was conducted and presented to the
Governing Board (see annex).

**2. ANALYSIS AND RATIONALE BEHIND THE**
**GOVERNING BOARD’S VOTING**

All members agreed that available indicators
suggest that the weakening of world economic
activity during the second half of 2018 continued
during the early part of 2019, with a lower dynamism
in most advanced and some emerging economies.
In this context, some members stated that among the
main factors of this deceleration are the trade
tensions and the implementation of tariff measures
between the U.S. and China, which have affected
global trade and investment. One member called
attention to persistent political and idiosyncratic
factors. Another member pointed out that the
deceleration of the global economy has been greater
than anticipated. Most of the members

acknowledged that such an environment has led to
the decline in world growth expectations for 2019,
one member adding that growth projections for 2020


have also been revised downwards. In this regard,
some members noted that different timely and
leading indicators continue showing weakness,
which signals a significant deceleration in several
regions of the world. However, some members
claimed that it is possible to expect a certain rebound
in the following quarters, insofar as the transitory
factors that have affected the dynamism of some
economies continue to dissipate and the stimulus
measures announced in several economies begin to
take effect.

All members stated that the balance of risks to global
growth remains biased to the downside and one
pointed out that, despite the apparent moderation of
some risk factors over the last weeks, other factors
have intensified considerably. The majority agreed
that among the main risks, the following stand out: i)
an escalation of trade disputes between the U.S. and
China; ii) a disorderly Brexit process; iii) a lowerthan-anticipated growth of the Chinese economy; iv)
a sharper-than-expected deceleration in some
economies due to idiosyncratic factors; and, v)
political and geopolitical tensions. Regarding the first
of these risks, one member warned that, although
negotiations appear to be heading towards reaching
an agreement, the risk of setbacks or episodes of
intensification of the tensions between both
countries has not disappeared. The same member
added that tariff barriers —greater than those
registered prior to the conflict — could be observed,
even if an agreement between both economies is
reached. As to the second risk, he/she mentioned
that the probability of a scenario without a mutually
convenient agreement between the U.K. and the
European Union has apparently increased in the last
days.

Most members mentioned the lower dynamism in
advanced economies, especially in the euro area
and, to a lesser extent, in the U.S. One member
delved into the fact that, although this group of
countries continue having differences in their cyclical
positions and in their inflationary gaps, the negative
effects of trade disputes have contributed to a
synchronized deceleration. Some members pointed
out that the economic slowdown in the euro area has
been greater than expected, and affected by
idiosyncratic factors. One of them mentioned the
case of Italy, which is already in recession, and of
Germany, where manufacturing production has even
started to show signs of contraction. One member
considered that although some idiosyncratic factors
that affected the euro area have already dissipated,
the lower growth of external demand continues to
affect the region’s dynamism. As for the deceleration

1


-----

of the US economy, another member stated that it
was intensified by the fading of the transitory effects
of the pro-cyclical fiscal stimulus adopted by that
country. Another member mentioned that industrial
production and exports seem to be suffering from the
effects of the trade tensions and the global economic
weakness, while the fiscal deficit has widened
further.

Most members stated that growth expectations for
advanced economies have decreased. One of them
stressed that, although the deceleration is

widespread, reductions to growth forecasts vary,
given that they have been considerable in the euro
area, while in Japan and in the U.S. they have been
of a smaller magnitude. However, most members
emphasized that several financial indicators point to
a higher probability of recession in the U.S. over the
next 12 months. One member explained that
although there are certain signals of a gradual
recovery of private spending in the U.S., it is
expected to grow at a lower rate than that registered
during the previous quarter.

As to emerging economies, most members

mentioned the lower dynamism displayed by some
of them, especially China, where the economic
slowdown has been greater than anticipated.
Nevertheless, some members considered that this
slowdown could moderate as a result of the adopted
fiscal and monetary stimuli. One of the members
pointed out that the People’s Bank of China
mentioned that there was still room to cut its reserve
requirements, in an effort to generate more market
liquidity, and that this could contribute to raise global
growth towards the second half of 2019. Some
members stated that such stimuli are limited by
China’s own structural problems, such as the
transition towards a more moderate growth as well
as the vulnerabilities that prevail in that country, such
as the high levels of public and private indebtedness.
Regarding growth prospects for emerging

economies, one member argued that a certain
divergence among them persists, given that,
although countries such as Argentina and Turkey are
anticipated to continue contracting in the first half of
the year, others like Brazil and India are anticipated
to continue recovering. Another member pointed out
that in an environment where lesser pressures from
external markets are foreseen, the performance of
emerging economies will be determined, to a large
extent, by idiosyncratic risk factors and by the
soundness of their macroeconomic fundamentals.

All members emphasized that inflationary pressures
have decreased worldwide, partly due to the decline


in economic growth. Some members added that this
has also been the result of lower prices of some
commodities. Most members noted a continuous
tightening in the labor markets of advanced
economies. Some of them specified that wage
growth has been accelerating and unemployment
continues to decline. One of them added that, in
certain cases, the unemployment rate has reached
multiannual minimum levels. Most members

specified that, despite the above, headline inflation
in these countries is below their respective central
bank targets, and one member pointed out that it has
been declining. Another member mentioned that
there are few pressures on prices associated with
the labor market. When analyzing the evolution of
inflation in advanced economies from a long-term
perspective, one member warned that lower
inflationary pressures reflect both the effects of the
recent economic deceleration and the presence of
other factors that have kept inflation structurally low.
In particular, he/she considered that technological
changes and globalization have allowed the
fragmentation of the production processes for both
goods and services according to the comparative
advantages of different countries and regions. Such
member added that this allowed the incorporation of
the abundant workforce from Asia and Eastern
Europe into the global economy and stressed that all
of this has contributed to greater market competition,
reducing the possibility of firms increasing their
prices. He/she noted that the continued presence or
weakening of these structural factors will be highly
relevant for the future evolution of inflation. With
regards to inflation in emerging economies, some
members agreed that it declined due to the fall in
energy and food prices, the fading of the effect of the
depreciation of their currencies, and to the lower
dynamism worldwide. One member pointed out that
in some of these economies, headline inflation was
close to their central banks’ targets, and in others it
was even below such targets.

All members mentioned that the described external
environment has consolidated expectations that the
main central banks will not tighten monetary
conditions in the foreseeable future. Regarding the
US Federal Reserve, they stated that in its policy
decision of March, it left the target range for the
federal funds rate unchanged and reaffirmed its
message that it will be patient in making future
adjustments. In this regard, most members stressed
that the median of the Federal Open Market
Committee projections suggests there will be no
increases in the federal funds target range in 2019.
One member underlined the adjustment in the target
range’s expected trajectory by the members of the

2


-----

Federal Open Market Committee, from two

increases this year to none. Another member
mentioned that markets are beginning to consider
the possibility of the next adjustment being to the
downside. Most members underlined the Federal
Reserve’s announcement of shrinking the rate of
reduction of its securities holdings starting in May
and concluding such process in September 2019.
One member added that the central banks of
Canada, the euro area, England and Japan did not
adjust their policy rates in their March meetings
either, and that they emphasized that the economic
deceleration has been greater than expected.
He/she added that, as a consequence of the latter,
market variables are discounting that there will be no
additional increases during the year in the policy rate
of several of these countries.

Most members agreed that during the first months of
2019, financial markets in developed countries
performed favorably, in light of expectations that the
central banks of the main advanced economies will
not tighten monetary conditions in the foreseeable
future. One member added that the apparent decline
in trade tensions between the U.S. and China as well
as the measures announced by the Chinese
government to address the deceleration of its
economy also contributed to this development.
Another member noted that financial conditions
improved despite the international uncertainty, which
entails the risk of an additional fall in economic
activity. Some members stated that the main stock
market indices registered gains, that government
bond interest rates decreased, that there was a
compression of corporate bond spreads and that risk
appetite increased. Some members noted that the
US yield curve inverted. One member specified that
the latter was notorious in its shorter terms. Another
member mentioned that this behavior, which was
also observed in Canada, has been present in all the
recent previous recessions in the U.S., since it
anticipates problems to finance medium- and longterm projects and therefore informs us about a
possible credit channel that can contribute decisively
to the economic deceleration.

As to financial markets of emerging economies, most
members pointed out that these have also had a
favorable performance, following the Federal

Reserve’s announcement of a more cautious policy
stance. One member specified that interest rates in
most of these countries decreased and some
mentioned the improved performance of their
currencies. Most members mentioned that improved
financial conditions have encouraged capital flows to
emerging economies, while some members also


attributed such flows, in part, to the significant
interest rate spreads some of these economies have
with respect to US rates.

Most members indicated that, in the foreseeable
future, although financial stress on emerging
economies has diminished, the perceived risks to
global economic growth could affect international
financial markets and therefore the possibility of new
episodes of financial volatility persists. Some
members added the risk of surprises to the upside in
the Federal Reserve’s monetary policy in view of
possible unexpected increases in inflation. One of
them argued that the implications of a slower
normalization process should be seen with caution
given that, although such process can ease
pressures on domestic financial markets, at the
same time it points to a lower expansion of the world
economy, it extends the challenges to financial
stability stemming from the persistence of low
interest rates, and reduces monetary policy’s margin
of response in the event of a weakening of economic
activity.

Most members noted that economic activity in
Mexico decelerated at the end of 2018 and in early
2019. One member indicated that this was more
marked at the end of 2018. Another member
mentioned that although GDP growth in the fourth
quarter was positive, it is a cause of concern that
both public and private investment have declined for
three consecutive quarters, that exports have fallen
for two consecutive quarters and that consumption
has decreased in two out of the last three quarters.
He/she added that the sum of the components of
aggregate demand exhibited a contraction.

In this context, most members mentioned that
available information suggests that in early 2019
economic activity continued exhibiting low growth,
although some of them specified that it has
maintained a positive trajectory. Most members
mentioned that the country’s economic performance
was a consequence of the slowdown of the world
economy, of some weakness in domestic demand,
and of some transitory factors, such as the fuel
distribution problems and the blocking of railways,
which could have affected growth during the first
quarter of the year. In this respect, another member
clarified that there was no major spillover to other
activities so that overall economic activity exhibited
a slight increase in January. With regard to economic
activity from the demand side, another member
noted that both external and domestic demand seem
to continue losing dynamism. Regarding external
demand, some members mentioned that exports

3


-----

continue following an upward trend. However, some
members warned that automotive exports to the U.S.
remain weak. As for domestic demand, most
members considered that consumption shows some
deceleration and that investment continues on a
negative trend. One of them elaborated that this is
due especially to the weakness in purchases of
machinery and equipment. In this context, he/she
added that according to economic analysts

interviewed by Banco de México, the current
juncture’s investment climate is going through a bad
moment. As for the performance of productive
activities, some members mentioned that in January
the Global Index of Economic Activity (IGAE) grew at
a lower-than-anticipated monthly rate. With respect
to industrial production, most members noted that it
has shown weakness and, in particular, that
manufacturing continues to show sluggishness and
that mining remains on a downward trajectory. One
member specified that within the mining sector, the
decline in oil production is noteworthy. Another
member mentioned that construction rebounded
significantly during the first month of the year. Some
members highlighted that the services sector has
also decelerated. One member added that this
behavior was observed in sectors that were most
affected by the fuel distribution problems.

Some members argued that it is yet to be seen if the
observed economic deceleration is temporary. One
member stated that it is not clear yet whether the
lower dynamism is caused by the adjustment that
always occurs at the beginning of a new
administration or if it is a phenomenon associated
with a new phase of the business cycle. The same
member warned about the performance of the
components of the Coincident Indicator of INEGI’s
Cyclical Indicators System, which have shown
declines for several consecutive months, which
points to the beginning of a downward phase in the
economic cycle. Such member argued that some of
these components, such as the IGAE, the urban
unemployment rate or the permanent IMSS-insured
workers, have had a negative contribution for at least
ten consecutive months. To put this into perspective,
he/she added that the level of the coincident
indicator in December 2018 was one of the lowest in
the last 10 years and that the last time these levels
were observed —with a downward trend— was in
November 2008, at the onset of the last recession in
Mexico. In the same vein, such member added that
the inverted yield curve in Mexico anticipates the
possibility of recession.

In this sense, most members noted that in light of the
deceleration in Mexico, both Banco de México as


well as private sector analysts and multilateral
entities have revised downwards their growth
expectations for 2019. One of the members
mentioned that given the lower global dynamism,
especially in the U.S., a certain deceleration of
foreign trade and, in consequence, a lower demand
for Mexican exports, will continue to be observed.
Some members highlighted that precisely exports
have been one of the country’s main growth drivers
over the last 25 years. As to the dynamism of
domestic demand, one member stated that

consumption is anticipated to continue weakening.
However, another member noted that, given the
decline in growth expectations, the increase in
consumer confidence, which is at historical highs, is
striking. In addition, some members commented that
signs of an economic recovery starting from the
second quarter of 2019 are to be expected, once the
transitory factors that have affected economic
activity dissipate. One of them noted that,
considering that the beginning of a new

administration is always complex for circumstantial
reasons and not necessarily for structural ones, the
performance of public spending in the next months
will be key for said economic recovery and to
subsequently boost private investment.

All members agreed that the balance of risks for
growth remains biased to the downside. One
member pointed out that this bias is observed in both
the short- and medium-term horizons. In addition to
the global risks described above, most members
mentioned other downward risks for growth of
domestic nature, among which the following stand
out: i) that the current environment of uncertainty that
has kept investment at low levels, and that may lead
to lower levels of consumer expenditure, persists or
deteriorates; ii) that a downgrading in the credit
rating of State-owned productive companies or of the
sovereign itself materializes; iii) that public spending
is exercised with a longer delay than would normally
occur at the beginning of an administration; iv) risks
stemming from the ratification process of the new
free-trade agreement with the U.S. and Canada; and
v) the possibility of a slower-than-expected recovery
in oil production. Regarding the first risk, some
members explained that the uncertainty originated
by the lack of clarity on several public policies may
hinder the recovery of private investment and
consumption. In this context, one member added
that the uncertainty could also make consumers
reduce their spending for precautionary reasons,
while another pointed out that the main action to
strengthen economic activity in the current scenario
is the creation of conditions of confidence that
promote an upturn of investment. To the above

4


-----

mentioned risks, one member added the possibility
of tax revenues decreasing in relation to their
projections, which may limit the performance of
public spending; that the recent stagnation of
automotive exports to the U.S. persists; and that the
real exchange rate appreciates, thus discouraging
non-oil exports. Another member pointed out that an
additional risk is that the effects of the transitory
factors that have affected the economy turn out to be
greater than expected or that this type of events
occur again. Finally, some members mentioned that
several risks to medium-term growth persist,
including the possibility of a recession in the U.S.

As to the upward risks for growth, one member noted
a greater-than-expected dynamism of the US
economy; the approval and implementation of the
new North America free trade agreement; a better
performance of one or several components of GDP
from the spending side; the possibility of a greaterthan-expected rebound effect arising from a low
base of comparison; and greater-than-expected
returns on the government’s new investment
projects. In this context, another member stated that
there are at least three factors that could contribute
to an economic growth rate that would not be as low
as might be anticipated: i) the increase in consumer
confidence; ii) the positive effect in consumption that
the new social programs focused on segments of the
population, such as elder adults and young people,
with a high propensity to consume, may have; and
iii) the slight 3% increase in the real wage of IMSSinsured workers. Similarly, the same member
mentioned that an escalation of trade tensions
between China and the U.S. may benefit Mexico, as
a result of the natural redirectioning of certain
bilateral trade flows between those countries.

Most members considered that slack conditions in
the economy loosened towards the end of 2018 and
in the early part of 2019, and some members
highlighted that this confirms the existence of a
negative output gap. Nevertheless, one member
pointed out that, excluding oil production, the latest
output gap indicators remained neutral and that,
although labor market indicators continue exhibiting
tightness, they appear to have loosened at the
margin. Another member noted that such conditions
were still tight at the end of 2018 and stated that, in
the current situation, an accurate assessment of the
economy’s business cycle stage is complex due to:
i) the fact that the recent evolution of the economy
may have been affected by transitory factors; ii) that,
given the decline in investment and the unfavorable
evolution of productivity, that the economy’s growth
potential is probably contracting, which further


complicates the estimation of the output gap; and, iii)
that, regardless of the recent increases in the
unemployment rate, such rate continues to be below
its long-term levels. Finally, most members stated
that, considering the forecasts for growth, slack
conditions in the economy are expected to widen in
the following quarters. Some members noted that
this would lead to a negative output gap.

All members mentioned that between January and
the first half of March 2019, annual headline inflation
decreased from 4.37 to 3.95%. Most members
highlighted that, since the first half of February, it
remained within the range of variability around the
3% target, and one member noted that this is the first
time this occurs since December 2016. The same
member pointed out that, during the last six
fortnights, inflation fell by 105 basis points. However,
he/she argued that it is unclear whether this path is
sustainable in the long term. In this regard, another
member noted that, although it has improved at the
margin, the reading for the first half of March was
slightly above that of February. One member added
that headline inflation has been affected by
significant adjustments stemming from both the
exchange rate and from pressures to non-core
inflation, particularly energy prices. Another member
argued that latest figures point to a significant fall in
inflation and reveal a behavior consistent with the
forecast trajectory of convergence to the target in the
time frame in which monetary policy operates. The
same member pointed out that the average of the
last six figures of annualized headline and core
inflation suggests that price increases have grown at
decreasing rates. He/she added that inflation seems
to be converging to the target faster than expected
and that it is exhibiting a significantly better path than
that described in the forecasts published in Banco de
México’s Quarterly Reports of the third and fourth
quarters of 2018. One member considered that the
recent decline in inflation is explained by the fall in
non-core inflation, and that it has been accompanied
by worrisome elements. He/she highlighted among
these the considerable persistence of core inflation;
the fact that it has exceeded the central bank’s
projections, in a context of frequent upward revisions
of its future trajectory; short-, medium- and long-term
inflation expectations above the central bank’s
forecasts and above the 3% target; long-term core
inflation expectations at the highest levels that have
been recorded, and gradually getting closer to those
for headline inflation, which could imply a deeper
entrenchment of expectations at levels above the
target; and estimates of compensation for

inflationary expectations and inflationary risk implied

5


-----

by market instruments which are still at relatively
high levels.
Most members agreed that the reduction in headline
inflation was mainly due to the fall in non-core
inflation from 6.81% in January to 5.39% in the first
half of March. Such members pointed out that this
component decreased by 385 basis points in the last
six fortnights. Some members noted that this
decrease was a reflection of the lower increases in
energy and in agricultural and livestock product
prices. Nevertheless, some members stated that
some of the favorable shocks that have led to the fall
in non-core inflation have started to revert recently.
In particular, the prices of energy goods rose during
the second half of February, reflecting the increase
in their international references.

As to core inflation, most members noted that it
decreased from 3.60 to 3.51% between January and
the first half of March 2019. As to the dynamics of its
components, most members mentioned that inflation
of certain services remains high. Similarly, some
members pointed out that food merchandise inflation
has increased. Most members agreed that core
inflation’s resistance to decline is worrisome. Some
members underlined that for the last eleven months,
the cumulative fall in core inflation has been of barely
two tenths of a percentage point. One member
underlined that core inflation has remained above
3.5% for 53 consecutive fortnights and that it has
shown a basically lateral behavior over the last
eleven months. Nevertheless, one member

considered that core inflation has broken through the
3.6% floor observed during several consecutive
months and has apparently started a downward
phase consistent with the forecasts of convergence
to the target.

Regarding inflation expectations, most members
mentioned that, between January and February, the
median of headline inflation expectations for the end
of 2019 and for 2020 fell from 3.80 to 3.65% and from
3.71 to 3.60%, respectively. Some members pointed
out that the median of expectations for 2019 is above
Banco de México’s forecast for the end of the year.
As to core inflation expectations, most members
pointed out that, between January and February,
their median for 2019 remained at 3.50% and that for
2020 increased slightly from 3.45 to 3.48%.
Additionally, some members described as mixed the
behavior of inflation expectations drawn from
surveys. However, one member stated that it is worth
mentioning that considering the aforementioned
decline in expectations, a change in trend of these
indicators has occurred given that, between May and
November 2018, headline and core inflation


expectations had been increasing constantly and
significantly. Regarding medium and long-term
inflation expectations, most members highlighted
that those corresponding to headline inflation
continue above the permanent target of 3%, at levels
around 3.50%. Regarding medium-term core

inflation expectations, such members stated that
these increased from 3.42% to 3.50%, while those
for the long term remained at 3.40%, after having
been at 3.30% during most of 2018. Some members
emphasized that the latter are at historically high
levels. As for information drawn from market
instruments, most members pointed out that
although the medium- and long-term inflationary risk
premium decreased, it still remains at high levels. In
this regard, one member pointed out that this
premium implied in the 10-year bond has continued
to decrease as stress in debt markets has faded.
Another member said that although some risk premia
have increased, those that are more closely linked to
monetary conditions have been decreasing.

As to the outlook for headline inflation, most
members considered that it is feasible that it will
converge to the 3% target towards the first half of
2020, although some members noted that an upturn
in inflation is anticipated in the coming months due
to a higher trajectory for energy prices. Some
members pointed out that the above is also due to a
low base of comparison in the previous year and that
this trend should begin to reverse in June. One of the
members added that this means that the perception
of favorable developments in inflation in the short
term will fade rapidly. However, another member
stated that, if the observed path continues, the
inflation target may be reached within the timeframe
in which monetary policy operates.

As to the forecasts for non-core inflation, some
members mentioned that, despite its recent decline,
some of its components, particularly energy prices,
are expected to exert upward pressure on this
subindex in the following months. In this regard, one
member explained that the decline in non-core
inflation resulted from a reduction in the growth rates
of agricultural and livestock product prices and of
energy prices. The same member added that the
former are highly volatile, while the latter are very
likely to increase in the following months due to their
seasonality. In this context, the same member
argued that it is foreseeable that non-core inflation
increases. Another member indicated that, from
March 2020 core inflation is anticipated to decrease
in view of expectations of a more appreciated peso
exchange rate. Some members added that this

6


-----

component would also be subject to downward
pressures as a result of greater slack.

As for upward risks to inflation, most members
highlighted the possibility that the peso exchange
rate is pressured by external or domestic factors.
One member added that, in his/her opinion, this
continues to represent one of the main risks for
inflation. Most members pointed out that inflation
could also be affected if additional pressures on
energy prices or on agricultural and livestock product
prices arise, if an escalation of protectionist and
compensatory measures worldwide materializes or
in case public finances deteriorate. One member
noted that the latter risk is important, because one of
the fundamental pillars of price stability is having
sustainable public finances, and emphasized that
their deterioration could increase medium and longterm inflation expectations. In this regard, another
member pointed out that public finances could
weaken given the fall in oil production and the
weakening of economic activity. Additionally, most
members agreed that, given the magnitude of the
minimum wage increases, in addition to their
possible direct impact, there is also the risk that
these bring about wage revisions that exceed
productivity gains and give rise to cost pressures,
affecting formal employment and prices. One
member estimated that the materialization of these
pressures would imply a greater resistance of core
inflation to decline or even additional pressures on
this subindex. Some members pointed out that this
year wage growth appears to be accelerating. In this
regard, some members emphasized that the
significant increase in the minimum wage level in the
country’s border zone has raised the possibility of
observing a lighthouse effect, that is, that the 100%
increase affects also contractual wage demands for
those salaries that are above the minimum wage.
One of the members added that this effect might be
observed in firms both at the border zone as well as
in the rest of the country. Another member stressed
that, up to now, there is no evidence that increases
in the minimum wage level have led to significant
inflationary pressures. He/she argued that in the
case of the northern border, where these pressures
could have been higher due to the greater increase
in the minimum wage level, available information
does not suggest an inflationary pattern different
from that of the rest of the country. In this regard,
another member argued that the new policy of
improving the purchasing power of minimum wages
is praiseworthy and necessary, but acknowledged
that, for this policy to be functional, it must be
implemented within a plausible horizon, in order to
assess it and ensure that the economy can absorb


such increases without generating inflationary
pressures. Some members argued that, in order to
raise the purchasing power of wages in a sustained
manner, the role of other public policies must be
considered, such as fostering competition in the
markets for those goods and services with a high
share in the consumption basket of the low-income
population.

Most members pointed out that the persistence
exhibited by core inflation could lead to a greater
resistance to decline of long-term inflation

expectations. In this regard, one member expressed
concern about the persistence of such subindex at
levels above the target, and within this subindex,
about the annual rate of change of services prices
other than housing and education continuing at high
levels. As for downside risks, some members
mentioned the possibility of observing lower price
variations in the prices of certain goods included in
the non-core subindex or a greater-than-foreseen
widening of slack conditions. In sum, the majority of
the members agreed that although there has been
an intensification of some of the downside risk
factors, there continue to be others that might put
upward pressure on inflation in greater magnitude
and make it deviate from its foreseen path, therefore
they highlighted that there still persists an upward
bias in the balance of risk to inflation with respect to
its forecast trajectory. One member stated that the
balance of risks for inflation is relatively stable, and
that several of the risk factors for inflation have been
easing in recent weeks.

Most members pointed out that, since the last
monetary policy decision, financial assets in Mexico
have exhibited a positive performance reflecting both
the more favorable conditions that have prevailed in
international financial markets as well as Mexico’s
monetary policy stance relative to that of other
economies. Regarding the performance of the
Mexican peso, one member noted that it appreciated
slightly during this period, with an improvement in the
measures of depth and volatility of the foreign
exchange market. Some members considered that
the Mexican peso has remained relatively stable
since the end of December 2018. In this context, one
member mentioned that the Mexican peso has
reversed the losses observed at the end of 2018 and
that the current low levels of volatility had not been
observed since, at least, 2014. Another member
highlighted that this behavior is noteworthy and
reflects certain calmness despite the uncertainty
associated with the change of administration and the
start of a government with novel policies. One
member emphasized that the performance of

7


-----

domestic markets was mixed, pointing out in this
regard, that, although the Mexican peso had
appreciated during part of the period since the
monetary policy decision of February, such trend
was recently reversed in view of concerns regarding
the weakening of the world economy, thus the peso
underwent a slight depreciation.

As to interest rates, most members mentioned that
those of government securities decreased

significantly during the period and that trading
conditions in this market improved. One member
pointed out that inflows to the fixed income market
from foreign investors have continued, although in
lesser magnitude than in previous months. In
regards to Mexico’s stock market, the same member
underlined that this market fell, as a reflection of the
latest quarterly results, which showed a deceleration
of revenue growth and profit margins, stating that this
might have been further influenced by the downward
revisions in growth forecasts for the Mexican
economy. As to sovereign risk premia, most
members highlighted that they remained at high
levels similar to those observed in the latest
monetary policy decision while one member stated
that they registered a decrease. Some members
mentioned that the current levels of such premia are
higher than those of other economies with a credit
rating similar or even lower, than that of Mexico. In
this regard, most members stressed that the
presence of risk factors and uncertainty associated
with the Mexican economy has led to an additional
discount or risk premium for domestic assets.

Most members stated that risk factors persist that
could affect the performance of domestic financial
markets, among which Pemex's financial situation,
its future economic viability and the implications this
could have on its credit rating stand out. Such
members noted that a deterioration in the credit
rating of the state-owned company could lead to a
revision in the rating of the country's sovereign debt,
reducing the availability of financial resources for the
economy and possibly causing episodes of volatility
in Mexican financial assets as well as significant
adjustments in investment portfolios. In this regard,
one member warned that Pemex's debt accounts for
a significant share in the portfolio of several
institutional investors dedicated to emerging

economies, which have exposure to a wide range of
Mexican assets. Another member pointed out the
nervousness of investors given the potential loss of
Pemex’s investment grade and the possible revision
of the country’s sovereign rating. In this context, all
members considered that Pemex’s financial

challenges are a risk factor for the country's


macroeconomic stability, as a deterioration of its
credit rating could increase not only the cost of the
country’s sovereign debt, but also that of the private
sector debt. One member added that the latter would
affect businesses and households, making public
and private investment more expensive, affecting
overall spending as well. The same member
considered that this could lead to a downturn in
economic activity and, eventually, to a deterioration
in the credit portfolio of commercial banks.

In this regard, most members highlighted the
possible announcement of support measures for
Pemex by the federal government. Some members
agreed that the support could improve the
company’s short-term outlook, but most members
pointed out that it should primarily address structural
problems, strengthening its medium- and long-term
capacity to generate value by means of a credible
and functional business plan. One member argued
that the measures announced so far to repair the
company’s financial position, although relevant,
have been considered insufficient by the markets.
This member indicated that, unless Pemex adopts a
business model that allows a sustained recovery of
its oil production capacity and that guarantees its
financial viability without affecting the perspectives
for solid public finances in the long run, such actions
might be counterproductive, because they would
probably not avoid a rating cut for Pemex, they would
increase the vulnerability of public finances and they
would affect the sovereign’s risk. Another member
mentioned that the proposal of using part of the
funds from the Budget Revenue Stabilization Fund
(Fondo _de_ _Estabilización_ _de_ _los_ _Ingresos_

_Presupuestales, FEIP) to grant a one-time financial_
support to Pemex as well as allowing the use of this
fund as a countercyclical fiscal policy tool can have
positive effects, but also entails risks. This member
noted that the effectiveness of the support will not
only depend on the amount, but on the destination of
the resources. Finally, most members agreed that
the support to be granted to Pemex should not affect
the fiscal balance, in order to avoid an impact on
Mexico’s sovereign risk.

Most members emphasized the importance of sound
public finances, so that together with a prudent
monetary policy, a solid macroeconomic stance is
maintained allowing the economy to face adverse
scenarios. Such members also pointed out the
importance of achieving the goal established in the
2019 Economic Package of a primary surplus of 1%
of GDP. One member noted that, since the last
monetary policy decision, concerns regarding
insufficient public revenues relative to the projections

8


-----

in the Federal Income Law have increased. He/she
mentioned that this could be the result of lower tax
collection as a consequence of lower economic
growth than forecast in the 2019 Economic Package,
or from a greater-than-expected decline in the oil
production platform.

Some members considered that the current
environment continues to pose significant risks in the
medium and long terms, which could affect the
country’s macroeconomic conditions, its growth
potential and the economy’s price formation process.
Some members mentioned that, for this reason, it is
necessary to adopt economic policy measures that
foster an environment of confidence and certainty for
investment, promote higher productivity, adequate
resource allocation, competition, technological

progress and human capital formation, and that also
narrow opportunity gaps. Such members

emphasized that, in order to achieve the

abovementioned, it is necessary to strengthen
institutions, to enforce the rule of law, to effectively
fight corruption and to bring down insecurity. One
member mentioned that, in particular, it is crucial to
try to avoid the combination of an economic
deceleration with the adoption of certain policies that
might generate higher levels of inflation and maintain
it above the target. He/she also pointed out that, in
the presence of different adverse shocks, the
Mexican economy has had to adjust to a lesser
availability of external financial resources. Such
member stated that this has required a significant
depreciation of the real exchange rate and a further
strengthening of macroeconomic policy. The same
member considered that in order for this adjustment
to be orderly and with the least possible impact on
GDP, the exchange rate has to function as an
adjustment variable and inflation must remain
contained and near its target. He/she concluded that,
for this reason, both monetary and fiscal policies had
to be reinforced.

All members agreed that the current monetary policy
stance is consistent with the convergence of inflation
to its target within the time frame in which monetary
policy operates. One member added that the
foreseen trends of headline, core and non-core
inflation seem to be the result of the credibility of
Banco de México’s decisions and of the functioning
of monetary policy’s transmission channels. Some
members argued that the expectations of monetary
policies in advanced economies more relaxed than
previously anticipated increases the room for
maneuver for monetary policy conduction in Mexico.
Nevertheless, one member mentioned that although
the moderation of expectations regarding monetary


normalization in advanced economies diminishes
the risks for monetary policy in Mexico, it does not
change significantly the inflationary scenario faced
by the Mexican economy.

Most members mentioned that slack conditions in
the economy are foreseen to widen over the next
quarters. In this regard, one member noted that
Banco de México should monitor that the tight
monetary policy does not remain in place for too
long, in case the economy’s slack conditions
continue to widen. He/she considered that,

otherwise, there is the risk of generating an overadjustment of economic activity. In line with the
above, such member argued that the recent behavior
of total investment is concerning, since this variable
has stagnated over the last years and has fallen in
recent months. The same member warned that it is
evident that this behavior cannot be decoupled from
the high real interest rate levels prevailing in Mexico,
since the policy interest rate is at its highest levels of
the last 10 years. Such member added that, although
the high interest rates contributed significantly to
financial stability and to diminish inflationary
pressures, partly due to an increase in capital inflows
and to an appreciation of the Mexican peso, the
prevalence of these interest rates at high levels could
eventually contribute to generate undesired

downward pressures on economic activity —
especially in the export sector— and also to attract
too-volatile capital inflows, which could increase the
instability and vulnerability of the foreign exchange
market in the long term. Such member concluded
that, in this environment, the balance of risks for
growth is clearly biased to the downside, while that
for inflation is stable and, for this reason, unless
something extraordinary occurs, the upward cycle of
interest rates should be thought of as concluded. The
same member underlined that the necessary room
to begin a downward adjustment in the policy rate
could be created in the near future, given that he/she
considers that the level of such rate is consistent with
the convergence of inflation to its target, and
depending on how inflation behaves in the next
weeks. Another member warned that if the current
monetary policy is relaxed too soon, significant
increases in volatility could be observed in domestic
financial markets and this could have an impact on
financial stability. While the same member agreed on
the need to measure the negative consequences of
maintaining a tight monetary policy for too long,
he/she stressed the importance of considering the
scope and limitations of monetary policy. The same
member explained that monetary policy has only one
instrument: the policy interest rate which aims to
achieve a single objective, price stability. Such

9


-----

member emphasized that the latter is a necessary
condition to achieve sustained growth in economic
activity, but it is far from being a sufficient condition.
He/she stressed that when monetary policy is used
to attain two objectives, such as to contribute to
improve public finances or to try to boost economic
growth in the short term, it loses its effectiveness and
there’s the risk of not achieving any of the objectives
at all. Such member mentioned that monetary policy
can influence the cyclical behavior of the economy
around its growth trend in the long term, but not the
trend itself. The same member argued that, for this
reason, the most important and solid contribution
that monetary policy can make to the healthy
economic development of the country is to seek price
stability. The same member also stressed the
importance of taking into consideration the natural
lag with which monetary policy operates and in which
it can effectively contribute to the commitment to
price stability.

Most members expressed their concern about the
persistence exhibited by core inflation. One member
pointed out that such concern stems from the fact
that the current monetary policy has been restrictive
since early 2018, with an ex-ante real interest rate
above its neutral level and that it is this component
that should respond most to monetary policy actions.
Another member added that its evolution should be
a focus of attention for the central bank, given the
degree of interrelation between inflation and its
expectations. One member underlined that despite
the tight monetary policy, the path of inflation
foreseen by economic analysts is markedly above
Banco de México's forecast. He/she argued that core
inflation expectations for 2019 and 2020 suggest that
core inflation will remain at its current levels, that is,
analysts expect core inflation will not decrease in the
next two years. He/she expressed that the fact that
long-term expectations are at 3.50% might be of
concern. However, he/she argued that, considering
that such expectations are "adaptive", they could
decrease in the medium term when inflation
converges to its target. Another member noted that
the increase in medium and long-term core inflation
expectations is a cause of unease for the central
bank. One member stressed that given the
persistence of a situation of high uncertainty and
upside risks to inflation, monetary policy must
continue to emphasize prudence and the

strengthening of its credibility. He/she indicated that
in this sense, economic analysts' generalized
forecasts of an easing of monetary policy in Mexico
in a context in which short and long- term inflation
expectations are above the 3% target are surprising.
He/she highlighted that this suggests that the


evolution of the reference rates drawn from analysts’
surveys and from market instruments is not
consistent, in their view, with the convergence of
inflation to the target for the first half of 2020. He/she
stated that, given the macroeconomic environment
that is currently foreseen, achieving this will require
a firm monetary policy to be in place for a prolonged
period. Likewise, this and another member agreed
that the behavior of inflation expectations described
above reflects lack of credibility regarding the 3%
target.

Most members mentioned that a prudent and firm
monetary policy must be maintained in order to attain
the convergence of inflation to its target in the time
frame in which monetary policy operates and to
promote the converge of inflation expectations to
3%. Some members stressed the above given the
persistence of an environment of high uncertainty
and of upward risks for inflation. One member
pointed out that the contribution of persistence to
core inflation is asymmetrical, that is, it increases
more when inflation rises and persists for a long time
when inflation decreases. He/she highlighted that,
for this reason, it is essential to have patience when
implementing a tight monetary policy in the periods
after inflation increased significantly. Most members
agreed that Banco de México must communicate a
clear signal of prudence and commitment to its price
stability mandate. Such members pointed out that
the central bank will continue following closely the
evolution of inflation, its determinants and its
expectations and will adjust its monetary policy
stance if necessary.

**3. MONETARY POLICY DECISION**

To guide its monetary policy actions, Banco de
México’s Governing Board follows closely the
development of inflation vis-à-vis its forecasted
trajectory, taking into account the monetary policy
stance and the time frame in which monetary policy
operates, as well as available information on all
inflation determinants and on medium- and longterm inflation expectations, including the balance of
risks for such factors. Monetary policy must respond
prudently if for any reason the uncertainty faced by
the economy increases considerably. In this context,
considering that the recent developments in inflation
and its main determinants have not changed
significantly with respect to their foreseen path, that
the cyclical position of the economy has loosened
somewhat, and that the current monetary policy
stance is consistent with the convergence of inflation
to its target, Banco de México’s Governing Board
decided unanimously to leave the target for the

10


-----

overnight interbank interest rate unchanged at
8.25%. Considering the risks to consolidate low and
stable inflation as well as those the economy’s price
formation is subject to, the Governing Board will take
the necessary actions so that the reference rate is
kept at a level consistent with the convergence of
headline inflation to Banco de México’s target within
the time frame in which monetary policy operates.

Banco de México’s Governing Board will maintain a
prudent monetary policy stance and, under the
current environment of uncertainty, will follow closely
the potential pass-through of exchange rate
fluctuations to prices, Mexico’s monetary policy
stance relative to that of the U.S. —in an external
environment that it is still subject to risks — and the
behavior of slack conditions in the Mexican
economy. In the presence and possible persistence
of factors that, by their nature, involve risks to both
inflation and inflation expectations, monetary policy
will be adjusted in a timely and firm manner to
achieve the convergence of inflation to its 3% target
and to strengthen the anchoring of medium- and
long-term inflation expectations so that they attain
such target.

**4. VOTING**

Alejandro Díaz de León-Carrillo, Irene EspinosaCantellano, Gerardo Esquivel-Hernández, Javier
Eduardo Guzmán-Calafell and Jonathan Ernest
Heath-Constable voted in favor of leaving the target


for the overnight interbank interest rate unchanged
at 8.25%.

**5. DISSENTING VOTES**

**Against the Monetary Policy Statement (press**
**release). Gerardo Esquivel-Hernández**

Although I agreed with the decision to keep the target
interest rate level constant, I do not agree with the
press release that informs about such decision.
Specifically, I differ on both the restrictive tone that
characterizes it as well as the conclusion reached
with respect to the balance of risks to inflation. In
regards to the first issue, I consider that the recent
evolution of the different indicators of inflation in
Mexico described in such document as well as the
policy changes announced recently by the Federal
Reserve and the European Central Bank, opened up
the space for a press release with a more neutral
tone. In regards to the second issue, I consider that
the downside risks to inflation due to both a
perspective for conditions of greater slack in the
Mexican economy as well as a foreseeable
worldwide economic deceleration, are high enough
as to balance the potential upward risks that are
identified in the document. It is worth adding that, in
my assessment, the concerns about the potential
impact on inflation of the increase in the minimum
wage level or of a possible exchange rate passthrough, are smaller than as reflected in the
monetary policy statement.

11


-----

**ANNEX**

The information in this Annex was prepared for this
meeting by the staff of Banco de México’s General
Directorate of Economic Research and General
Directorate of Central Bank Operations and Payment
Systems. It does not necessarily reflect the
considerations of the members of the Governing
Board as to the monetary policy decision.

**A.1. External conditions**

**A.1.1. World economic activity**

The weakening of world economic activity observed
during the second half of 2018 (Chart 1) continued in
the early part of 2019, as evidenced by a lower
dynamism in most advanced and some emerging
economies, such as the euro area, China, and, to a
lesser extent, the United States. Indeed, indicators of
manufacturing activity, capital goods orders and
retail sales point to a lower world growth rate in the
early part of the year. This has led to a downward
revision of global growth expectations for 2019,
although there are certain factors that could support
an increase in growth in the second half of 2019,
such as the economic stimuli in China; a partial
improvement in financial markets; the fading of some
idiosyncratic factors in the euro area; and a gradual
stabilization in emerging economies, like Argentina
and Turkey. Nevertheless, risks to global growth
persist. Among those that stand out are a sharper
deceleration of the euro area, Chinese and US
economies than previously foreseen; uncertainty
regarding trade disputes between the U.S. and
China; a disorderly Brexit process; a lower-thanexpected growth of the Chinese economy; and an
escalation of political and geopolitical turmoil in
different regions.


**Chart 1**

**World GDP Growth**

Annual percentage change, s. a.

12

10

8

6

4

2

0

-2

World

-4 Advanced economies

Emerging and developing economies Q4

-6

2001 2003 2005 2007 2009 2011 2013 2015 2017

s. a. / Seasonally adjusted figures.
Note: GDP calculations for Q4 2018 include estimates for some countries.
The sample of countries used in the calculations accounts for 84.6% of
world GDP measured by purchasing power parity.
Source: Prepared by Banco de México with data from Haver Analytics, J.P.
Morgan and International Monetary Fund.

In the U.S., available indicators of domestic demand
point to a deceleration of economic activity during the
first quarter of the year, with GDP forecasts pointing
to an annualized quarterly growth rate below 2%,
after having grown 2.2% in the fourth quarter of 2018
(Chart 2). Although retail sales picked up significantly
in January, after having fallen markedly at the end of
last year, private consumer spending is expected to
grow at a more moderate rate during the first quarter
of 2019relative to the fourth quarter of 2018. On the
other hand, shipments and capital goods orders
suggest that non-residential investment may

continue displaying weakness. Industrial production
and exports also appear to be enduring the negative
effects of the increasing trade disputes and the
weakening of global growth.

**Chart 2**

**USA: Real GDP and its Components**

Annualized quarterly percentage change and

contributions in percentage points, s. a.

6

4

2

0

-2

Public spending Net exports

Inventories Non-residential investment

-4 Residential investment Private consumption

Total Blue Chip

New York Fed Nowcast

-6

I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV

2016 2017 2018

s. a. / Seasonally adjusted figures.
Source: BEA.

12


-----

In the U.S., industrial production remained practically
unchanged in February, after having contracted at a
monthly rate of 0.1% in January. This was due to the
diverging behavior of its main components. On the
one hand, the unusually low temperatures in
February in several regions of the country explain the
strong rebound of 3.6% in utilities. In contrast,
manufacturing production contracted for the second
consecutive month (monthly rates of -0.3% and
-0.4% in January and February, respectively),
reflecting the weakening of global demand, the
appreciation of the US dollar, and a moderation of
domestic demand in this country. In addition, mining
contracted 0.2% due to the fall in the exploration and
drilling of oil wells. The component of new orders of
the manufacturing sector Purchasing Managers’
Index (PMI), which had exhibited relative strength up
until January, suggests that manufacturing

production may weaken further over the next months.

The US labor market remained tight in early 2019.
Although the monthly average growth of the non-farm
payroll slowed down at the beginning of this year, as
compared to the levels observed in 2018, the number
of new jobs created remains above the increase in
the labor force. The unemployment rate decreased
once more, from 4.0% in January to 3.8% in
February, a figure considerably below the estimated
long-term level. This decline is explained partly by
the return of federal employees who had been
classified as unemployed during the partial

government shutdown in the U.S. The increase in
labor participation rates along with data on other
indicators, such as job openings and quit rates,
suggest a further tightening of the labor market. In
this context, an increase in wage growth was
observed.

In the euro area, economic activity continued to be
affected by transitory factors. In particular, although
for the region as a whole industrial production
recovered in January, in Germany, it contracted
again mostly due to a new downturn in vehicle
production, which may be associated with a strike in
an auto-parts factory. As for forward-looking
indicators available up to March, the production item
of the composite PMI reversed in this month most of
the increase registered in February, mainly reflecting
a fall in the manufacturing sector, while the
component of manufacturing production of the IFO
survey once again declined.

In Japan, available indicators of retail sales, capital
goods orders, industrial production, and exports for
the first quarter of the year point to a deterioration of
domestic and external demand. The manufacturing
sector’s PMI continued to decrease, registering
levels consistent with a contraction. Regardless of


the latter, the unemployment rate remained near its
lowest level of the last 25 years.

In emerging economies, available indicators as of the
first quarter of the year show some stabilization of
economic activity, after the weakening observed in
the fourth quarter, though with heterogeneity among
countries. In particular, indicators of Chinese
industrial production, imports, and gross fixed
investment show that this economy might be
reducing its rate of deceleration in response to the
introduction of a series of fiscal and financial stimuli.
In the foreseeable future, greater economic activity is
expected in both India and in a significant number of
Latin American countries, while Russia and several
Asian and European emerging countries are
estimated to exhibit a lower dynamism.

International prices of commodities have generally
trended upwards over the last weeks. In particular,
crude oil prices continued to recover mainly due to
the fulfillment of oil production cuts by OPEC
members and to the unexpected interruptions of oil
production in Venezuela. Similarly, the prices of
industrial metals have increased in recent weeks due
to the improved outlook for the Chinese economy
after the announcement of greater stimulus

measures by the authorities of this country, and to
progress in China’s trade negotiation with the U.S. In
contrast, grain prices, particularly wheat prices, fell
due to signs of a larger world supply.

**A.1.2. Monetary policy and financial international**
**markets**

In major advanced economies, headline inflation
continued to decrease in the early part of 2019 due
mainly to the lower energy prices observed in relation
to the previous year, while core inflation has
remained relatively stable (Chart 3). In the U.S.,
headline inflation as measured by the Consumer
Price Index (CPI) decreased from 1.9% in December
to 1.5% in February, while its core component went
from 2.2 to 2.1%. The latter was due largely to a fall
in the prices of certain medicines and of used cars.
Additionally, inflation measured by the personal
consumption expenditure deflator (PCE) has

remained slightly below the Federal Reserve target,
given that the possible effects of the imposition of
trade tariffs on the price level may have been offset
by the appreciation of the US dollar. In the euro area
and Japan, core inflation remained at low levels and
below their central banks’ targets. Inflation

expectations implied by market variables remain low
in most advanced countries, suggesting that
inflationary pressures are contained.

13


-----

**Chart 3**

**Selected Advanced Economies: Core Inflation**


3 USA
Euro area
Japan 1/
Canada 2/
United Kingdom

2

1


0

-1


2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019

1/ Excludes fresh food, energy, and the direct effect of the consumption tax
increase.
2/ Excludes food, energy, and the effect of adjustments on indirect taxes
(CPI-XFET).
Source: Haver Analytics, BEA, Eurostat, and Statistics Bureau.

In an environment of a deteriorating outlook for global
growth and of low inflation, expectations that the
major central banks will not tighten monetary
conditions in the foreseeable future have

consolidated (Chart 4).

**Chart 4**

**Reference Rates and Implied Trajectories in**


3.5% **― U.S. Federal Reserve*** Forecasts

**― Bank of England**

3.0% **―― Bank of Japan Bank of Canada**

**― European Central Bank deposit rate**

2.5% **― OIS implicit trajectory Mar 25, 2019**

**--- OIS implicit trajectory Feb 4, 2019**

2.0% **--- OIS implicit trajectory Sep 28, 2018**

1.5%

1.0%

0.5%

0.0%

-0.5%

-1.0% End of 2018 End of 2019 End of 2020

2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020

|ected Advanced Econ|nomies:|: Core|e Inflatio|on|
|---|---|---|---|---|
|cted Advanced Econ Annual percent USA Euro area Japan 1/ Canada 2/ United Kingdom 2015 2016|omies: age cha 2017|Core nge|Inflati Feb 18|on|
|||20||ruary 2019|
|des fresh food, energy, and the . des food, energy, and the effe ET). Haver Analytics, BEA, Eurostat environment of a deteri h and of low inflation central banks will tions in the fore lidated (Chart 4). Chart ference Rates and Im OIS Cur Perce ― U.S. Federal Reserve* ― Bank of England ― Bank of Japan ― Bank of Canada ― European Central Bank deposit rate ― OIS implicit trajectory Mar 25, 2019 --- OIS implicit trajectory Feb 4, 2019 --- OIS implicit trajectory Sep 28, 2018|direct effec ct of adjust, and Statis orating, expe not ti seeable 4 plied T ves1/ nt Forecasts||||
||||||
||||||


1/ OIS: Fixed floating interest rate swap where the fixed interest rate is the
effective overnight reference rate.

- In the case of the US observed reference rate, the average interest rate of
the federal funds target range is used (2.25% - 2.50%).
Source: Bloomberg.

In its March meeting, the US Federal Reserve left the
target range for the federal funds rate unchanged at
2.25-2.5%. In its statement, the Federal Open Market
Committee (FOMC) expressed that, notwithstanding
the strong labor market, available information points
to a deceleration of economic activity in the early part
of the year, vis-à-vis the still solid growth observed
during the fourth quarter. Consistent with the above
statement, the Fed adjusted downwards its growth
expectations for 2019 and 2020 from 2.3 to 2.1%,
and from 2 to 1.9%, respectively. Similarly, the


median of its inflation forecasts went from 1.9 to 1.8%
in 2019, and from 2.1 to 2% in 2020 and 2021,
respectively. The FOMC also reiterated that it will be
patient in making future adjustments to the target
range. This is consistent with an expected slower
trajectory of interest rate increases than previously
anticipated. Indeed, the FOMC members adjusted
their expectations of number of increases to the
target range for 2019 from two in their forecasts of
December to none in those of March, while leaving
expectations of one increase of 25 basis points in
2020 unchanged. The federal funds rate futures even
suggest one cut of 25 basis points in the reference
rate for 2019 and another for 2020. The Fed also
announced significant changes in the strategy for the
normalization of its balance sheet, which consist in
reducing the rate of decrease of its balance starting
in May and concluding such process in September
2019.

In its March meeting, the European Central Bank
(ECB) left its benchmark rate unchanged at 0%, its
key deposit facility rate at -0.4% and its key marginal
lending facility rate at 0.25%. Additionally, the BCE
revised downwards its growth and inflation forecasts
for 2019 and 2020 and adjusted its forward guidance,
pointing out that the key interest rates will remain at
the current levels at least until the end of 2019 and
not until summer, as it had been mentioning in its
previous statements. The ECB also announced a
new program of longer-term refinancing operations
(LTRO) to help preserve favorable bank lending
conditions and a better transmission of monetary
policy. It also confirmed its intention to continue
reinvesting its balance securities for an extended
period of time, past the date when it starts raising its
key interest rates.

In its March meeting, the Bank of Japan left its shortterm policy interest rate unchanged at -0.1% and its
long-term interest rate (indexed to its 10-year bond)
at 0%. It also reiterated that it will continue with a
highly accommodative monetary policy, keeping
interest rates at low levels for as long as needed to
reach its price stability target of 2%, highlighting that
it will take into consideration the uncertainty on the
development of economic activity and inflation,
including the effects of the consumption tax increase
programmed for the end of 2019. Although its
statement noted that world economic conditions have
worsened, which has lead in turn to a deterioration of
Japanese exports and industrial production, it
restated its outlook that domestic demand will
continue its positive trend.

In its March meeting, the Bank of Canada left its
policy interest rate unchanged at 1.75%. It pointed
out that the global economy weakened more than

14


-----

anticipated in January and that it expects that this will
lead to a lower growth of the Canadian economy
during the first half of the year, vis-à-vis previous
expectations. In this environment, the Bank of
Canada modified its message regarding the
expected path of its policy interest rate by stating that
the current conditions indicate that the target rate will
remain below its neutral level, as compared to
previous statements where it noted that target rates
should continue rising towards their neutral level in
order to reach the inflation target. Finally, this central
bank mentioned that it will follow the development of
household spending, oil markets, and trade policies
worldwide.

In its March meeting, the Bank of England left its
base rate (Bank rate) unchanged at 0.75%. In its
statement, the Monetary Policy Committee pointed
out that available figures on economic activity had
been mixed, emphasizing that, although the labor
market has continued strengthening, surveys reflect
that economic activity has continued to deteriorate,
as originally anticipated in its economic forecasts
published in February. Nevertheless, this central
bank stressed that the uncertainty as to

the conditions for the United Kingdom’s withdrawal
from the European Union (Brexit) has complicated
the interpretation of recent economic figures.
Regarding monetary policy, the Bank of England
reiterated that it will adjust it in the direction that is
required, depending on the balance of effects of
Brexit on demand, supply and the exchange rate. It
also highlighted that, if the path of economy activity
is smooth and free of shocks associated with the new
trade arrangements between the European Union
and the United Kingdom, it would be expecting a
gradual and limited increase of its reference rate.

In most emerging economies, inflation continued
following a downward trend, mainly reflecting the
decline in energy and food prices relative to the
previous year as well as in global demand. In several
cases, inflation was below the target of their
respective central banks. Nevertheless, in particular
cases, such as Russia and Argentina, measured
inflation rebounded due to certain adjustments in
taxes and subsidies. In this environment of lower
risks to inflation, most central banks of emerging
economies left their policy interest rates unchanged.
In the specific case of India, its central bank cut its
policy rate, pointing out that the negative output gap
has widened.

International financial markets exhibited a favorable
behavior, given expectations that the major central
banks would be more cautious in adjusting their
monetary policies and, consequently, keeping
interest rates at lower levels than expected some


months ago. Investors’ concerns regarding certain
risk factors have also diminished. In particular, there
is the perception of a higher possibility of a trade
agreement between the U.S. and China. In addition,
the announcement of both fiscal and monetary
measures by the Chinese authorities diminished
concerns about this economy undergoing a sharper
deceleration.

In advanced economies, stock market indices
registered overall gains, the yield spreads on
corporate bonds compressed, and interest rates of
government bonds decreased (Chart 5). In foreign
exchange markets (FX markets), the US dollar
appreciated slightly against the currencies of other
advanced economies, driven partly by the improved
performance of the US economy relative to that of
other advanced economies and by their interest rate
differentials.

**Chart 5**

**Change in Selected Financial Indicators**

**(February 4, 2019 – March 22, 2019)**

Percent, basis points


1/ MSCI Emerging Markets Index (includes 24 countries).
2/ DXY: Weighted average of the nominal exchange rate of the six main
world-traded currencies (calculated by Intercontinental Exchange, ICE) with
the following weights: EUR (57.6%), JPY (13.6%), GBP (11.9%), CAD
(9.1%), SEK (4.2%), and CHF (3.6%).
3/ J.P. Morgan Index constructed from a weighted average of the nominal
exchange rate of emerging economies’ currencies with the following
weights: TRY (8.3%), RUB (8.3%), HUF (8.3%), ZAR (8.3%), BRL (11.1%),
MXN (11.1%), CLP (11.1%), CNH (11.1%), INR (11.1%), and SGD (11.1%).
Source: Bloomberg and ICE.

In emerging economies, asset prices exhibited a
diverging behavior and were highly sensitive to the
monetary policies of advanced economies, to
China’s economic figures, to the trade negotiations
between the U.S. and China, and to some
idiosyncratic factors (Chart 6).

15


20%

15%

10%

5%

0%


**<-- Stock markets** **<-- Currencies** **10-year government bond** 40

**yields-->**

Shanghai (China)

30

FTSE MIB (Italy)
Eurostoxx (Europe)CAC 40 (France) 20
S&P 500 (U.S.)

IBEX (Spain) GBP
FTSE-100 (UK) DXY 2/ 10


-5%

-10%

-15%

-20%

-25%


0

-10

-20

-30

-40

-50


-----

**Chart 6**

**Emerging Economies: Financial Assets**

**Performance between February 1, 2019 and**

**March 25, 2019**

Percent, basis points

**Equity** **Interest rates** **Interest rates**
**Region** **Country** **Currencies** **CDS**

**markets** **2Y** **10Y**

**Mexico** **0.45%** **-2.37%** **-43** **-53** **-8**

**Brazil** **-5.40%** **-4.29%** **19** **34** **10**

**Latin America** **Chile** **-4.28%** **-4.76%** **-21** **-23** **2**

**Colombia** **-1.35%** **9.50%** **-18** **-23** **-10**

**Argentina** **-13.15%** **-9.38%** **104** **86** **185**

**Russia** **2.17%** **-0.96%** **-88** **-48** **-5**

**Poland** **-1.33%** **-1.49%** **1** **-12** **-1**

**Emerging**

**Europe** **Turkey** **-6.56%** **-3.51%** **31** **279** **100**

**Czech Republic** **-1.38%** **2.68%** **0** **10** **-1**

**Hungary** **-0.86%** **1.54%** **-5** **-15** **-1**

**South Korea** **-1.35%** **-2.66%** **-12** **-21** **-2**

**Malaysia** **0.64%** **-2.04%** **-9** **-6** **-13**

**India** **3.25%** **3.67%** **-84** **-60** **-18**

**Asia**

**Philippines** **-0.56%** **-3.45%** **-24** **-30** **-9**

**Thailand** **-0.98%** **-1.54%** **2** **-8** **3**

**Indonesia** **-1.72%** **-1.95%** **-44** **-42** **-19**

**Africa** **South Africa** **-7.37%** **2.66%** **4** **4** **24**

Note: Interest rates correspond to interest rate swaps for 2-year/10-year Note: Interest rates corresponds to interes rate swaps for maturities of 2 and 10 years. For Argentina, because of
maturities. In the case of Argentina, considering low liquidity and in order to
reflect the performance of the fixed income market adequately, rates in US
dollars are used.
Source: Bloomberg.

Going forward, investors are expected to remain
cautious and attentive to the evolution of several risk
factors that are still latent worldwide. Among those
that stand out are the outcome of trade negotiations
between the U.S. and its trade partners; the risk of a
sharper deceleration of the world economy; and the
negotiations regarding Brexit. In addition to the
above, there is the possibility of an escalation of
idiosyncratic and geopolitical events in different
regions.

**A.2. Current situation of the Mexican economy**

**A.2.1. Mexican markets**

In the weeks after Banco de Mexico’s latest monetary
policy decision, the prices of financial assets in
Mexico exhibited a relatively positive performance
(Chart 7). Among the factors behind these results,
the outlook that the main central banks of developed
economies will continue with a much more gradual
than previously expected normalization of their
monetary policies, as well as Mexico’s monetary
policy stance relative to that of other economies are
noteworthy. Nevertheless, it is important to point out
that the period between monetary policy decisions in
Mexico was not exempt from some episodes of
volatility generated by news about the credit rating of
Mexico’s sovereign debt as well as of Pemex’s. In
this regard, the announcement that the credit outlook
of both Mexico and Pemex was being revised from
stable to negative by the S&P rating agency, and the
publication of a document by Moody’s stating that the


Note: The percentile distribution with levels as of 2007 is considered, except
for the Federal Electricity Commission (CFE, for its acronym in Spanish)
bond, where the 10-year bond is considered since its issuance; and for the
CPI, where the inverse distribution of the levels is used. For the Mexican
peso’s exchange rate volatility, skewness and kurtosis, the levels implied in
1-month exchange rate options are considered. For the interest rate
volatility, a Garch model (1,1) is used.
Source: Calculated by Banco de México with Bloomberg and PIP data.

16


announced support measures for Pemex by the
Federal Government are negative for Mexico’s
sovereign rating. In this context, some risk factors
and the uncertainty associated with the Mexican
economy have led to an additional discount or risk
premium for domestic assets.

Despite the aforementioned, the peso exchange rate
appreciated by 0.5% during the reference period.
Trading conditions in the foreign exchange market
improved, as compared to the previous period (Chart
8). Similarly, forward-looking conditions implied by
exchange rate options (FX options), measured using
volatility and depreciation bias in the short term,
improved. Finally, exchange rate expectations by
several financial institutions’ forecasters for the end
of 2019 were adjusted downwards, from 20.33 to
20.10 pesos per US dollar, while those for the end of
2020 were adjusted upwards, from 20.00 to 20.15
pesos per US dollar (Chart 9).

**Chart 7**

**Mexican Markets’ Performance and Trading**

**Conditions**

Pesos per US dollar


100

90

80

70

60

50

40

30

20

10

0


Mbond yields

Range during COPOM period Feb 1, 2019


Mexican peso

March 25,2019


-----

**Chart 8**

**Mexican Foreign Exchange Market Trading**

**Conditions**

Index (10-day moving average)


**Chart 10**

**Annual Revenue Growth of Firms Listed in the**

**BMV Mexican Stock Exchange**

Percent


80

70


22

20

18

16

14

12

10

8

6

4

2

0

-2


60

50


40

30


20


22.0

21.5

21.0

20.5

20.0

19.5

19.0

18.5

18.0

17.5

17.0


J F M A M J J A S O N D J F M A M J J A S O N D J F M A M J J A S O N D J F M


2016 2017 2018


2019


Note: Index calculated using the mean, volatility, skewness, kurtosis, bidask spread and mean of simple differentials, all of them related to quotes of
intraday operations, and the total traded volume. After obtaining this data,
the percentiles since 2011 are calculated and the average of the 7
percentiles for each day is considered. The black vertical line represents
Banco de México’s latest monetary policy decision.
Source: Prepared by Banco de México with Reuters data.

**Chart 9**

**Analysts’ Mexican Peso Exchange Rate**

**Expectations for Each End of Quarter**

Pesos per US dollar


Consumer staples Industrial Materials

Consumer discretionary Telecom services Financial

Energy Health care Total

Source: Prepared by Banco de México with Bloomberg data.

Interest rates of government securities with morethan-one year maturities decreased between 37 and
58 basis points (Chart 11). These reductions took
place in a context in which trading conditions in that
market remained stable throughout the analyzed
period (Chart 12).


22.5

22.0

21.5

21.0

20.5

20.0

19.5

19.0

18.5

18.0

17.5


D M J S D M Q2 2019J Q3 2019S Q4 2019D Q1 2020M


Bloomberg interquartile range Bloomberg expectations range

Mexican peso 2019 year-end forecast Citibanamex

Bloomberg median


Note: The black vertical line represents Banco de México’s latest monetary
policy decision.
Source: Bloomberg and Citibanamex survey.

The revision of economic growth forecasts for Mexico
by several private sector forecasters and multilateral
organizations apparently had a negative impact on
the Mexican stock exchange (BMV, for its acronym
in Spanish), whose main benchmark index (known as
IPC) fell by 2.4% during the reference period. Indeed,
the BMV’s latest quarterly financial results indicate a
deceleration of revenue growth and profit margins for
the main Mexican firms listed (Chart 10).


**Chart 11**

**Nominal Yield on Government Securities**

Percent, basis points

8.75

8.50

8.25

8.00

7.75

7.50

0 5 10 15 20 25 30

Term in years

←Feb 1,2019 ←Mar 25, 2019 Change (Feb 1 to March 25, 2019)→

Source: PIP.


17


-----

**Chart 12**

**Index of Mexican Government Debt Market**

**Trading Conditions**

Index (10-day moving average), percent Index, percentage

80

Index June-27

70

60

50

40

30

20

10

0


9.5

9.0

8.5

8.0

7.5

7.0

6.5

6.0

5.5

5.0


**Chart 14**

**Banxico Overnight Interbank Rate Implied in**

**TIIE IRS Curve**

Percent


J F M M J J S O N J F M M J J S O N J F A M J J S O N D F

2016 2017 2018 2019

Note: Index calculated with the changes in bonds’ interest rates, volatility of
events, bid-ask spread, the average of the differences in quotes of intra-day
operations, and the daily interbank and customer traded volume.
Considering the aforementioned, percentiles since 2016 and the average of
percentiles for every day are calculated. The vertical line represents the
date of Banco de México’s latest monetary policy decision.
Source: Calculated by Banco de México with data from Bloomberg, PIP and
brokerage firms.

The real yield curve decreased between 23 and 34
basis points for their different terms. Thus, both
inflation compensation and inflation risk premia
implied in the spreads of nominal and real rates of
market instruments decreased between 15 and 34
basis points, remaining, on average, at levels of 413
basis points (Chart 13). Expectations regarding the
level of the monetary policy target rate implied in the
yield curve structure were adjusted downwards visà-vis the levels of the previous period (Chart 14).
Nonetheless, markets are not anticipating

adjustments to the target rate in the monetary policy
decision of March, in line with expectations of
forecasters surveyed by Citibanamex. As for
expectations for the target rate for the end of 2019,
markets anticipate that it will end the year at 7.65%,
while the median of forecasters is 8.00%.


8.50

Banxico overnight rate (target rate)

8.25 1-Feb-19

Rest of the period

8.00 25-Mar-19

7.75

7.50

7.25

7.00

6.75

jun. 17J nov. 17N           M           J           D           A           S   mar. 18 jul. 18 dic. 18

2017                    2018                            2019


Source: Banco de México with PIP data.

**A.2.2. Economic activity in Mexico**

During the fourth quarter of 2018, Mexico’s economic
activity decelerated significantly as compared to the
third quarter (Chart 15). Available information
suggests that in the early part of 2019 economic
activity continued registering low growth, as a result
of the slowdown of the world economy, some
weakness in domestic demand, and certain transitory
factors.

**Chart 15**

**Gross Domestic Product**

Quarterly percentage change, s. a.


2

1


0

-1


**Chart 13**

**Inflation Compensation and Inflationary Risk**

**Implied in Government Securities’ Yield Curve**

Basis points

550

500 3-year 10-year 30-year

450

400

350

300

250

200


I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV

2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018

1/ Figures for the fourth quarter of 2018 correspond to INEGI’s GDP
quarterly flash estimate.
Source: Mexico’s National Accounts System (SCNM, for its acronym in
Spanish), INEGI.

During January and February 2018, manufacturing
exports remained on a positive trend due to the
performance of non-automotive exports, while
automotive exports displayed a slight downward path
(Chart 16). By destination, exports to the U.S.
continued trending upwards, although at a lower
growth rate, while those to the rest of the world
slightly recovered.


-2


Q4

II III IV


150

2009 2010 2011 2011 2012 2013 2013 2014 2015 2015 2016 2017 2017 2018 2019

Source: Prepared by Banco de México with Bloomberg data.


18


-----

**Chart 16**

**Total Manufacturing Exports**

Index 2013 = 100, s. a.


170

160

150

140

130

120

110

100

90

80

J

2013


A J O J

2014


A J O J

2015


A J O J

2016


A J O J

2017


A J O J

2018


A J O J F

2019


s. a. / Seasonally adjusted series and trend series based on data in nominal
USD. The former is represented by a solid line and the latter by a dotted
line.
Source: Prepared by Banco de México with data from the Tax
Administration Service (SAT, for its acronym in Spanish), the Ministry of the
Economy (SE, for its acronym in Spanish), Banco de México, the National
Institute of Statistics and Geography (INEGI, for its acronym in Spanish),
Mexico’s Merchandise Trade Balance, and the National System of
Statistical and Geographical Information (SNIEG, for its acronym in
Spanish).

As for domestic demand, according to its monthly
indicator, private consumption decelerated at the end
of 2018 vis-à-vis the growth rate observed in
previous months. This downturn reflected the
weakness of consumption of goods and a certain
loss of dynamism in the consumption of services.
Timely indicators of consumption, albeit of less
coverage, suggest that the lower dynamism of
private consumption may continue in the early part of
2019. Indeed, at the beginning of 2019, retail stores
revenues, domestic sales of manufacturing

industries, as well as sales of light vehicles continued
on a downward path. At the end of 2018, the negative
trend that gross fixed investment —both in machinery
and equipment as well as in construction — had been
exhibiting since the early part of 2018 steepened,
keeping investment at low levels.

As for production, despite the improvement

registered in January 2019, industrial activity
continued exhibiting a weak performance, while
services slightly decelerated (Chart 17). In particular,
although construction rebounded in the first month of
2019, manufacturing continued to show lack of vigor
and mining activities remained on a downward trend
(Chart 18). On the other hand, the evolution of
services at the beginning of the year might be related
to the weak results of different services more related
with consumption, such as those of entertainment
and recreation; temporary accommodation and food
services; and those linked with transportation and
information industries, which might have been
affected by different transitory factors. In contrast, the
items professional, scientific and technical services;
management of companies and enterprises;


administrative and support, waste management and
remediation services; finance and insurance and real
estate and rental and leasing; wholesale trade and
retail trade; and public administration contributed
positively to this sector.

**Chart 17**

**Global Index of Economic Activity**

Indices 2013 = 100, s. a.

120 140

Total IGAE

Secondary activities

Tertiary activities

115 130

Primary activities

110 120

105 110

100 100

January

95 90

J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J

2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019

s. a. / Seasonally adjusted and trend series. The former is represented by a
solid line and the latter by a dotted line.
Source: Mexico’s National Accounts System (SCNM, for its acronym in
Spanish), INEGI.

**Chart 18**

**Industrial Activity**

Indices 2013 = 100, s. a.

120

110

100

90 Total

Mining (22.3%)

Manufacturing (49.7%)

80


s. a. / Seasonally adjusted and trend series. The former is represented by a
solid line and the latter by a dotted line.
Source: Mexico’s National Accounts System (SCNM, for its acronym in
Spanish), INEGI.

As for the economy’s cyclical position, slack
conditions are deemed to have eased towards the
end of 2018 and the early part of 2019, (Chart 19).
As to the labor market, in January and February both
the national and urban unemployment were at levels
above those of the fourth quarter of 2018 (Chart 20).
Although in the early part of 2019 the number of
IMSS-insured jobs continued exhibiting a positive
trend, its growth rate has lost dynamism since mid2018. At the beginning of 2019, unit labor costs in the
manufacturing industry maintained an upward trend
(Chart 21).

19


70


J

2013


A J O J

2014


A J O J

2015


A J O J

2016


A J O J

2017


A J O J

2018


January

A J O J

2019


-----

**Chart 19**

**Output Gap Estimates [1/]**

**Excluding Oil Industry [4/ ]**

Potential output percentages, s. a.


**Chart 21**

**Manufacturing Productivity and Unit Labor**

**Costs [1/]**

Indices 2008 = 100, s. a.


8

Global Index of Economic Activity (IGAE) 2/

6 Gross Domestic Product 2/

95% Confidence interval 3/

4

2

0

-2

-4

-6

-8

-10 Q4

January

-12

J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J

2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019


110

Unit labor costs

Productivity

105

100

95

January

90

J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J

2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019


s. a. / Seasonally adjusted figures.
1/ Output gap estimated with a tail-corrected Hodrick-Prescott filter; see
Banco de México (2009), “Quarterly Report (April-June 2009)", p.74.
2/ GDP flash figures up to the fourth quarter of 2018; IGAE figures up to
January 2019.
3/ Output gap confidence interval calculated with a method of unobserved
components.
4/ Excludes both oil and gas extraction, support activities for mining, and
petroleum and coal products' manufacturing.
Source: Prepared by Banco de México with INEGI data.

**Chart 20**

**National Unemployment Rate and Urban**

**Unemployment Rate**

Percent, s. a.

8.5

Urban unemployment rate

8.0

7.5 National unemployment rate

7.0

6.5

6.0

5.5

5.0

4.5

4.0

3.5

3.0

February

2.5

J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J F

2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019

s. a. / Seasonally adjusted and trend series. The former is represented by a
solid line and the latter by a dotted line.
Source: National Survey of Occupations and Employment (ENOE, for its
acronym in Spanish), INEGI.


s. a. / Seasonally adjusted and trend series. The former is represented by a
solid line and the latter by a dotted line.
1/ Productivity based on hours worked.
Source: Prepared by Banco de México with seasonally adjusted data from
the Monthly Manufacturing Survey and industrial activity indices of INEGI’s
Mexican National Accounts’ System (Sistema de Cuentas Nacionales de
_México)._

In January 2019, domestic financing to the private
sector seemed to have ended the decelerating trend
that began to be observed since the second half of
2018, and which was noticed mainly in the growth
rate of firms financing, while lending to households
grew at a relatively lower and stable pace. Regarding
interest rates, those related to firms financing have
continued to respond to the reference interest rate
and thus, although they did not change at the margin,
they are at the highest levels registered since the
second quarter of 2009. Meanwhile, interest rates of
housing credit have remained stable since the
second quarter of 2017, whereas in the segment of
consumer credit interest rates have remained
practically unchanged, with the exception of those of
credit cards, which have trended upwards since
December 2015. With regards to portfolio quality,
firms and mortgage delinquency rates remained at
low levels, while those related to consumption have
followed a downward trend since August 2018,
although they continue being at high levels.

**A.2.3. Developments in inflation and inflation**
**outlook**

Between January and the first two weeks of March
2019, annual headline inflation decreased from 4.37
to 3.95%. This result was mainly due to the reduction
of non-core inflation, while core inflation continued to
exhibit resistance to decline (Chart 22 and Table 1).
Nevertheless, some of the favorable shocks that
have led to the fall in non-core inflation have recently
started to revert. In particular, during the second half
of February, new increases in energy prices were
registered.

20


-----

13

12

11

10

9

8

7

6

5

4

3

2

1

0


**Chart 22**

**Consumer Price Index**

Annual percentage change

CPI
Core
Non-core


J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J

2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019

Source: Banco de México and INEGI.

As for annual core inflation, it went from 3.60 to
3.51% between January and the first two weeks of
March 2019. Although the annual rate of change of
non-food merchandise prices continued trending
downwards, that of food merchandise prices has
been increasing since February (Chart 23). At the
same time, the annual rate of change of services
prices decreased due to the lower increases in the
prices of tourist services and telecommunications
(Chart 24). Nevertheless, the prices of some services
continued to exhibit high annual rates of change and
do not show a clear downward trend.

**Chart 23**

**Merchandise Core Price Subindex**

Annual percentage change

8

Food, beverages and tobacco

7 Non-food merchandise

6

5

4

3

2

1

1st half March

0

J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J

2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019


**Chart 24**

**Merchandise and Services Core Price Subindex**

Annual percentage change

7

Merchandise

6 Services

5

4

3

2

1

1st half March

0

J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J

2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019

Source: Banco de México and INEGI.

Moreover, annual non-core inflation fell from 6.81 to
5.39% between January and the first two weeks of
March 2019. This reduction was due mainly to the
lower increases in agricultural products and energy
prices, although the latter reversed to an upward
trend in the last two weeks of February (Chart 25 and
Table 1), especially gasoline and LP gas prices,
which reflected the increase in their corresponding
international references.

**Chart 25**

**Non-core Price Subindex**
Annual percentage change


J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J

2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019

Source: Banco de México and INEGI.

The medians for short-term inflation expectations
drawn from surveys exhibited mixed adjustments.
Regarding those from Banco de México’s Survey of
Private Sector Forecasters, between January and
February the medians of end-of-year headline
inflation expectations for 2019 and 2020 were
revised downwards, from 3.80 to 3.65% and from
3.71 to 3.60%, respectively. This decrease is
explained by a reduction in implied non-core inflation
expectations (from 4.73 to 4.11% and from 4.51 to
3.97%, respectively), given that the medians of core
inflation expectations for 2019 remained unchanged
at 3.50% and those for 2020 rose from 3.45 to 3.48%.
The medians of headline inflation expectations for

21


20

15

10

5

0

-5


Non-core
Agriculture
Energy and government-authorized prices


Source: Banco de México and INEGI.


-----

the following 12 months —relative to the month in
which data is collected and to the subsequent month
— increased from 3.98 to 4.17% and from 3.98 to
4.10%, respectively. The median of headline inflation
expectations for the medium term (next four years)
declined from 3.53 to 3.50%. The median for the
longer term (next five to eight years) remained stable
at around 3.50%. Nevertheless, it is worth noting that
the median of medium-term core inflation

expectations was adjusted upwards to 3.50%, while
that for the longer term remained at levels close to
3.40%, after being at 3.30% during most of 2018.
Thus, both headline and core inflation expectations
remain above the 3.00% headline inflation target.
Finally, inflation expectations implicit in market prices
of long-term money market instruments (drawn from
10-year government bonds) remained at levels close
to 3.5%, while the inflation risk premium decreased,
although it remains at relatively high levels.

Considering the monetary policy stance and the
timeframe in which it operates, as well as available
data on inflation determinants, including the current
economic environment and the economy’s business
cycle phase, forecasts for annual headline inflation
continue to anticipate that it will reach levels close to
Banco de México’s target during the first half of 2020.
Similarly, annual core inflation is expected to be at
levels around 3% in the first half of 2020.


The abovementioned forecasts are subject to risks
within the timeframe in which monetary policy
operates. Among such risks, the following stand out.
To the upside: that the peso exchange rate is
pressured by external and domestic factors; that
more pressures are observed on energy prices or
new increases on agricultural and livestock product
prices; that an escalation of protectionist and
compensatory measures worldwide materializes;
that public finances deteriorate; and, considering the
magnitude of the recent minimum wage increases,
there is also the risk that these bring about wage
revisions that exceed productivity gains and give rise
to cost pressures, affecting formal employment and
prices; and that the persistence shown by core
inflation also gives rise to a greater resistance of
long-term inflation expectations to decline. To the
downside: that certain goods included in the noncore subindex exhibit lower price variations; and, that
slack conditions widen more than foreseen.

Altogether, although there has been an

intensification of some downside risk factors, there
are still others that might put upward pressure on
inflation in greater magnitude and make it deviate
from its foreseen path. For this reason, the balance
of risks for the forecasted trajectory for inflation still
remains to the upside, in an environment of marked
uncertainty.


**Table 1**

**Consumer Price Index and Components**

Annual percentage change

**Item** **January 2019** **February 2019** **1st half March 2019**

**CPI** **4.37** **3.94** **3.95**

**SubyacenteCore** **3.60** **3.54** **3.51**

**Merchandise** **3.66** **3.61** **3.68**

Food, beverages and tobacco 4.30 4.34 4.52

Non-food merchandise 3.03 2.90 2.86

**Services** **3.51** **3.43** **3.31**

Housing 2.59 2.62 2.66

Education (tuitions) 4.68 4.84 4.84

Other services 4.28 4.02 3.67

**No SubyacenteNon-core** **6.81** **5.25** **5.39**

**Agriculture** **7.41** **4.80** **3.80**

Fruits and vegetablesFruits abd vegetables 13.23 10.68 10.21

Meats, poultry, fish and eggsLivestock 1.95 0.77 -0.33

**Energy and government-authorized prices Energéticos y Tarifas Aut. por Gobierno** **6.26** **5.73** **6.70**

Energy productsEnergy 7.36 6.57 7.94

Government-authorized pricesTarifas Autorizadas por Gobierno **3.45** **3.43** 3.36

Source: INEGI.


22


-----

-----

-----

