-----

-----

**FOREWARNING**
This document is provided for the reader’s convenience only.
The translation from the official Spanish version was made
by Banco de México’s staff. Discrepancies may arise
between the original document in Spanish and its English
translation. For this reason, the original Spanish version is
the only official document.


**1. PLACE, DATE, AND PARTICIPANTS**

**1.1 Place:** Av. Cinco de Mayo Street no. 2, 5[th ] floor,
Col. Centro, Mexico City.

**1.2. Date of Governing Board meeting:** November
13, 2019

**1.3. Participants:**
Alejandro Díaz de León-Carrillo, Governor. Irene
Espinosa-Cantellano, Deputy Governor. Gerardo
Esquivel-Hernández, Deputy Governor.
Javier Eduardo Guzmán-Calafell, Deputy Governor.
Jonathan Ernest Heath-Constable, Deputy
Governor.
Arturo Herrera-Gutiérrez, Secretary of Finance and
Public Credit.
Gabriel Yorio-González, Undersecretary of Finance
and Public Credit.
Elías Villanueva-Ochoa, Secretary of the Governing
Board.

Prior to this meeting, preliminary work by Banco de
México’s staff analyzing the economic and financial
environment, together with the developments in
inflation and the determinants and outlook for
inflation, was conducted and presented to the
Governing Board (see annex).

**2. ANALYSIS AND RATIONALE BEHIND THE**
**GOVERNING BOARD’S VOTING**

Most members of the Governing Board pointed out
that during the third quarter of the year the world
economy continued to decelerate. Some members
added that this was mainly the result of trade
tensions, primarily between the United States and
China. In this regard, one member mentioned the
imposition of tariffs between these countries, as well
as restrictions to trade in technology and to
investment, while another member added that other
idiosyncratic factors have also contributed to the
economic slowdown. One member specified the
latter has had a differentiated impact across
countries, depending on their degree of openness
and the overall state of their economies.

The majority of members mentioned that the adverse
global environment has contributed to a decline in


world trade, in investment and in business
confidence as well as in manufacturing production.
One member stated that indicators of global
manufacturing activity suggest that it could be
reaching an inflection point, which would limit the
impact of potential negative effects on world trade
and on activity in the services’ sector. However,
he/she added that the possible strengthening of the
manufacturing industry is still uncertain.

Most members mentioned that the main advanced
economies have decelerated, which has been
salient in the industrial sector, and has been mainly
motivated by the abovementioned trade disputes.
One member highlighted the fragility of aggregate
demand in the euro area and Japan, and its strong
dependence on world trade. Likewise, he/she
mentioned that the United States has also been
affected by trade disputes, but to a lesser degree.
He/she added that in advanced economies, the
services sector has performed better, thus
supporting the labor market. In this regard, another
member considered that labor markets in these
economies continue to perform strongly, with low
unemployment rates, which has allowed
consumption and the services sector to be less
affected by the economic slowdown. Regarding
emerging economies, one member noted that some
of them have been subject to risk factors of an
idiosyncratic and political nature, and associated to
public policies, which have reinforced the trend of
lower growth and uncertainty and have hindered
investment. Another member mentioned that
emerging economies have shown some recovery,
which could more than offset the weakening
trajectory of advanced economies. Considering the
above, he/she stated that the latest information
suggests a stabilization of global economic growth
by the end of 2019.

With respect to the growth outlook, most members
pointed out that it has continued to be adjusted to the
downside. One member delved into the fact that,
although an outlook of low interest rates has
consolidated for a long time, investment tends to be
more sensitive to an environment of high economic
uncertainty. He/she added that, for that reason, it is
likely that investment will remain weak and that
looser financial conditions will support households’
spending and lead to greater leverage, rather than
encouraging an increase in capital accumulation.

Most members noted that trade tensions between
the U.S. and China have eased, and that the
probability of a disorderly exit of the United Kingdom
from the European Union has diminished. One

1


-----

member pointed out that in the U.S. there is a lower
probability of additional tariffs on imports of vehicles
and vehicle parts from the European Union, among
others economies. Another member considered that
the favorable evolution of trade tensions, as well as
the more accommodative stances adopted by the
main central banks have mitigated the perception of
risk for global economic activity. Nevertheless, most
members emphasized that risks to the global
economy persist, associated to trade tensions and
geopolitical factors as well as political and social
uncertainty in different countries. One member
pointed out that emerging economies are facing
considerable challenges, such as a greater-thananticipated deceleration, both at a global level and in
some of these countries, particularly in China, where
the authorities’ efforts to implement countercyclical
measures could be insufficient. Another member
mentioned that the global economic situation poses
significant macroeconomic policy challenges.
He/she stated that the room for maneuver for fiscal
policy is limited, and that it is worrying that global
indebtedness has reached historic highs. Finally,
he/she argued that increasing the debt burden would
imply adding more financial vulnerabilities to the
world economy and could represent a major obstacle
for sustainable growth. In this context, most
members agreed that the balance of risks to world
economic activity remains biased to the downside.

Considering the weak economic environment, most
members underlined that global inflation pressures
have diminished. One member indicated that the
indirect effects of the lower energy prices have also
contributed to the above. In the case of the main
advanced economies, most members mentioned
that headline and core inflation remain below their
central banks’ targets. One member added that
inflation expectations for this group of economies
have also been at levels below such targets. Most
members agreed that these developments in
inflation have taken place despite the upturn in
wages, associated with the relative strength of the
labor market. One member added that inflation in
various emerging economies is also at levels below
their respective targets. Finally, one member
considered that the balance of risks for world inflation
remains biased to the downside.

The majority of members pointed out that some
central banks of the main advanced economies have
taken measures to relax monetary conditions in
recent months. One member highlighted that the
contribution of additional stimuli to address the
economic slowdown is increasingly smaller. All
members underlined that in its October meeting, the


US Federal Reserve cut the target range for the
federal funds rate by 25 basis points. Most added
that, with this decision, a 75 basis point decrease has
accumulated this year. They highlighted that the
Federal Reserve communication indicates that the
attained range is appropriate, considering the risks
faced by the US economy and that, therefore, no
further adjustments are expected in the short term.
One member highlighted that the adjustment in the
federal funds rate was made despite the fact that
inflation is at its symmetrical 2% target and despite
the strength of economic activity and of the labor
market, given that, in his/her opinion, the Federal
Reserve considers that uncertainty is high. In
addition, another member stated that, given the
referred adjustment, the US Treasury bonds’ yield
curve is no longer inverted, even in its shorter
segments. For the euro area, Japan and the United
Kingdom, most members noted that the central
banks of these countries have declared that they will
maintain accommodative monetary policy stances
until they reach their respective inflation targets. One
member underlined that the European Central Bank
increased its monetary stimulus considerably in
September. Some members pointed out that the
Bank of Japan stated that it could even reduce its
interest rate in case it was necessary. As for
emerging economies, another member expressed
that most central banks have eased their monetary
policies during the year. He/she mentioned that
some of these have lowered their interest rates to a
greater degree than the Federal Reserve, as Brazil
(150 basis points), Chile (100bp), India (135bp) and
Indonesia (100bp).

Most members agreed that global financial markets
exhibited lower volatility, due mainly to the mitigation
of the above mentioned global risks. In addition, they
indicated that the accommodative monetary policy
stances in the main advanced economies have
contributed to a better performance of such markets
in recent weeks. Some members mentioned that, in
view of a lower risk aversion, stock markets have
recorded gains. One member noted that these have
reached historic highs. Another member added that
since the last monetary policy decision, advanced
economies’ interest rates increased moderately and
the US dollar registered a generalized depreciation.
Most members pointed out that during the last weeks
capital flows to emerging economies exhibited a
positive trend, both to fixed income and equity
markets, and that the currencies of these economies
appreciated against the US dollar and their risk
premia decreased. One member mentioned that
both in advanced and emerging economies, financial
markets anticipate an environment of low interest

2


-----

rates and that over 30% of fixed income instruments
exhibit negative returns. However, he/she noted that
volatility episodes have been observed during the
periods in which different risk factors have
intensified. In this context, most members indicated
that financial markets could be affected by the
prevailing risks to the global economy. Some
members argued that these could, to a greater
extent, affect emerging markets. One member
pointed out that the negative effect of the
materialization of such risks on financial markets
should not be overestimated, given that the central
banks of the main economies would seek to improve
global financial conditions via more accommodative
monetary policy stances. Some members
considered that the risks to international financial
markets have subsided, and one of them mentioned
that the balance of risks to global financial markets
remains neutral.

All members pointed out that latest information on
the third quarter of 2019 shows that the stagnation
that economic activity in Mexico has been exhibiting
for several quarters continues. Most members
agreed that there has been practically no economic
growth during a year and a half. Some members
added that in the third quarter growth was marginal.
One member specified that the economy grew 0.1%,
while in the annual comparison a 0.4% contraction
was observed. Some members highlighted that
economic activity is decelerating at a faster-thananticipated pace. One member added that if the
figures for the third quarter are confirmed, the first
annual contraction since 2009 would be registered,
along with the first desynchronization of the Mexican
economy in 25 years with respect to the US
economic cycle. Some members pointed out that
such contraction would have its origins in the
uncertainty related to domestic factors, such as
governance problems and public expenditure below
the programmed, and to external factors, such as the
USMCA ratification process.

Regarding aggregate demand, most members
highlighted the weakening of consumption and the
lack of dynamism of investment. Delving into the
evolution of consumption, one member added that it
has decelerated despite the continuous increase in
remittances and in the total wage bill in real terms.
Another member added that the weakness of
consumption is evident in durable goods, while retail
sales have registered sustained growth, which could
be related to the expansion and creation of some
social programs. As for investment, he/she
highlighted that, after having followed a clear
negative trend during the year, August figures were


positive, albeit still insufficient to consider that there
has been a change of trend. Another member
specified that public investment has been
contracting for several years and continues to bear
the adjustment of public finances, while private
investment has been affected by the uncertainty
related to the trade relationship in North America and
other domestic factors since late 2016. As for
external demand, most members indicated that
manufacturing exports lost dynamism, although
some members pointed out that automotive
manufactures destined to the U.S. partially offset the
referred fall.

On the supply side, most members mentioned the
weakness exhibited by the industrial sector, in
particular construction and mining. One member
pointed out that the weakness in the mining sector
was due to lower oil production. Meanwhile, another
member highlighted that industrial activity started to
rebound in August and seems to have stopped falling
after reaching a minimum in July. He/she added that
this behavior is accounted for by a better
performance of mining, which finally appears to have
started reverting the negative trend it had shown for
many years, and because manufactures have
continued to grow, showing greater resilience
against an adverse environment. With respect to
tertiary activities, most members noted their
stagnation throughout 2019, which is a cause for
concern. In this regard, one member highlighted that,
in the past, these activities have contributed
significantly to economic growth. Another member
indicated that tertiary activities are the largest sector
of the economy and added that most of their
components have weakened, although activities
such as transportation, trade and recreation are
starting to show a slight recovery. One member
noted that only primary activities performed
favorably.

Regarding the labor market, most members stressed
the strong decline in the pace of formal job creation
during the year. In this respect, one member noted
that as of October 2019 the growth rate of annual
formal employments was 1.68%, which is below the
3.74% registered last year. Some members
mentioned that the unemployment rate has risen
moderately. However, one member added that this
has been accompanied by higher rates of
underemployment and informal sector employment.
He/she argued that, in addition to the lack of
dynamism, the labor market is characterized by the
creation of job posts that are, to a large extent, of low
quality or that cannot meet the workers’ needs.
Some members noted that the performance of the

3


-----

labor market reflected the weakness of the economy.
One member added that it has also reflected a
trajectory of wages that has been incompatible with
the evolution of productivity.

Most members agreed that the stagnation of
economic activity has implied the widening of slack
conditions in the economy at a faster rate than
foreseen. Some members noted that the negative
output gap is expected to continue widening
throughout next year.

Most members mentioned that, based on the most
recent data, expected GDP growth for the present
and next year will be lower than that published in the
Quarterly Report April – June 2019. Similarly, one
member pointed out that specialists surveyed by the
central bank once again revised their growth
expectations downwards for the current and
following years. With respect to growth in 2019, one
member indicated that the economy would not grow
in the last quarter of the year and another one added
that, therefore, a delay is anticipated in the recovery
foreseen for such quarter. Another member noted
that this would partly be due to factors such as
strikes and technical shutdowns that would affect the
performance of the automotive industry during the
fourth quarter of the year. Meanwhile, another
member estimated that economic activity will tend to
improve moderately starting next year, despite the
current stagnation due to the statistical comparison
basis, which will be more evident in certain sectors
of the industry, for instance, in construction. In the
same vein, he/she mentioned that 2020 will be a leap
year, and therefore there will be an extra day to
produce goods and services, as compared to the
previous year. Finally, another member highlighted
that the weakness of gross fixed investment has had
considerable implications for the evolution of the
economy’s capital stock and that its growth rate is
estimated to intensify in 2019 the downward trend it
has been showing over the last years, with the
consequent risks for potential growth.

Most members noted that in an environment of
marked uncertainty, the balance of risks to growth
continues biased to the downside. One member
considered that such balance has deteriorated
significantly given the unfavorable dynamics of the
services sector and emphasized that one of the most
important risks that economic activity faces is the
continuation of very restrictive monetary policy
stance for too long, because it operates through
channels that affect real variables, such as
consumption and investment. Some members stated
that growth is subject to both external and domestic


risks. Among external risks, besides the global risks
described above, one member mentioned the threat
of tariffs by the United States on Mexico, and delays
in the USMCA ratification. Another member added
that manufacturing exports could be affected by the
evolution of industrial production and of the
automotive sector in both the United States and the
rest of the world. With regards to domestic risks,
some members mentioned the situation of Pemex
and of public finances. Regarding the latter, one
member highlighted the risk of a reduction in public
revenues and internal factors that affect confidence
and the outlook for the Mexican economy. Another
member added the negative effect of maintaining
very high interest rates on public finances. One
member mentioned various upward risks to growth:
i) the possibility of the USMCA being ratified in the
short term, which would improve the certainty
outlook for investment; and ii) a better
implementation of public policies. Finally, he/she
added that the negative factors that affected the
economic performance in 2019 are not likely to occur
again, such as the difficulties caused by the fuel
shortages, the strikes in Tamaulipas, the railroad
blockages, and the suspension of important
infrastructure projects.

Most members mentioned that headline inflation has
remained stable, and that in October it was 3.02%
and thus lies around the point target. The majority
stressed that this performance is due to the fact that
non-core inflation has remained at low levels, lying
at 1.01% in October, while core inflation has
remained at higher levels, although it has shown a
slight decline to 3.68% in such period. One member
considered that headline inflation has declined at a
faster-than-anticipated pace.

Regarding non-core inflation, most members
indicated that it is at historically low levels and
pointed out that in recent months some downward
risks have materialized in this subindex. Some
members highlighted the lower rates of change of
energy and agricultural and livestock product prices.
One stressed that these have recently shown the
lowest levels on record. However, most members
highlighted that non-core inflation is subject to a high
degree of volatility.

With respect to core inflation, most members agreed
that it has continued to show persistence. One
member pointed out that it has remained at around
3.8% for over 9 months. Another member expressed
that within the core component there are greater
pressures on the prices of services other than
housing and on food merchandise, partly due to the

4


-----

indirect effects of the energy price increases during
the second half of last year and of wage increases
since the start of this year, which also have a lagged
effect. One member added that, given the negative
output gap, an exchange rate that has remained
most of the year at more appreciated levels than at
the end of 2018, energy prices with negative annual
growth and agricultural product prices with moderate
growth, wages are the variable that seems to be
contributing, to a larger extent, to core inflation’s
persistence. He/she pointed out that econometric
exercises lead to the same conclusion. Meanwhile,
some members mentioned that core inflation has
recently shown slightly lower readings. One member
noted that in October it declined for the fourth
consecutive month. Some members considered that
the fall of core inflation is essentially explained by the
lower growth of services prices.

Most members indicated that short-term inflation
expectations drawn from surveys have followed the
latest data, while longer term expectations have
remained relatively stable, albeit at levels above 3%.
Some members detailed that in October headline
inflation expectations for year-end 2019 decreased
to 3%. One member added that for 2020 and for the
medium and long terms they stood at 3.5%. Some
members mentioned that compensation for inflation
and inflationary risk implied in fixed income
instruments has continued to decrease. One of them
specified that break-even inflation is at its lowest
level of the year.

Regarding inflation forecasts, most members
mentioned that the recent behavior of the factors that
affect the foreseen trajectory of headline inflation
suggests that it may lie slightly below the trajectory
set forth in the previous Quarterly Report. One
member pointed out that at the end of the year
inflation is likely to be below the target. Meanwhile,
another member stated that, on balance, the latest
data on inflation and the expected trajectory of
different economic variables do not significantly alter
the outlook for the performance of headline and core
inflation for the following months. One member
indicated that, despite expectations of headline
inflation converging to its target, the trajectory
depends on core inflation’s persistence easing and
on non-core inflation converging to levels close to the
inflation target. Some members emphasized that a
slight increase in headline inflation is expected in the
first quarter of next year, as a consequence of the
comparison base, calendar effects and seasonality.
One mentioned that it is foreseen that inflation will
return to levels of around 3% starting in the second
quarter of 2020.


Regarding the outlook for core inflation, one member
outlined that its performance in the following quarters
will depend on the interaction between the indirect
effects of the energy price and wage increases, with
the effects of the greater slack in the economy.
He/she pointed out that core inflation is estimated to
follow a gradual declining trajectory towards 3%
within the forecast horizon, slightly above that
anticipated in the last Quarterly Report. One member
considered that there are two factors that make it
possible to anticipate a greater reduction in the core
component. On the one hand, the moving average of
the annualized monthly changes of this indicator
remains at low levels of 3.3%. On the other hand,
fundamental core inflation, that is, the one that is
more closely associated to the economic cycle, was
only 3.38% in October. With respect to non-core
inflation, another member indicated that this
component is expected to rebound to levels much
closer to 3%.

In relation to upward risks to inflation, most members
mentioned the possibility of core inflation continuing
to show persistence. Some members added that this
could occur despite the greater slack in the
economy. In this respect, one member detailed that
risks to core inflation’s trajectory are evident when
considering that close to 70% of the basket of the
item that includes services other than housing and
education, excluding tourism, continues to show
annualized monthly growth rates above 4%. In this
context, some members expressed their concern
about the persistence of headline and core inflation
expectations above the central bank forecast for
2020 and for the long term.

Most members added the following risks: i) wage
increases above productivity gains, and that this
generates cost pressures. Some mentioned that
there is uncertainty associated with the new
adjustments to the minimum wage in 2020: ii) that
the peso exchange rate comes under pressure from
both external and domestic factors; iii) the threat of
tariffs by the United States and that compensatory
measures are adopted, although they considered
that this risk has diminished; iv) that public finances
deteriorate; and, v) increases in agricultural,
livestock or energy prices greater than expected. In
addition, some members pointed out the risk that
non-core inflation registers a reversal to its historic
values.

One member mentioned the composition of
observed inflation as a risk to its trajectory. He/she
indicated that currently its components do not
correspond to a long-term equilibrium, given that

5


-----

non-core inflation is abnormally low and core inflation
is high.

As for downward risks, most members mentioned
the following: i) a possible appreciation of the peso
exchange rate, which could likely be associated with
a context of greater risk appetite in international
financial markets or in case the trade agreement with
the United States and Canada is ratified; ii) that slack
conditions widen more than expected or that their
impact on core inflation is greater than foreseen; in
this regard, one member indicated that, given that a
negative output gap is observed, no demand-related
inflation pressures are anticipated; and, iii) the
possibility that the prices of certain goods included in
the non-core subindex register lower rates of
change. Some members pointed out as a possible
indicator of lower inflationary pressures the fact that
the producer price index was 0.6% in October as
compared to the same month of the previous year,
noting that this rate is the lowest observed since
August 2015.

In this context, most members agreed that
uncertainty still persists regarding the risks that could
make inflation deviate from its foreseen trajectory.
One member considered that, although the balance
of risks is more balanced in the short term, in a
longer-term perspective it could become uncertain
due to the above mentioned dynamics of the
headline inflation components. Another member
mentioned that although the balance of risks is
complex, in his/her opinion, it continues biased to the
upside. One member estimated that risks to inflation
have subsided considerably during this year,
associated with better global financial conditions and
with the above mentioned downward risks.
Therefore, he/she considered that the balance of
risks to inflation remains neutral.

Most members agreed that financial markets in
Mexico performed favorably, in line with the
improvement in global financial conditions. They
indicated that government bond yields declined for
all terms. One member specified that stronger
decreases were observed in certain short-term
segments, and another one indicated that interest
rates have remained at their lowest levels of the
year. One member added that the recomposition
towards longer term assets in foreign investors’
portfolio continued. Another member stated that
nominal and real yield curves are inverted in their
shortest tranches. He/she added that, after breaking
down long-term interest rates into short-term interest
rate expectations and term premia, it is found that
both components have declined in recent months.


He/she argued that maintaining a prudent
macroeconomic policy stance has been crucial for
yield curves, both nominal and real, especially in
their long end, to be adjusting in an orderly manner
and to the downside, in a context of a slowdown of
economic activity, looser global financial conditions,
and idiosyncratic risks. All members noted that the
peso exchange rate appreciated slightly. One
member stressed that such appreciation occurred in
a context of better market trading conditions. Another
member highlighted that the Mexican peso has
performed better than other Latin-American
economies’ currencies, which he/she associated
partly to the fact that the short-term interest rate in
Mexico is higher. One member added that the
exchange rate has maintained a favorable outlook in
light of the possible ratification of the USMCA. Some
members mentioned that the stock market recorded
slight gains. As for risk premia, most members
emphasized that these decreased. One member
stated that the Credit Default Swap (CDS) premium
has decreased, both for the sovereign and Pemex’s
debt, as both of these were at their lowest levels of
the year. Another member emphasized that despite
this reduction, the level of the sovereign CDS
premium suggests that markets are still discounting
a downgrade of Mexico’s credit rating, given that said
CDS level is above those of other countries with a
similar or even lower credit rating.

Most members agreed that risks persist, which could
affect the performance of financial assets in Mexico.
Among these risks is a possible downgrade of the
sovereign and Pemex’s ratings. In this sense, one
member claimed that, given the strong presence of
foreign investors, the country is exposed to a
reversal of capital flows and to an increase of the
country risk premium. Another member pointed out
that economic growth rates consistently below
expectations are a risk to domestic financial markets.
One member considered that, although risks for
domestic financial markets have diminished, an
important risk faced by these markets currently is the
continuation of an overly-tight monetary policy for a
prolonged period. He/she stated that an interest rate
that is too high, in addition to affecting growth and
public finances, contributes to maintain the
exchange rate appreciated, which not only affects
net exports, but also attracts speculative capital,
which could increase the country’s financial
vulnerabilities. He/she stated that it is possible that a
very high interest rate, which in principle would seek
to protect the economy from certain risks, could,
paradoxically, end up being an additional
destabilizing factor.

6


-----

Most members mentioned that the current
environment continues to pose significant risks that
could affect the country’s macroeconomic
conditions, its ability to grow, and the economy’s
price formation process. In this regard, they
emphasized that it is particularly important that, in
addition to a prudent and firm monetary policy,
measures to foster an environment of confidence
and certainty for investment and higher productivity
are adopted, and that public finances are
consolidated in a sustainable way. In this context,
they underlined that it is necessary to strengthen the
credit rating outlook for the sovereign and Pemex’s
debt, as well as to achieve the fiscal targets for 2019
and the goals set in the 2020 Economic Package.
Likewise, they also pointed that strengthening the
rule of law, tackling corruption, and fighting insecurity
are equally imperative. One member added that it is
important to increase productivity by adopting new
technologies and investing in human capital. Another
member mentioned that such measures would
prevent potential growth from further deteriorating.
Delving into Pemex’s financial situation, the majority
of members acknowledged that efforts for
refinancing the company’s external liabilities have
had a favorable impact, as recognized by markets.
They also mentioned that during the third quarter
Pemex registered a positive cash flow and that oil
production ceased to fall. One member added that
the state-owned company has improved its financial
profile in the short and medium terms. Some
members stated that due to the above, the price of
debt instruments stabilized and the premium on its
CDS decreased. One member specified that in
addition to the latter, the significant channeling of
resources by the federal government contributed to
reduce Pemex’s 5-year CDS by 100 basis points
over the last weeks and thus the possibility of a
downgrade is significantly lower than it was a few
months ago. Nevertheless, the majority warned
about Pemex’s business plan continuing to be a
cause of concern for the rating agencies.

One member expressed that the state-owned
company's financial results as of the third quarter of
this year show that it is still premature to consider
that the structural problems that have prevented it
from being profitable have been overcome. He/she
also mentioned that the International Monetary Fund
(IMF) noted that the business plan of the company
must be revised. Another member pointed out that
there is skepticism about Pemex’s ability to meet its
production and reserve replacement goals. He/she
asserted that one of the rating agencies, whose
stance is decisive for maintaining the company’s
investment grade, has pointed out that the


company’s investment levels are far below those
that, in its opinion, are required to increase
production and reserves. Some members indicated
that given the above, markets seem to continue
discounting that Pemex will lose its investment
grade. Faced with this scenario, such members
warned that this company could require additional
support from the Federal Government, which would
exert greater pressure on public finances, which
already face the challenge of achieving the revenues
projected for next year, in an environment in which
economic activity may be lower than originally
forecasted. One member pointed out that, given the
aforementioned, the sovereign credit rating may also
be affected.

Delving into the state of public finances, one member
mentioned that according to the IMF, the weakness
of public revenues can lead to pressures and that, in
the absence of additional measures to raise
revenues or reduce spending, it estimates that a
fiscal gap of between 0.5 and 1.5% of GDP will
appear over the next five years. On the other hand,
another member mentioned that fiscal policy has
remained prudent and that the proposal for 2020 is
cautious and responsible by presenting a primary
surplus of 0.7% of GDP. Finally, the majority added
that, judging from the opinion of business people and
analysts, among the obstacles for economic activity
in Mexico those that stand out are factors related to
problems of insecurity, the rule of law, corruption and
the lack of clarity in some public policies. One
member pointed out that the percentage of
companies that report having been victims of a crime
continued to increase, and that the cost of credit is
clearly higher for companies in those states with
higher crime rates.

In relation to the monetary policy decision,
considering that the lower levels recorded by
headline inflation, as well as the ample slack
conditions in the economy and the recent behavior
of the external and domestic yield curves allow for
decreasing the policy rate, the majority considered
adequate to reduce by 25-basis points the overnight
interbank interest rate to a level of 7.50%.

Most members highlighted that given the high
uncertainty outlook faced by inflation, monetary
policy must remain prudent. They stated that the
monetary policy stance must be adjusted gradually,
incorporate available information, respond to the
economy’s conditions, and allow for an orderly and
sustained convergence of inflation to the target. One
member argued that the level of the attained rate
allows for gradually decreasing the level of monetary

7


-----

restriction, according to the economy’s conditions,
and facilitates the efficient convergence of inflation
to its target in the time frame in which monetary
policy operates. Another member mentioned that the
outlook has become more complex as GDP growth
has turned out to be lower than anticipated, while
core inflation and inflation expectations continue to
show persistence, and an environment of high
uncertainty prevails around factors that could affect
inflation, even in the short term, such as the wage
policy and Pemex’s situation. In this context, he/she
asserted that while any room for maneuver that is
available should be used to ease the monetary policy
stance, this should be done with caution given the
risks faced by the economy.

One member pointed out that it is necessary to
determine the best balance for the monetary position
that considers i) an external environment of lower
inflationary pressures and interest rates; ii) a
headline inflation around its target, a persistent core
inflation and an atypically low non-core inflation; iii) a
widening of economic slack; and iv) the need for
aligning short-term interest rates to procure an
orderly adjustment of the economy; that is in tune
with the yield curve and the risk premia; that
contributes to maintain the attractiveness of
domestic markets; and that helps the yield curve
incorporate short-term interest rate expectations that
are consistent with the central bank objectives. The
same member considered that the above suggests
that, under the current environment, the monetary
policy stance should be adapted gradually. He/she
added that in such process it is necessary to identify,
in the best possible manner, the economy’s
conditions, the risks that it faces, as well as possible
vulnerabilities that might arise.

Some members highlighted that the monetary policy
stance is very restrictive, considering both the
domestic situation as well as its position relative to
other countries, and that therefore the policy rate
should be adjusted by 50 basis points. As for the
domestic situation such members argued that
economic slack has increased significantly and that
inflation is at the central bank’s target.

One of them considered that the adjustment in the
interest rate in Mexico is lagging very much behind
with respect to the current conditions in the country
and in the world. He/she pointed out that from
September 2018 to October 2019 inflation
decreased by 200 basis points, while the policy rate
is at the same level as in September last year. In this
context, he/she considered that a reduction of only
25 basis points to the policy rate would be minimizing


the important fall registered by inflation in the last
year. He/she also argued that it would obviate other
factors that have changed significantly during said
period: the deceleration of the global economy, the
relaxation of monetary policies of advanced and
emerging economies, as well as the decline in some
internal risks associated with Pemex and public
finances. He/she also mentioned that Mexico is the
investment grade emerging market country with the
highest real rate in the world, and that it is the only
country in Latin America that simultaneously has
inflation close to its target together with a tight
monetary policy position. He/she considered such
stance atypical, in addition to unjustifiable and
insensitive to the current circumstances. He/she
considered such stance inexplicable given that
already headline inflation is at its objective and the
output gap is at its most negative level since the
2009 crisis. He/she mentioned that it might widen if
the interest rate remains too high. Finally, he/she
warned that the monetary policy stance might be
contributing to an over-adjustment of the economy in
an effort to keep inflation low, which is already at its
target level, and considered that monetary policy
operates through channels that affect real variables,
such as consumption and investment, and thus
maintaining a very tight monetary policy stance for a
long period constitutes a risk to economic activity,
public finances and financial stability.

Given the prospects of a more negative output gap,
another member pointed out that although monetary
policy is not the most effective instrument to induce
a recovery, its transmission mechanisms, especially
the interest rate, credit and asset price channels, do
influence, albeit modestly, aggregate demand. Such
member added that the primary goal of a 3% inflation
should be pursued at the lowest possible cost.
He/she mentioned that the policy rate is over the
upper bound of the estimation range for the neutral
rate, even after incorporating risk premia. He/she
also considered that since the economic cycle is in
its low phase, the monetary policy stance must be
reduced in absolute terms, although a tight monetary
policy stance is still required in order for core inflation
to converge to 3% levels. However, he/she noted
that it is not appropriate to maintain the current levels
of monetary tightening, which are higher than those
observed in other episodes where inflation was
higher, the output gap was positive, and the balance
of financial and global risks was less favorable.

One member pointed out that the current economic
weakness cannot be overcome with monetary policy
measures, as its margins of maneuver are narrow,
since the level of the policy rate is a reflection of the

8


-----

risks faced. In this regard, he/she noted that interest
rate spreads with other economies decrease
considerably when the foreign exchange risk is
incorporated. He/she added that the evidence
suggests that the impact of interest rates on
economic activity is relatively modest and that
countercyclical policies do not address the main
cause of stagnation: an environment of uncertainty
and not conducive to investment. Such member
underlined that an imprudent easing of monetary
policy, by constituting an additional source of
uncertainty, would have an effect opposite to the one
intended, and that the risks are particularly high in
economies as open as Mexico’s. He/she argued that
monetary policy is not a substitute for the economic
and institutional measures needed to foster
investment and increase productivity. Another
member pointed out that although economic activity
is slowing down at a faster pace than anticipated and
slack conditions have widened, the challenges faced
by the economy, the price formation process and
inflation are not only those that stem from the
economy’s cyclical position. He/she emphasized that
there are multiple challenges and risk factors, both
external and domestic, which have an impact on the
economy and inflation.

As for the monetary policy stance relative to other
countries, some members pointed out that Mexico's
interest rate spread with respect to the United States
is at its highest levels in recent history and
considered that a reduction of 25 basis points would
keep such spread unchanged. Such members
argued that the relative monetary policy stance is
high when taking into consideration that the external
and domestic risks faced by the economy have
decreased and monetary policy has eased globally.
One of them mentioned that the spread between
Mexico and US interest rates is the second highest
among emerging and advanced economies. Another
member stated that keeping interest rate spreads
constant gives a double false impression: on the one
hand, it makes it seem that Mexico is responding
mechanically to the Federal Reserve’s actions. On
the other hand, it suggests that there has not been a
significant change in the country’s economic and
financial conditions, which sends a misleading
message about the balance of risks faced. All
members pointed to the notion that while the Federal
Reserve's actions are a factor that is considered by
Banco de México, they are not a determinant for
monetary policy decisions. One of them added that,
from previous decisions, it is possible to observe that
Banco de México responds by assessing a wide
range of factors that might influence inflation.
Another member highlighted that the monetary


policy stance should not be tied to monetary
conditions relative to other economies which
respond to a different context.

As for monetary policy communication, one member
mentioned that Banco de México’s communication
policy must be transparent, concise, and easy to
understand, so that the general public has an
understanding that the central bank actions have as
a priority to guarantee the convergence of inflation to
the target. He/she added that the above prevents
distortions in inflation expectations that could
compromise such convergence, as well as incorrect
expectations regarding monetary policy intentions.
He/she mentioned that communication should
emphasize that a strategy of gradual and prudent
adjustments in the absolute and relative monetary
policy stance will be followed, which will strengthen
consistency with the economic cycle and with future
expectations. He/she indicated that this strategy
must take into account the level of uncertainty and
the lag with which monetary policy operates. Such
member added that the forward guidance on the
monetary adjustment cycle should be subject to what
the margins of absolute and relative monetary policy
stances suggest, as well as to incoming data and
unexpected events. He/she mentioned that this
strategy should facilitate the understanding of
monetary policy actions and improve their
effectiveness. Another member stressed the
importance of an adequate and objective
communication by the central bank. He/she also
underlined that the tone of the communiqué should
highlight the decrease in both inflation and its risks.
He/she pointed out that this would send a message
of certainty and confidence and confirm that the
central bank can ease monetary policy without
compromising its mandate and with the lowest
possible costs for the Mexican economy. The
majority of members concluded that under the
current environment of high uncertainty it must be
communicated that monetary policy will adjust
prudently, contributing to an orderly and sustained
convergence of headline inflation to its target.

**3. MONETARY POLICY DECISION**

To guide its monetary policy actions, Banco de
México’s Governing Board follows closely the
development of inflation vis-à-vis its forecasts, taking
into account the monetary policy stance and the time
frame in which monetary policy operates. In this
process, it uses available information on all inflation
determinants as well as on medium- and long-term
inflation expectations, including the balance of risks
for such factors. Monetary policy must also act

9


-----

prudently if for any reason the uncertainty faced by
the economy increases significantly. In this context,
considering that the lower levels registered by
headline inflation, the ample slack in the economy,
as well as the recent behavior of external and
domestic yield curves allow for decreasing the policy
rate, Banco de México’s Governing Board decided
by majority to lower the target for the overnight
interbank interest rate by 25 basis points to 7.50%.
Two members voted for lowering the target to 7.25%.
In order to consolidate a low and stable inflation, in
an environment in which price formation and slack
conditions in the economy are subject to risks, the
Governing Board will continue to follow closely all
factors and elements of uncertainty that have an
impact on inflation and its outlook, and will take the
required actions based on incoming information so
that the policy rate is consistent with the orderly and
sustained convergence of headline inflation to Banco
de México’s target within the time frame in which
monetary policy operates.

Banco de México’s Governing Board will maintain a
prudent monetary policy stance and, under the
current environment of uncertainty, will follow closely
the potential pass-through of exchange rate
fluctuations to prices, Mexico’s relative monetary
policy stance in an external environment that it is still
subject to risks, and the behavior of slack conditions
and cost-related pressures in the economy. In the
presence and possible persistence of factors that, by
their nature, involve risks to both inflation and its
expectations, monetary policy will be adjusted in a
timely and firm manner to achieve the convergence
of inflation to its 3% target and to strengthen the
anchoring of medium- and long-term inflation
expectations so that they attain such target.

**4. VOTING**

Alejandro Díaz de León-Carrillo, Irene EspinosaCantellano, and Javier Eduardo Guzmán-Calafell
voted in favor of lowering the overnight interbank
interest rate by 25 basis points to a level of 7.50%.

Gerardo Esquivel- Hernández and Jonathan Ernest
Heath-Constable voted in favor of lowering the
overnight interbank interest rate by 50 basis points
to a level of 7.25%.

**5. DISSENTING OPINIONS/VOTES**

**Vote. Gerardo Esquivel- Hernández**


Headline inflation has performed better than
expected and will soon have been at figures very
close to the inflation target for a full quarter. Indeed,
accumulated inflation so far allows us to anticipate
that annual year-end inflation will be less than 3%.
Although core inflation is still at relatively high levels,
its recent trend is clearly downward, and it is
estimated to maintain this tendency in the coming
months. On the other hand, the generalized
reduction of interest rates in other economies, as
well as the widening of the negative output gap and
the reduction of certain domestic and external risks,
opened up space for easing the country’s relative
monetary policy stance. It is worth remembering that
Mexico is an atypical case since it is the only Latin
American country that has inflation close to target
and, simultaneously, maintains a tight monetary
policy stance. For this reason, I believe that on this
occasion it was possible and desirable to reduce the
interest rate by 50 basis points, without jeopardizing
or compromising Banco de México’s fundamental
mandate. Under the current economic conditions, a
25-basis point reduction is not enough and comes in
too late.

**Vote. Jonathan Ernest Heath-Constable**

Headline inflation has reached the 3.0% point target,
economic activity remains stagnant and forecasts
indicate that the negative output gap will continue to
widen. Monetary policy easing is being observed
worldwide, as well as relatively stable financial
markets and a moderation of domestic and external
risks, which, nevertheless, are still latent. All of the
aforementioned favors adopting a less tight policy
stance.

I restate that maintaining a tight monetary policy
stance is necessary to guarantee a core inflation
consistent with the inflation target. However, the
levels of tightness of the current policy stance are the
highest in the past eleven years. In relative terms,
despite the reductions in the policy rate, the
monetary policy stance has not changed given that
monetary policy easing has continued worldwide. In
absolute terms, although there has been a reduction,
we are still far above the upper limit of the estimates
for the long-term neutral rate. Consequently, there is
a wide margin of maneuver for the proposed
reduction, even if considering that the balance of
risks for inflation, despite being well-balanced in the
short term, is uncertain in a longer time horizon.

10


-----

**ANNEX**

The information in this Annex was prepared for this
meeting by the staff of Banco de México’s General
Directorate of Economic Research and General
Directorate of Central Bank Operations. It does not
necessarily reflect the considerations of the
members of the Governing Board as to the monetary
policy decision.

**A.1. External conditions**

**A.1.1. World economic activity**

World economic growth continued to slowdown
during the third quarter of 2019 (Chart 1). In
particular, the prolonged trade tensions, greater
geopolitical risks and several idiosyncratic factors
continued to cause a deterioration of manufacturing
activity, trade and investment, which led to a
downward revision of global economic growth
expectations for 2019 and 2020. For its part, headline
and core inflations in the major economies remained
at low levels and below their central banks’ targets.
In response to this environment, some of these
institutions have eased monetary policy in the last
months, while some countries have also adopted
more fiscal stimuli.

Although world economic growth continues facing
significant risks, some of these have been
diminishing in the last weeks, supporting a recovery
of international financial markets. In particular,
tensions between the United States and China eased
after the intention of signing a draft trade agreement
between their governments was announced. In
addition, a lower probability of a disorderly exit of the
United Kingdom from the European Union is
perceived, given that the British Parliament approved
in principle the exit agreement negotiated between its
First Minister and the European Union, albeit
rejecting the proposed timetable. In turn, the
European Commission approved an extension to
January 31 to reach a final agreement with the U.K.,
in an environment where parliamentary elections will
be taking place in December in this country. Despite
the above described progress, a new escalation of
trade tensions between the United States and China
or greater adverse effects in the UK and euro area
economies cannot be ruled out, given the high
uncertainty about their future relationship, while at
the same time several social and political risks
persist in other countries.


**Chart 1**

**World GDP Growth**

Annual percentage change, s. a.

12

10

8

6

4

2

0

-2

World

-4 Advanced economies

Emerging and developing economies Q3

-6

2001 2003 2005 2007 2009 2011 2013 2015 2017 2019

s. a. / Seasonally adjusted figures.
Note: GDP calculations for Q3 2019 include estimates for some countries.
The sample of countries used in the calculations accounts for 85.6% of
world GDP measured by purchasing power parity.
Source: Prepared by Banco de México with data from Haver Analytics, J.P.
Morgan and International Monetary Fund (IMF).

In the United States, the growth rate of GDP
decelerated slightly, declining from a seasonally
adjusted annual rate of 2.0% in the second quarter to
1.9% in the third quarter (Chart 2). The lower growth
of economic activity was associated to the further
weakening of business investment and of net
exports, due largely to the escalation of trade
tensions at the beginning of the period. In contrast,
private consumption continues to be driven by the
still solid growth of employment, higher disposable
income and high household confidence, while
residential investment registered an incipient
recovery after exhibiting prolonged sluggishness,
driven by lower mortgage interest rates.

**Chart 2**

**United States: Real GDP and its Components**

Annualized quarterly percentage change and
contributions in percentage points, s. a.

6

4

2

0

-2

Public spending Net exports

-4 Inventories Non-residential investment

Residential investment Private consumption

Total

-6

I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV I II III

2016 2017 2018 2019

s. a. / Seasonally adjusted figures.
Source: Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA).

11


-----

US industrial production contracted in September at
an annual rate of 0.4%, due to the decline exhibited
by both the manufacturing sector, explained by
transitory factors —and the mining sector explained
by lower crude oil drilling and extraction—. In
particular, the 0.5% decline of manufacturing
production during that month partly reflected the
sharp fall of the automotive sector, in turn associated
to strikes in that sector. Nevertheless, the rest of
manufacturing also exhibited a weak performance,
given that production figures excluding vehicle and
auto parts production fell by 0.2%. Although the
manufacturing sector Purchasing Managers’ Index
(PMI) exhibited certain recovery in September and
October, it continues to suggest weakness in said
sector.

In this environment, the US labor market continued
showing signs of strength. Although the growth of the
non-farm payroll moderated, diminishing from an
average of 188,000 jobs in the third quarter to
128,000 in October, it was largely due to transitory
factors, such as the strike in the automotive sector
and the fading of temporary hires in the public sector.
In addition, such growth continued to be above the
level necessary to offset the labor force expansion.
For its part, the unemployment rate fell from 3.7% in
August to 3.6% in October, in a context where the
labor force participation rate continued to increase.
Other labor market indicators, such as hire and quit
rates, have continued to reflect the tight conditions in
this market. In this context, wages have continued to
increase at a moderate rate.

In the euro area, during the third quarter, GDP grew
at a seasonally adjusted annual rate of 0.9%, similar
to that observed in the second quarter. Available
indicators suggest that economic growth continued to
be driven by private consumption and residential
investment, while net exports continued to have a
negative contribution to adjustments in the economy
(Chart 8). Indeed, the growth of private consumption
has continued to show a relative strength stemming
from the good performance of the labor market and
the still high consumer confidence. The weakness of
external demand has continued to affect
manufacturing activity and business investment in
this region. The composite Purchasing Managers’
Index stabilized at low levels at the beginning of the
fourth quarter, which may suggest that a moderate
growth will prevail in the region for the remainder of
the year. In this context, the unemployment rate
remained at low levels, fluctuating around 7.5%.

In Japan, GDP growth decelerated significantly
during the third quarter by registering an annualized


seasonally adjusted rate of 0.2%, after having grown
1.8% during the second quarter, due to the sharp
deterioration of external demand. Consumer and
business confidence indicators also continue to
deteriorate, which, together with the increase in
consumption taxes, may intensify the weakness of
this economy. In this environment, although the pace
of job creation has been decreasing, the labor market
has remained relatively strong. In particular, although
the unemployment rate rose from 2.2% in August to
2.4% in September, it remained below the long-term
rate.

In most emerging economies, economic activity
continued to grow at a moderate rate during the third
quarter of the year. The weakening of China’s annual
growth rate stood out, declining from 6.2% in the
second quarter to 6.0% in the third, the lowest growth
rate registered since 1990. The Asian economies
have continued to be affected by the deterioration of
manufacturing activity worldwide. As for Latin
America, its economies have grown less than
expected due mainly to idiosyncratic factors.

Most international commodity prices followed an
upward trend in recent weeks. In particular, after
decreasing at the end of September on account of
the weakness of world economic activity and the
rapid recovery of crude oil in Saudi Arabia after the
attack to its main oil facilities, crude oil prices partially
recovered. Such recovery can be associated to the
progress in trade negotiations between the United
States and China; the rising expectations that the
Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries
(OPEC) and its allies will make an additional cut to
the current production quotas; and the still solid US
growth figures. Moreover, grain prices continued to
follow an upward trend due to unfavorable climate
conditions for crops and greater expectations of a
trade agreement that involves the purchase by China
of significant amounts of these goods from the United
States. Finally, industrial metal prices exhibited a
mixed behavior, with considerable increases in
copper and aluminum prices and falls in iron and
steel prices.

**A.1.2. Monetary policy and international financial**
**markets**

Headline and core inflation in the major advanced
economies remained at relatively low levels and
below their central banks’ targets, despite the
persisting tightening of labor markets and the fading
of some transitory factors that had been exerting
downward pressures on them (Chart 3). Similarly,
inflation expectations drawn from surveys and

12


-----

market instruments remain at low levels. In the
United States, core inflation, as measured by the
personal consumption expenditure deflator,
decreased from 1.4 to 1.3% in September, remaining
below the Federal Reserve target, while the core
component declined from 1.8 to 1.7%. In the euro
area and Japan, core inflation has remained low
despite the low unemployment levels. In emerging
economies, headline and core inflation intensified
their negative trend and, in several cases, continued
at levels below their central banks’ targets.

**Chart 3**

**Selected Advanced Economies: Core Inflation**

Annual percentage change

3

2

1


stance remains appropriate given the risk the
economy faces and that only significant
developments in economic conditions would modify
said outlook, which was interpreted as a possible
pause in the process of reduction of the federal funds
rate. In this environment, the implied path in federal
funds futures reflects expectations of only one
additional cut in 2020.

**Chart 4**

**Reference Rates and Implied Trajectories in**

**OIS Curves[1/]**

Percent


0

-1


3.0% **― US Federal Reserve***

**― Bank of England** Forecasts
**― Bank of Japan**

2.5% **― Bank of Canada**

**― European Central Bank deposit rate**
**― OIS implicit trajectory 11 Nov 2019**

2.0% **--- OIS implicit trajectory 23 Sep 2019**

**--- OIS implicit trajectory 31 Dec 2018**

1.5%

1.0%

0.5%

0.0%

-0.5%

September

OctoberOctober -1.0% End of 2018 End of 2019 End of 2020

2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020

|Col1|― Bank of Canada ― European Central Bank deposit rate ― OIS implicit trajectory 11 Nov 2019 --- OIS implicit trajectory 23 Sep 2019 --- OIS implicit trajectory 31 Dec 2018|Col3|Col4|Col5|
|---|---|---|---|---|
||||||
||||||
||||||


2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019


1/ Refers to the Personal Consumption Expenditures Price Index (PCE).
2/ Excludes fresh food, energy, and the direct effect of the consumption tax
increase.
3/ Excludes food, energy, and the effect of adjustments on indirect taxes
(CPIX).
Source: Haver Analytics, BEA, Statistical Office of the European Union
(Eurostat), and Statistics Bureau (Japan).

In this context, the central banks of a large number
of economies have continued to adopt
accommodative monetary policy stances, given low
inflation levels, lower growth expectations, and
greater risks to world economic activity.
Nevertheless, adjustments were made to the
expected policy stances that some of the main
central banks may follow in the future, particularly in
the case of the US Federal Reserve. In particular, the
implied trajectory of reference interest rate futures of
the main advanced economies suggest that the pace
of reductions may be more gradual than was
anticipated some weeks ago.

In its October meeting, as anticipated, the US
Federal Reserve cut the target range for the federal
funds rate by 25 basis points to 1.50-1.75%. The Fed
Chairman stated that the Fed will continue to monitor
the effects of its actions as well as incoming
economic information, clarifying that the path to be
followed by monetary policy is not on a preset
course. He added that the current monetary policy


1/ OIS: Fixed floating interest rate swap where the fixed interest rate is the
effective overnight reference rate.

- In the case of the US observed reference rate, the average interest rate of
the federal funds target range is used (1.50% - 1.75%).
Source: Bloomberg.

In its October meeting, the European Central Bank
(ECB) ratified the measures announced in its
previous monetary policy meeting, which
represented a significant change in its monetary
policy stance. As to its forward guidance, the ECB
highlighted that the Governing Council expects the
key ECB interest rates to remain at their present or
lower levels until inflation robustly converges to a
level sufficiently close to, but below, 2%. As to its new
asset purchase program, it also restated that it will
run for as long as necessary to reinforce the
accommodative impact of its policy rates, and to end
shortly before it starts raising its policy interest rates.

The Bank of Japan did not modify its policy interest
rates in its October meeting, although it adjusted its
forward guidance for policy rates. In particular, in this
meeting, it also pointed out that it will leave short- and
long-term interest rates at their present or lower
levels as long as it is necessary to be certain that the
2% inflation target is not at risk, which contrasts with
the previous message that suggested that interest
rates were to remain at low levels until the spring of
2020. The Bank of Japan also mentioned that it did

13


-----

not cut its reference rates because it does not
consider that the possibility of a setback in the
achievement of its price stability target has
increased. Nevertheless, it lowered its growth and
inflation forecasts for the next three years.

The Bank of Canada left its policy interest rate
unchanged at 1.75% in its October meeting, although
it discussed the possibility of a cut to mitigate the
downward risks that the Canadian economic outlook
is facing. In its statement, this central bank
mentioned that the Canadian economy is expected
to decelerate in the second quarter of the year,
anticipating a growth below potential as a reflection
of the uncertainty associated with trade conflicts,
adjustments to the energy sector and the fading of
transitory factors that boosted productive activity in
the second quarter. In addition, the Bank of Canada
pointed out that, in determining its monetary policy
stance, it will assess the possibility of the impact of
the weakening of the world economy on Canada’s
economic activity spreading beyond investment and
manufacturing. In this context, it stated that it will pay
close attention to the elements that have supported
growth, such as private consumption spending, the
real estate sector, and fiscal policy.

In its November meeting, the Bank of England left its
policy rate at 0.75% and did not modify the size of its
government bond purchases, although two members
voted in favor of cutting its interest rate. In its
statement, it pointed out that the a no-deal exit of the
United Kingdom from the European Union has
decreased due to the recent agreement negotiated
between both regions and the extension of the
deadline to approve such agreement. Nevertheless,
it highlighted that the risks for growth continue to be
biased to the downside due to the uncertainty about
the nature of this transition. In this environment, the
Bank of England conditioned its monetary policy
stance to the evolution of the Brexit, by pointing out
that a gradual and limited tightening would be
necessary in case the UK economy recovers
according to projections and the risks that it is facing
do not materialize.

In emerging economies, most central banks
continued to ease their monetary policies, in an
environment of low inflation and weak external and
domestic economic activity, especially in those
economies where inflation has been below their
central bank targets, such as Saudi Arabia, Brazil,
Chile, the Philippines, India, Thailand, Turkey, and
Ukraine.


In the last weeks, international financial markets
registered less volatility due to the partial fading of
some risk factors, as previously mentioned. In
addition, the monetary easing actions by some of the
main central banks have contributed to improve
market performance in the last weeks. This context
led to a climate of lower risk aversion, reflected in
gains in most stock indexes and in increases in most
interest rates of advanced economies, particularly in
longer-term bonds. There was a depreciation of safehaven currencies, such as the Japanese yen, the
Swiss franc, and the US dollar, while the rest of the
advanced economies’ currencies appreciated (Chart
5).

Similarly, in emerging economies, currencies
appreciated and most stock indexes recovered
(Chart 6). In this context, flows towards emerging
economies’ financial assets exhibited a positive
trend. In particular, inflows towards fixed income
assets were observed. As for equity markets, these
moderated their outflow trend and even registered
inflows in the last weeks. In some particular cases,
financial markets were negatively affected by the
presence of idiosyncratic factors, such as the case of
Chile, where demonstrations related to social reform
demands have taken place, and of Argentina, where
the results of the general elections and the change in
administration have generated uncertainty over the
course of that country’s economic policy

It should be noted that the relative recovery of
markets in the last weeks may still be reversed due
to the presence of several risk factors, such as a
greater than expected weakening of global economic
activity; increased uncertainty as to the future
economic relationship between the United Kingdom
and the European Union; a new escalation of trade
tensions between the United States and its main
trading partners; increased political and social
tensions; and, growing geopolitical tensions in the
Middle East, among others.

14


-----

**Chart 5**

**Change in Selected Financial Indicators**

**from September 21, 2019 to November 11, 2019**

Percent, basis points


12%

10%


60

50


8%

6%


40

30


4%

2%


20

10


0%

-2%


0

-10


-4%


-20

|<-- Stock markets FTSE MIB (Italy) DAX (Germany) EM 1/ Nikkei (Japan) CAC 40 (France) Eurostoxx (Europe) IBEX (Spain) S&P 500 (U.S.) FTSE-100 (UK) Shanghai (China)|<-- Currencies GBP CNY AUD NZD EM Currencies 3/ EUR CAD CHF DXY 2/ JPY|2-year government bond yields --> Italy Germany Spain France Japan United Kingdom Canada United States|10-year government bond yields --> Italy France Germany Spain United … United States Canada Japan|
|---|---|---|---|


1/ MSCI Emerging Markets Index (includes 24 countries).
2/ DXY: Weighted average of the nominal exchange rate of the six main
world-traded currencies (calculated by Intercontinental Exchange, ICE) with
the following weights: EUR (57.6%), JPY (13.6%), GBP (11.9%), CAD
(9.1%), SEK (4.2%), and CHF (3.6%).
3/ J.P. Morgan Index constructed from a weighted average of the nominal
exchange rate of emerging economies’ currencies with the following
weights: TRY (8.3%), RUB (8.3%), HUF (8.3%), ZAR (8.3%), BRL (11.1%),
MXN (11.1%), CLP (11.1%), CNH (11.1%), INR (11.1%), and SGD (11.1%).
Source: Bloomberg and ICE.

**Chart 6**

**Emerging Economies: Financial Assets**
**Performance from September 23 to November**
**11, 2019**

Percent, basis points


**A.2. Current situation of the Mexican economy**

**A.2.1. Mexican markets**

Since Banco de Mexico’s previous monetary policy
decision, the prices of financial assets in Mexico
exhibited a positive behavior, in line with its emerging
peers (Chart 7). In particular, in the presence of
episodes of volatility, the peso/dollar exchange rate
fluctuated between 19.06 and 19.82 pesos per US
dollar, standing at 19.12 pesos per US dollar at the
end of the period, implying a 1.86% appreciation
during the period. In turn, forward-looking trading
conditions for the peso exchange rate implied in FX
options remained stable (Chart 8). For its part, peso
exchange rate expectations by forecasters from
several financial institutions for the end of 2019 were
adjusted slightly downwards from 19.80 to 19.75
pesos per US dollar, while those for the end of 2020
were adjusted upwards from 20.00 to 20.07 pesos
per US dollar (Chart 9).

**Chart 7**

**Mexican Markets’ Performance and Trading**
**Conditions**

Percent, pesos/US dollar, index and basis points


9.5

9.0

8.5

8.0

7.5

7.0

6.5

6.0


20.4

20.2

20.0

19.8

19.6

19.4

19.2

19.0

18.8

18.6

18.4


15

10


25

20


46,000

45,000

44,000

43,000

42,000

41,000

40,000

39,000

38,000


400

350

300

250

200

150

100

50

0


**Equity**
**Region** **Country** **Currencies**
**markets**


**Interest**
**rates 2Y**


**Interest**
**CDS**
**rates 10Y**


**Mexico** **1.86%** **0.13%** **-21** **4** **-26**


5

0


**Latin**
**America**


**Brazil** **0.65%** **3.39%** **-47** **-42** **-14**

**Chile** **-5.02%** **-8.43%** **-16** **33** **6**

**Colombia** **3.02%** **2.53%** **38** **37** **-15**

**Argentina** **-4.85%** **15.47%** **1,873** **250** **994**


M Bono


Volatility


Range in year Range since last monetary policy decision 23-Sep-19 Last level


**Emerging**
**Europe**

**Asia**


**Russia** **-0.04%** **6.32%** **-64** **-64** **-10**

**Poland** **3.16%** **4.07%** **6** **27** **-5**

**Turkey** **-1.10%** **3.10%** **-278** **-204** **-66**

**Czech Republic** **1.84%** **3.85%** **24** **34** **-2**


**India** **-0.75%** **3.21%** **-17** **4** **-4**

**Philippines** **2.61%** **1.80%** **-13** **-13** **-10**


**Hungary** **0.75%** **5.49%** **7** **32** **-8**


**South Korea** **2.35%** **1.55%** **45** **60** **-1**

**Malaysia** **0.86%** **0.96%** **2** **-1** **-9**


**Thailand** **0.50%** **-0.04%** **2** **23** **-3**

**Indonesia** **0.14%** **-0.93%** **-59** **-34** **-4**


**Africa** **South Africa** **0.04%** **0.99%** **17** **27** **-6**

Note: Interest rates correspond to interest rate swaps for 2-year/10-year
maturities. In the case of Argentina, rates in US dollars are used since they
are the most liquid ones and those that reflect more adequately the
performance of the fixed income market in that country.
Source: Bloomberg.


Note: For the Mexican peso volatility, the levels implied in 1-month
exchange rate options are considered. For the interest rate, a Garch model
(1,1) of daily fluctuations in all the curve since 2007 is considered. For
exchange rate volatility, the Vimex published by MexDer is considered.
Source: Prepared by Banco de México with Bloomberg and Proveedora
Integral de Precios (PIP) data.

15


-----

**Chart 8**

**Mexican Foreign Exchange Market Trading**
**Conditions**

Index (5-day moving average) and pesos/US dollar


90

80

70

60

50

40

30

20


22.0

21.5

21.0

20.5

20.0

19.5

19.0

18.5

18.0

17.5

17.0


J F A M J J A O N D J M A M J J S O N D F M A M J A S O N J F M M J J A S N


2016 2017 2018


2019


Note: Index calculated using the mean, volatility, skewness, kurtosis, bidask spread and mean of simple differentials, all of them related to quotes of
intraday operations, and the total traded volume. After obtaining this data,
the percentiles since 2011 are calculated and the average of the 7
percentiles for each day is considered. The black vertical line represents
Banco de México’s latest monetary policy decision.
Source: Prepared by Banco de México with Reuters data.

**Chart 9**

**Analysts’ Mexican Peso Exchange Rate**
**Expectations for Each End of Quarter**

Pesos per US dollar


**Chart 10**

**Nominal Yield on Government Securities**

Percent, basis points

30
6
5

Sep 23, 2019 Nov 11, 2019 Change (Sep 23, 2019 to Nov 11, 2019)

Trading range over COPOM period


**Chart 11**

**Bond Rate (Jun-27)**

Percent

Mbond Jun-27 →

November

J F M A J J A S N D J F A M J J A O N D J M A M J A S O N J F M M J J A S N

2016 2017 2018 2019


9.5

9.0

8.5

8.0

7.5

7.0

6.5

6.0

5.5


Source: PIP.


22.5


D M J S D M J S IVQ 2019D IQ 2020M IIQ 2020J IIIQ 2020S

Bloomberg interquartile range Bloomberg expectations range Mexican peso


2019 year-end forecast Citibanamex Bloomberg median

Note: The black vertical line represents Banco de México’s latest monetary
policy decision.
Source: Bloomberg and Citibanamex survey.

Interest rates of government securities continued to
reflect the effects of the lower external interest rates.
Thus, most of them decreased up to 15 basis points
for terms over one year (Chart 10). It should be noted
that interest rates of longer-term bonds accumulate
decreases of over two percentage points from the
highest level recorded at the end of the previous year
(Chart 11).


Note: The black vertical line represents Banco de México’s latest monetary
policy decision.
Source: Bloomberg and Citibanamex survey.

As to expectations regarding the path of the
monetary policy target rate, information implied in the
TIIE (Interbank Equilibrium Interest Rate) swap curve
considers that the funding rate will be at levels of
7.23% at the end of the year (Chart 12), practically in
line with the median of private sector analysts
surveyed by Citibanamex, which expects that it will
be at 7.25%. As to the end of 2020, market variables
incorporate rates slightly below 6%, while the median
of said survey among forecasters was adjusted
downwards from 6.75 to 6.50%.

16


-----

**Chart 12**

**Banxico Overnight Interbank Rate Implied in**

**TIIE IRS Curve**

Percent

8.75

Banxico overnight rate (policy rate)

8.50 23-Sep-19

8.25 Rest of period

11-Nov-19

8.00

7.75

7.50

7.25

7.00

6.75

6.50

6.25

6.00

abr. 18A           A            D            M            S            J             J ago. 18 dic. 18 may. 19 sep. 19 ene. 20 jun. 20

2018                        2019                              2020

Source: Prepared by Banco de México with Bloomberg data.

**A.2.2. Economic activity in Mexico**

INEGI’s GDP flash estimate for the third quarter of
2019 shows that the stagnation that Mexico’s
economic activity has been registering for several
quarters continues (Chart 13). Such behavior
reflected the deceleration of exports, the weakness
of private consumption, and the unfavorable
performance that investment has maintained.

As for external demand, during the third quarter of
2019 manufacturing exports registered a
deceleration vis-à-vis the previous quarter, in an
environment where trade tensions and the
weakening of world trade prevail. Such evolution was
associated with the weakness of non-automotive
exports, given that automotive exports continued to
improve. By destination, manufacturing exports to
the United States continued trending upwards, while
those to the rest of the world continue to show the
same lack of vigor observed since mid- 2018 (Chart
14).


2

1

0

-1

-2 Q-III 1/

I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV I II III

2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019

s. a. Seasonally adjusted figures.
1/ Figures for Q3-2019 refer to INEGI’s GDP flash estimate.
Source: Mexico’s National Accounts System (SCNM, for its acronym in
Spanish), INEGI.

**Chart 14**

**Total Manufacturing Exports**

Indices 2013 = 100, s. a.

150

Total

140 Rest of the world

United States

130

120

110

100

90

80

September

70

J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S

2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019

s. a. / Seasonally adjusted series and trend series based on data in nominal
USD. The former is represented by a solid line and the latter by a dotted
line.
Source: Prepared by Banco de México with data from the Tax
Administration Service (SAT, for its acronym in Spanish), the Ministry of the
Economy (SE, for its acronym in Spanish), Banco de México, the National
Institute of Statistics and Geography (INEGI, for its acronym in Spanish),
Mexico’s Merchandise Trade Balance, and the National System of
Statistical and Geographical Information (SNIEG, for its acronym in
Spanish).

As for domestic demand, according to its monthly
indicator, the weakness that private consumption has
been exhibiting since the end of 2018, — explained
by a lackluster performance of consumption of both
goods and services— continued in the middle of the
third quarter of 2019. More timely indicators of
consumption, such as retailers’ earnings and sales of
manufacturing industries that are more correlated
with the consumption of domestically produced
goods, continued on a positive trend at the middle of
the third quarter of the year. In contrast, sales of light
vehicles continued trending downward. For its part,
the unfavorable performance that gross fixed
investment has been registering for several quarters
continued. The negative trend that investment in

17


**Chart 13**

**Gross Domestic Product**

Quarterly percentage change, s. a.


-----

machinery and equipment has followed since the
beginning of 2018 persisted while investment in
construction remained weak, although slightly
recovering in August.

As for production, according to the flash estimate, the
incipient growth of Mexico’s economic activity during
the third quarter of 2019 reflected the lack of
dynamism of industrial activity and the stagnation of
tertiary activities, while primary activities reversed the
contraction registered in the second quarter of this
year (Chart 15). Within secondary activities, the
downward trend followed by construction intensified,
while manufacturing continued trending upwards,
although with a certain loss of dynamism as
compared to the previous quarter. Mining registered
a slightly favorable change of trend that can be
associated with the stabilization of the oil platform
(Chart 16). For its part, services showed a negative
change of trend towards the end of the quarter, as a
result of the unfavorable evolution of finance and
insurance and real estate, rental and leasing; retail
trade; educational and health care and social
assistance; accommodation and food services;
public administration and arts, recreation and
entertainment. In contrast, improvements were
observed in wholesale trade; transportation and
warehousing and professional, scientific, and
technical services.

**Chart 15**

**Economic Activity Indicators**

Indices 2013 = 100, s. a.

120 140

Total IGAE 1/

Industrial production 2/

Services IGAE 1/

115 130

Agriculture IGAE 1/

110 120

105 110

100 100

AugustAugust

September

95 90

J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S

2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019

s. a. / Seasonally adjusted and trend series. The former is represented by a
solid line and the latter by a dotted line.
1/ Figures up to August 2019.
2/ Monthly Industrial Activity Indicator figures up to September 2019.
Source: Mexico’s National Accounts System (SCNM, for its acronym in
Spanish), INEGI.


s. a. / Seasonally adjusted and trend series. The former is represented by a
solid line and the latter by a dotted line.
1/ Figures in parentheses correspond to its share in the total in 2013.
Source: Mexico’s National Accounts System (SCNM, for its acronym in
Spanish), INEGI.

As to the economy’s cyclical position, it is estimated
that the negative slack conditions might have
widened at a greater-than-anticipated pace during
the third quarter of 2019. In particular, estimates of
the output gap, based both on total GDP and on the
one that excludes the oil sector, exhibited a greater
negative gap than in the previous quarter (Chart 17).
As to labor market conditions, both national and
urban unemployment rates remained at levels above
those reported during most of 2018 (Chart 18), while
the number of IMSS-insured jobs continued to grow
at a slower rate. At the middle of the third quarter of
2019 unit labor costs in the manufacturing sector
remained at relatively high levels (Chart 19).

18


**Chart 16**

**Industrial Activity [1/]**

Indices 2013 = 100, s. a.


130

120

110

100

90

80

70

60


M S J

2016


M S J

2017


M S J

2018


M S J

2019


J

2013


M S J

2014


M S J

2015


M S


-----

**Chart 17**

**Output Gap Estimates [1/]**

**Excluding Oil Industry [4/ ]**

Potential output percentages, s. a.


**Chart 19**

**Productivity and Unit Labor Costs in the**
**Manufacturing Sector [1/]**

Indices 2013 = 100, s. a.


8

Global Economic Activity Indicator 2/

6 Gross Domestic Product 2/

95% confidence interval 3/

4

2

0

-2

-4

-6

-8

-10

Q-III

September

-12

J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S

2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019


115

Unit labor costs

Productivity

110

105

100

95

August

90

J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J A

2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019


s. a. / Calculations based on seasonally adjusted figures.
1/ Output gap estimated with a tail-corrected Hodrick-Prescott filter; see
Banco de México (2009), “Inflation Report (April-June 2009)", p.74.
2/ GDP figures up to the second quarter of 2019 and of IGAE up to July
2019.
3/ Output gap confidence interval calculated with a method of unobserved
components.
4/ Excludes both oil and gas extraction, support activities for mining, and
petroleum and coal products' manufacturing.
Source: Prepared by Banco de México with INEGI data.

**Chart 18**

**National Unemployment Rate and Urban**
**Unemployment Rate**

Percent, s. a.

8.5

Urban unemployment rate

8.0

7.5 National unemployment rate

7.0

6.5

6.0

5.5

5.0

4.5

4.0

3.5

3.0

September

2.5

J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S

2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019

s. a. / Seasonally adjusted and trend series. The former is represented by a
solid line and the latter by a dotted line.
Source: National Survey of Occupations and Employment (ENOE, for its
acronym in Spanish), INEGI.


s. a. / Seasonally adjusted and trend series. The former is represented by a
solid line and the latter by a dotted line.
1/ Productivity based on hours worked.
Source: Prepared by Banco de México with seasonally adjusted data from
the Monthly Survey of the Manufacturing Industry and from industrial activity
indicators from Mexico’s National Accounts System, INEGI.

In September 2019, domestic financing to the private
sector grew at an annual rate below that of the
previous quarter. Within it, the slowdown of financing
to private firms intensified, as explained by the lower
net placement of domestic debt and the lower growth
of bank credit. As to the household segment,
mortgages continued registering a high dynamism,
while consumer credit kept growing at a slow rate. As
for interest rates, those related to firm financing
decreased, in line with the reduction of the overnight
interest rate, although they remain at high levels.
Interest rates of mortgages have remained stable
since the second quarter of 2017, whereas in the
segment of consumer credit those of credit cards
continue trending upwards. Regarding portfolio
quality, firms and mortgage delinquency rates
remained at low levels, while those related to
consumption did not register significant changes,
although they remain at high levels.

**A.2.3. Development of inflation and inflation**
**outlook**

Between September and October 2019, annual
headline inflation remained practically unchanged
registering 3.00 and 3.02%, respectively (Chart 20
and Table 1). This behavior reflected the fact that,
although core inflation registered some reduction,
non-core inflation increased, after exhibiting the
lowest annual rate since June 2016 in September.

19


-----

**Chart 20**

**Consumer Price Index**

Annual percentage change


13

CPI

12

Core

11

10 Non-core

9

8

7

6

5

4

3

2

1 October

0

J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O

2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019

|Chart 22 and Services Core Price Subindex nnual percentage change|Col2|
|---|---|
|||
|||
|||
|||
|||
|||
|October||


Source: Banco de México and INEGI.

Annual core inflation decreased from 3.75 to 3.68%
between September and October 2019, thus
continuing to show persistence. Within this
component, the annual rate of change of
merchandise prices remained stable during this
period, at 3.77 and 3.78%, respectively. In particular,
the annual rate of change of food merchandise prices
registered levels of 4.61 and 4.67%, while that of
non-food merchandise prices has remained at levels
below 3% (Chart 21). As to the annual rate of change
of services prices, it decreased from 3.73 to 3.58%
between September and October (Chart 22), due
mainly to the lower increases in tourist and certain
food/beverage services prices, while other services
continued registering rates above 5%.

**Chart 21**

**Merchandise Core Price Subindex**

Annual percentage change

8

Food, beverages and tobacco

Non-food merchandise

7

6

5

4

3

2

1

October

0

J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O

2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019

Source: Banco de México and INEGI.


**Merchandise and Services Core Price Subindex**

Annual percentage change

7

Merchandise

6 Services

5

4

3

2

1

October

0

J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O

2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019

Source: Banco de México and INEGI.

As to annual non-core inflation, it increased from 0.71
to 1.01% between September and October 2019
(Chart 23 and Table 1). This result was due to an
increase in the annual rate of change of agricultural
and livestock product prices, which was partially
offset by a decrease in that of energy prices.

**Chart 23**

**Non-core Price Subindex**
Annual percentage change

20

Non-core
Agricultural and livestock products
Energy and government-authorized prices

15

10

5

0

October

-5

J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O

2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019

Source: Banco de México and INEGI.

The medians for short-term inflation expectations
drawn from Banco de México’s Survey of Private
Sector Forecasters exhibited decreases between
September and October. Indeed, the medians for
headline inflation expectations for the end of 2019
and 2020 decreased from 3.36 to 3.00% and from
3.56 to 3.50%, respectively. Such adjustments are
mainly explained by a decrease in implied non-core
expectations, which decreased from 2.46 to 1.07%
for the end of 2019 and from 4.10 to 3.81% for the
end of 2020. The medians for core inflation
expectations for the end of 2019 and 2020 also
decreased from 3.67 to 3.60% and from 3.40 to
3.38%, respectively. The medians for headline
inflation expectations for the medium term (next four

20


-----

years) remained unchanged at 3.50%, while those
for core inflation decreased from 3.49 to 3.46%. As
to the medians for headline and core inflation
expectations for the longer term (five to eight years),
these remained at 3.50 and 3.40%, respectively.
Thus, expectations for both headline and core
inflation remain above the 3% headline inflation
target. Finally, long-term inflation expectations
(average of 6 to 10 years) implied in long-term
market instruments decreased slightly between
August and October and remain close to 3%, while
the inflation risk premium (calculated on the basis of
1-10 year average inflation expectations) was also
adjusted downwards, from 0.28 to 0.18% between
August and October.

Regarding inflation risks, those to the upside are: that
core inflation remains persistent; wage revisions that
exceed productivity gains and generate cost-related
pressures; that the peso exchange rate comes under


pressure from external or domestic factors; the threat
of tariffs by the United States and that compensatory
measures are adopted, although this risk has
diminished; that public finances deteriorate; and,
increases in agricultural, livestock or energy prices
greater than anticipated. As for downside risks: an
appreciation of the peso exchange rate, possibly
associated with a context of greater appetite for risk
in international financial markets or in case the trade
agreement with the United States and Canada is
ratified; a widening of slack conditions or that its
impact on core inflation is greater than foreseen; and,
that the prices of certain goods included in the noncore subindex register lower rates of change. In this
context, uncertainty still persists regarding the risks
that could make inflation deviate from its foreseen
trajectory.


**Table 1**

**Consumer Price Index and Components**

Annual percentage change

**Item** **August 2019** **September 2019** **October 2019**

**CPI** **3.16** **3.00** **3.02**

**Core** **3.78** **3.75** **3.68**

**Merchandise** **3.76** **3.77** **3.78**
Food, beverages and tobacco 4.63 4.61 4.67
Non-food merchandise 2.85 2.88 2.85

**Services** **3.79** **3.73** **3.58**
Housing 2.92 2.89 2.93
Education (tuitions) 4.66 4.73 4.73
Other services 4.40 4.28 3.91

**Non-core** **1.28** **0.71** **1.01**

**Agricultural and livestock products** **2.78** **2.98** **3.82**

Fruits and vegetables -0.75 0.71 2.36

Livestock products 5.77 4.86 5.02

**Energy and government-authorized prices** **0.20** **-0.90** **-0.91**

Energy products -1.53 -3.09 -3.20

Government-authorized prices 4.30 4.35 4.78

Source: INEGI.


21


-----

-----

