-----

-----

**FOREWARNING**
This document is provided for the reader’s convenience only.
The translation from the official Spanish version was made by
Banco de México’s staff. Discrepancies may arise between the
original document in Spanish and its English translation. For
this reason, the original Spanish version is the only official
document.

**1. PLACE, DATE, AND PARTICIPANTS**

**1.1 Place: Av. Cinco de Mayo street no.2, 5[th] floor,**
Col. Centro, Mexico City.

**1.2.** **Date** **of** **Governing** **Board** **meeting:**

September 25, 2019.

**1.3. Participants:**
Alejandro Díaz de León-Carrillo, Governor.
Irene Espinosa-Cantellano, Deputy Governor.
Gerardo Esquivel-Hernández, Deputy Governor.
Javier Eduardo Guzmán-Calafell, Deputy Governor.
Jonathan Ernest Heath-Constable, Deputy

Governor.
Arturo Herrera-Gutiérrez, Secretary of Finance and
Public Credit.
Gabriel Yorio-González, Undersecretary of Finance
and Public Credit.
Elías Villanueva-Ochoa, Secretary of the Governing
Board.

Prior to this meeting, preliminary work by Banco de
México’s staff analyzing the economic and financial
environment, together with the developments in
inflation and the determinants and outlook for
inflation, was conducted and presented to the
Governing Board (see annex).

**2. ANALYSIS AND RATIONALE BEHIND THE**
**GOVERNING BOARD’S VOTING**

Most members of the Governing Board noted that
available information suggests that the moderation
of world economic growth continued during the third
quarter of the year. In particular, they stressed that
global manufacturing production has continued to
weaken. Some members mentioned that the risk of
the weakness in the goods sector being passed on
to the service sector cannot be ruled out. One
member mentioned that trade tensions have been
accumulating throughout the year, with periods of
higher tariff threats and considerable impacts on the
involved economies and on those more open to
trade, which has contributed to the slowdown of
world trade and manufacturing production. He/she
noted that this environment of uncertainty has
hindered investment and business confidence.

Most members indicated that during the recent
weeks there has been more willingness of China and


the U.S. to come to an agreement, while the risk of
a no-deal exit of the United Kingdom from the
European Union seems to have diminished. One
member pointed out that the above helped to
improve the business climate. With respect to the
growth outlook, most members pointed out that for
2019 and 2020 it has been revised to the downside
once again, highlighting the risks to the global
economy. Such members emphasized among these
risks those associated to the following factors: i) a
possible intensification of trade tensions; ii) a
marked deceleration of the Chinese economy; iii) a
disorderly exit of the United Kingdom from the
European Union; and, iv) the escalation of political
and geopolitical tensions in the Middle East. In
addition, one member mentioned that the risk of
surprises or unwanted effects of monetary policy
actions in advanced economies cannot be ruled out.
In this context, most members pointed out that the
balance of risks for world economic activity remains
biased to the downside.

Regarding advanced economies, one member
indicated that the service sector is still expanding,
and that the gap between the Purchasing Managers’
Index of the service sector and that of the
manufacturing sector has reached high levels as
compared to those of recent years. Another member
pointed out that in the euro area, business
confidence indicators and purchasing managers’
indices continued to decline. With regard to the US
economy, some members highlighted the

moderation of its growth rate and the weakening of
investment. One member added that exports have
also had a negative performance and that
manufacturing production remains stagnant.

Another member noted that, by showing signs of a
slight deceleration, such economy has started to
show the effects of the trade tensions, albeit to a
lower degree than other economies, given that it is
less dependent on external demand. He/she
mentioned that the inversion of the yield curve in
some short-term segments points to a deceleration
of the US economy, while another one considered
that the probability of a recession in that country is
still high.

Most members highlighted the lower inflation
pressures worldwide. In the case of the main
advanced economies, they pointed out that both
headline and core inflation are below their respective
central bank targets, underlining that there are no
considerable wage pressures, even in a context of
tight labor market conditions. One member specified
that the abovementioned, along with the outlook for
lackluster economic activity, contributes to the
prevalence of inflation expectations at contained
levels. Another member specified that muted

1


-----

inflation pressures are observed despite the recent
wage increases and added that in the major
advanced economies services’ inflation is close to
3%, while goods’ inflation is negative. Some
members agreed that the lower inflation pressures in
advanced and emerging economies have been due
to transitory factors, such as the lower energy and
food product prices. One of them highlighted that,
despite the above, it should be stressed that in
advanced economies core inflation is at low levels
and in emerging economies it displays a sustained
downward trend. Another member mentioned that
although commodity prices have declined, the
recent attacks in Saudi Arabia have affected energy
prices, although another member pointed out that
such effects have been contained.

From a longer-term perspective, another member
considered that technological change and the
incorporation of countries with an abundant labor
force into globalization have contributed to muted
inflationary pressures, given that they have
increased productivity and generated more

competitive markets, with a lower possibility of
passing cost pressures onto prices. In this context,
he/she expressed that advanced economies face
important challenges regarding monetary policy
conduction. On the one hand, he/she stated that it
would be advisable to take preventive measures to
close the inflation gaps and to avoid inflation
expectations from consolidating at levels below their
targets. On the other hand, he/she mentioned that
more vigorous actions would be required in order for
inflation to converge to its target, which would imply
using a large part of monetary policy’s reduced room
of maneuver or the use of unconventional monetary
policies in a sustained manner, thus reducing the
margin to face adverse scenarios in the future.
He/she considered that these challenges are greater
in the present environment of economic slowdown,
and, mainly, in the current conditions registered in
the euro area and Japan, which: i) largely depend on
external demand and have thus been affected by the
slowdown of world trade; ii) their aggregate demand
remains fragile; and, iii) their medium- and long-term
inflation expectations have consolidated below the
inflation target. He/she pointed out that the monetary
policy response of these economies’ central banks
has focused on generating great levels of inflation, a
goal that has not been achieved, thus perpetuating
exceptional monetary conditions. Another member
delved into the criticism of the extent and
effectiveness of the unconventional measures.
He/she mentioned that monetary variables have a
limited impact on the magnitude and evolution of real
variables and therefore the results cannot be
sustained in the medium and long term. He/she
added that interest rate levels, which have been


even negative in some economies, represent a risk
for financial system stability. Finally, he/she
indicated that such measures fail to address the
structural barriers that limit growth, such as
competitiveness, innovation, legal certainty, and
property rights.

All members noted that, given the environment of
global economic slowdown and low inflation
pressures, several central banks have eased their
monetary policy stances. They noted that, in the
case of the US Federal Reserve, in its September
meeting, it cut the target range of the federal funds
rate by 25 basis points. One member pointed out
that the statement of such decision was perceived
by markets to have a less accommodative tone than
was expected. Some members noted that the
median of the forecast range of the Federal Open
Market Committee does not point to additional
adjustments for 2019 and 2020, although one
member expressed that market expectations
continue incorporating additional reductions during
that period. Most members mentioned that the
European Central Bank adopted diverse measures
of monetary policy easing by reducing its key deposit
facility rate by 10 basis points and by announcing the
implementation of a new asset purchase program for
an indefinite period. One member considered that
differences still prevail among the members of the
monetary policy committees of the Federal Reserve
and the European Central Bank as to how to address
the current juncture. In addition, another member
underlined that the monetary authorities of Japan
and England announced their willingness to adjust
their monetary policy as circumstances warrant. As
to emerging economies’ monetary policy stances,
most members mentioned that they have continued
trending towards a greater easing, especially in the
cases of Brazil, Chile, Peru, Colombia and Russia.
Regarding the monetary policy outlook, some
members pointed out that in the future more
accommodative monetary policy stances are
foreseen worldwide. One of them stated that, in
addition to monetary policy easing, the governments
of some economies, particularly in Asia, have also
applied greater fiscal stimuli.

Most members noted that episodes of volatility were
registered in international financial markets, mainly
associated with trade tensions, although, as
mentioned above, these have diminished in recent
weeks. One member pointed out that, during times
of higher trade tensions, episodes of search for safe
haven assets have been observed, which has
affected emerging economies’ markets. Most
members highlighted that, in a context of

accommodative monetary policies, global financial
conditions have eased. Some members indicated

2


-----

that interest rates have decreased throughout the
yield curve in both advanced and emerging
economies. One of them added that recently stock
markets in most countries posted gains and that
emerging economies’ currencies appreciated

against the US dollar. Another member noted that
the capital outflows from emerging economies which
had been observed seem to have stopped, although
there is still a possibility of a new reversal of such
flows if risks materialize, which would have
implications for asset prices and the financial
systems of these economies. He/she added that the
easing of global financial conditions has been of
smaller magnitude than in previous episodes, as a
result of the environment of caution and risk aversion
prevailing in international financial markets. Most
members mentioned that these markets could be
affected by the prevailing risks for the global
economy and considered that emerging economies
could be especially affected by a decline in risk
appetite. Nevertheless, one member pointed out that
the impact that the materialization of such risks could
have on financial markets should be evaluated,
given that the central banks of the major economies
would seek to improve the global financial conditions
via more accommodative monetary policy stances.
Therefore, he/she considered that the balance of
risks to global financial markets remains stable.

All members noted that available information
suggests that economic activity in Mexico in the
previous quarters and in July remained stagnant.
One member specified that economic activity has
grown, on average, only 0.02% in the last five
quarters, and another one mentioned that it has
decelerated at a higher-than-expected rate. Most
members highlighted that a slight improvement in
economic activity is anticipated for the July–
September period, although one member

considered that currently there is scant information
available to assess the evolution of the economy
during this period.

In regards to aggregate demand components, all
members pointed out that exports maintain their
dynamism, highlighting the positive performance of
manufacturing exports. One member mentioned that
the increase in automotive exports contributed to the
above. As for domestic demand, most members
noted the slowdown of consumption, although they
specified that it shows signs of recovery at the
margin. In this respect, some members underlined
the evolution of some of its determinants, such as
the increase in remittances and the growth of the
wage bill. One member specified that consumption
of durable goods has registered negative annual
rates for three consecutive quarters.


Regarding investment, most members highlighted
the downward trajectory of both private and public
sector investment. One member indicated that
public investment has contracted for several years
and that it has been the public spending item which
has borne the brunt of the adjustment in public
finances. Another member indicated that investment
and its components exhibit a negative trend since
mid-2018. Most members emphasized the lack of
dynamism of construction as well as the decline in
imported machinery and equipment. One member
detailed that, similar to public spending, private
investment has declined for five consecutive
quarters. He/she mentioned that the lack of
investment is one of the most worrisome issues, to
such an extent that adverse effects begin to be
perceived in the balance of payments. Some
members associated the lack of dynamism of
investment with the surplus in the current account
during the second quarter of the year. One of them
emphasized that such surplus is visibly higher than
others that have been observed previously, even
during economic crises. He/she underlined that
gross fixed investment is so low that external
savings are not necessary to finance it. Another
member specified that the above should not come
as a surprise in a context of tight macroeconomic
policies. He/she indicated that a restrictive monetary
policy encourages private savings and discourages
investment, while a tight fiscal policy generates
higher public savings, and that, therefore, both
policies lead to a higher current account balance.
He/she mentioned that such surplus could also be
reflecting a change in the structure of aggregate
spending, where wage increases, higher

remittances and the new social programs could be
contributing to a higher consumption of

domestically-produced goods and to a reduction in
the growth of consumption of imported products.

From a medium-term perspective, one member
mentioned his/her concern over the secular
slowdown in the growth rate of private consumption
that has been observed since 2016, as well as over
the stagnation of private investment during the same
period. The same member pointed out that the
interest rate and the cost of financing for households
and firms have grown steadily since then and that
the growth rate of credit by commercial banks has
decreased. He/she considered that the latter brings
to the fore that risks associated to maintaining a high
interest rate for a long period should not be
minimized. Another member indicated that it is
fundamental to keep in mind the factors that have
contributed to the weakness of investment. In this
regard, he/she specified that data from surveys
conducted among analysts and business contacts
indicates that such factors are mainly associated

3


-----

with problems of uncertainty and governance, rather
than with monetary policy, to which they assign little
importance. In this sense, one member stated that
since late 2016 private investment has been affected
by the uncertainty over the foreign trade

environment and, recently, by factors of domestic
uncertainty.

On the supply side, most members mentioned the
weakness shown by industrial production, while one
member pointed out that its contraction has been
accompanied by an upward trend of manufacturing
production and evidence suggesting a moderate
growth of the service sector. Some members
highlighted the weakness of construction and
mining, and one of them specified that the slowdown
of mining was due to lower oil production. Another
member considered that the economic weakness is
evident even in the service sector.

Most members noted that growth expectations for
2019 and 2020 remain consistent with the range
foreseen in the Quarterly Report April – June 2019
and indicated that such expectations consider a
slight recovery for the rest of the year. One member
pointed out that analysts’ expectations for GDP
growth in 2019 continued to decline in August.
Regarding the factors that would support the
economic recovery over the next months, one
member highlighted the following: i) that the wage
bill and the growth of remittances should continue
supporting private consumption; ii) the sectoral
composition of the evolution of US manufacturing
production, combined with export opportunities for
Mexican products as a result of the trade conflict
between the U.S. and China; and, iii) the anticipated
recovery of public expenditure given the

underspending observed during the first half of the
year. He/she added that, despite the expected
improvement in the rate of economic growth during
the second half of 2019 and in 2020, the economy
would remain in a situation of weakness. He/she
underlined that this would be accompanied by a lack
of dynamism in investment, given that this indicator
is not anticipated to reverse its contraction of recent
months.

All members highlighted that, in an environment of
marked uncertainty, the balance of risks for growth
remains biased to the downside. Thus, most
members argued that growth is subject to both
external and domestic risks. Among external risks,
in addition to the already described global risks, one
member mentioned the possible delays in the
ratification of the USMCA, together with new threats
of US tariffs imposed on Mexico, although the latter
has subsided recently. Regarding domestic risks,
such member emphasized the possibility of


additional reductions in public revenue and domestic
factors affecting the confidence and the outlook for
the Mexican economy. He/she added that in Mexico,
as in other emerging economies, idiosyncratic risk
factors have reinforced the impact of the global trend
of lower growth and uncertainty that have hindered
investment. Another member specified that the risk
that economic activity remains stagnant or that it
deteriorates even further persists, pushing the
economy towards a recession. He/she added that
coincident indicators generated by INEGI to
establish the trajectory of the economic cycle
indicate the need to remain watchful of a possible
recession.

Most members agreed that slack conditions have
widened, although at the beginning of the third
quarter they remained at levels similar to those of
the previous quarter, with a persistent negative
output gap. One member noted that, if the slight
recovery foreseen for the third quarter of the year is
confirmed, it could moderate the widening of slack
conditions observed during the second quarter of the
year. In this regard, some members specified that
negative output gaps are expected within the
forecast horizon, although one of them mentioned
that slack conditions could loosen less than
anticipated.

With respect to the labor market, most members
noted that it has continued to weaken and some
members highlighted that the unemployment rate
has increased. However, one member emphasized
that it is still below the Non-Accelerating Inflation
Rate of Unemployment (NAIRU), and that, for this
reason, its increase does not imply the presence of
slack. Another member mentioned that the

weakness of the labor market has been particularly
reflected in the behavior of formal employment, and
specified that in August 2019 the number of jobs
enrolled at IMSS increased by 343,000 in annual
terms, while in the same month of the previous year,
the increase was 750,000 in annual terms. He/she
added that increases have simultaneously been
observed not only in the unemployment rate, but in
informal sector employment and in

underemployment. Some members considered that
the weakness of the labor market is partly
associated with the economic slowdown. One of
them added, as a factor explaining such weakness,
the increase in the growth rate of unit labor costs,
resulting mainly from the simultaneous effect of the
contractions in labor productivity and the increases
in mean real earnings.

All members mentioned that between July and the
first fortnight of September headline inflation
declined from 3.78% to 2.99% and noted that such

4


-----

reduction was mainly due to the non-core
component. Most members indicated that headline
inflation is in line with the 3% target and some
members pointed out that it has decreased faster
than anticipated. One of them pointed out the
continuation of the downward trend that inflation has
shown since mid-2018.

All members highlighted that non-core inflation has
decreased significantly due to the lower increases of
energy and agricultural and livestock product prices.
Most members pointed out that this component lies
at historically low levels. Nevertheless, they warned
that it is subject to high volatility. In this context, one
member argued that the analysis of inflationary
pressures should not rely exclusively on the
evolution of the headline price index since, currently,
due to the high volatility of the non-core component,
it may provide only a partial and even erroneous
view of the trend of inflation.

The majority of members pointed out that core
inflation has remained persistent around 3.8%.
Some members noted that the abovementioned is in
part due to the evolution of food merchandise and
services prices. One member underlined that core
inflation has remained at levels above 3% for over
seventeen months, higher than the path foreseen by
Banco de México. He/she also mentioned that the
trimmed mean of core inflation indicates that
pressures are not concentrated only on a few
products. Another member stated that the

persistence of this component reflects, among other
factors, the indirect effects of the increases in energy
product prices in the second half of 2018 as well as
those related to the minimum wage increases since
the beginning of 2019, which have a lagged impact.
He/she also highlighted that at the margin there were
greater pressures on services than on

merchandises. One member emphasized the core
inflation has been decreasing since April and that
inflation of both food merchandise and food services
prices are trending downwards, after having reached
maximum levels some months ago. He/she pointed
out that the six-month moving average of the
monthly annualized rates of change of core inflation
continues trending downwards, reaching 3.33% in
August. He/she mentioned that, if this behavior
continues, its annual rates of change will eventually
reflect similar levels. Another member considered
that it is too early to conclude that core inflation has
resumed a downward trend. He/she emphasized
that inflation of food services, transportation, and
recreation prices is at high levels and around 4.5%.

Some members noted that short-term inflation
expectations drawn from surveys have followed the
latest data, while longer term ones have remained


relatively stable, although at levels above 3%. One
member explained that, during April and May,
analysts increased their inflation expectations to
3.75% for 2019 due to a calendar effect.
Nevertheless, in August, they lowered them to only
3.36%. He/she added that expectations are below
what was anticipated in previous Quarterly Reports.
For his part, another member pointed out that
breakeven inflation and inflationary risk premium
implied in fixed income instruments have been
decreasing.

Most members mentioned that the baseline scenario
for headline inflation is near the path published in the
last Quarterly Report. In this regard, another
member considered that, given the slack indicators,
the widening of the negative output gap, and the
dynamics of agricultural and livestock product
prices, there is an increased probability that headline
inflation converges to the target not only earlier than
expected, but that at the end of the year it lies below
the forecasts of the latest Quarterly Report. One
member explained that in the Quarterly Report
published in May the forecast for headline inflation
for the end of 2019 had increased to 3.7%, but in the
latest Report published in August it had decreased
to only 3.2%. Nevertheless, another member noted
that the convergence of inflation to the target in 2020
could be delayed.

Regarding core inflation expectations, most

members pointed out that it is anticipated to start
decreasing as the indirect effects of the shocks on
energy product prices fade. One member added the
fading of the shocks on food prices, while another
emphasized the effects related to exchange rate
adjustments. The majority highlighted that the
downward trend of core inflation would be influenced
by the amount of slack in the economy. One member
added that this subindex will also be influenced by
the effects of wages, which have a lagged impact. In
this context, some members mentioned that core
inflation is still expected to converge to the 3% target
within the forecast horizon.

As for upside inflation risks, most members
mentioned the possibility that core inflation

continues to show persistence. Some members
added that this may occur despite the greater
amount of slack in the economy. One member
considered that the persistence of this component
would contribute to the increase of its medium-term
expectations and of headline inflation expectations
remaining above the 3% target, thus hindering the
convergence to the target in the foreseen time
frame. The majority of members mentioned the risk
that the exchange rate comes under pressure
stemming from external or domestic factors. One

5


-----

member stated that, considering the uncertainty that
the economy is facing, this is the most important risk.
In this regard, he/she pointed out that, although the
pass-through of exchange rate fluctuations on prices
is low, it is not zero. Another member noted that
there is the possibility that the exchange rate
depreciates further than expected and puts pressure
on prices through a greater pass-through than the
observed so far. Another member warned that,
despite evidence that the pass-through effect of the
exchange rate is limited, short-term inflation and its
expectations are significantly sensitive to sharp
exchange rate fluctuations. Most members

mentioned that another upside risk to inflation is the
threat by the United States to impose tariffs on
Mexican imports and the adoption of compensatory
measures, although this risk has diminished. They
added the risk that energy or agricultural and
livestock product prices increase. One member
noted the possibility that non-core inflation reverts to
its historic values. In this regard, another member
added that, given the high volatility of these
products, this risk persists even considering the
current administration’s gasoline price policy.
Another member mentioned that, insofar as energy
price inflation remains low due to the new pricing
policy of the federal government, a perception of low
and stable inflation will be generated, which is
certain to have a favorable impact on the price
formation process. The majority of members
mentioned as risks an environment of weak public
finances and that given the magnitude of various
wage revisions, cost-related pressures arise, insofar
as such revisions exceed productivity gains. In this
regard, one member highlighted that the outlook for
wage adjustments for the next year is still uncertain.
Another member considered that, in his/her opinion,
the available evidence points to a limited impact of
minimum wage increases on inflation, considering
that headline inflation is below 3% and that in the
border area it is below the national average. He/she
added that inflation of services other than housing
and education, which, in principle, could be affected
by the wage increases, is not too far from its historic
average after excluding the atypical deflationary
behavior of the telecommunications sector during
2014-2016. Most members added the risk that
global protectionist measures worldwide escalate.
Finally, one member also mentioned the potential
impact of the increase to the tax on flavored drinks
and on cigarettes projected on the 2020 budget.

Regarding downside risks, most members

mentioned the possibility that the peso exchange
rate appreciates, which could be associated with a
context of more accommodative monetary policy
stances and lower interest rates worldwide, or in
case that greater certainty arises regarding the trade


relation with the United States. The majority added
as a downside risk that the prices of certain goods
included in the non-core subindex register lower
rates of change. In this regard, one member
explained that energy product prices are following a
downward trend associated with the global

economic slowdown. All members mentioned the
possibility that slack conditions widen more than
anticipated, which would impact the behavior of core
inflation. Nevertheless, one member pointed out that
it remains to be seen to what extent the sluggish
performance of economic activity contains the
pressures on prices.

In this context, the majority of members agreed that
high uncertainty regarding the risks that might affect
inflation continues to persist. One member

estimated that, given the inflation forecasts and the
atypical behavior of the non-core component, it is
difficult to gauge the balance of risks. Another
member considered that, although it is difficult to
assess a balance of risks in such an uncertain
environment, in his/her opinion, it remains biased to
the upside. For their part, some members mentioned
that risks have decreased substantially as compared
to those of previous months. One member pointed
out that such behavior is associated with the
significant downside inflation risks described above
and with the balance of risks for growth being
sharply biased to the downside. Another member
noted that, although domestic and external risks
persist, they are not necessarily at levels above
those observed in past episodes. He/she added that
the continuous widening of the output gap, along
with a favorable dynamics of agricultural and
livestock product prices, suggests a balance of risks
for inflation biased to the downside.

Most members pointed out that domestic financial
markets have reflected the effects of lower interest
rates for all terms in the main advanced economies,
as well as episodes of volatility with exchange rate
adjustments, although these have diminished over
the last weeks. One member considered that
domestic factors, such as the agreement of the
federal government with the firms operating gas
pipelines, Pemex’s bond repurchase and

refinancing, and the presentation of the 2020
Economic Package, contributed to the favorable
performance displayed by domestic financial

markets in September. The majority of members
stated that yields on government securities for all
terms have continued to decrease. One member
pointed out that mixed trajectories were observed for
different terms, with sharper falls in those of up to
five years. Another member explained that yields are
at their lowest levels of the year. Another member
mentioned that nominal and real yield curves are

6


-----

inverted vis-à-vis the target for the overnight
interbank funding rate. He/she explained that, when
decomposing long-term yields, both expectations for
short-term interest rates and term premia are found
to have fallen in the last months. He/she added that
real interest rates on Udibonos have also

decreased. He/she argued that maintaining prudent
macroeconomic stances has been fundamental for
the orderly and downward adjustment of nominal
and real yield curves, given the combination of
looser global financial conditions and the presence
of significant idiosyncratic risks. Some members
noted that the peso exchange rate appreciated since
the monetary policy decision of August, although
another member highlighted that the peso exchange
rate has been subject to depreciation episodes
associated with uncertainty factors in international
financial markets, to idiosyncratic factors, and to
contagion from other emerging economies. Some
members mentioned that the stock market

registered a significant recovery and one member
emphasized that this favorable performance stands
out among emerging economies. As to risk premia,
some members pointed out that these have
decreased significantly since the last monetary
policy decision. One member explained that such
reduction was similar to that observed in other
emerging economies, which suggests that it is
fundamentally determined by external factors.
He/she emphasized that Credit Default Swaps
(CDS) premia for Mexico’s sovereign debt remain
above those of other emerging economies with a
lower credit rating. He/she argued that, among the
main fifteen emerging economies, only Mexico,
along with Turkey and Brazil, have registered a
downgrading of their sovereign credit rating in the
last year. Finally, another member stated that capital
inflows from foreign investors have been negative
with regard to those channeled to fixed income
instruments, although their holdings maintain a
balance similar to that observed in previous years,
while inflows destined to equity instruments were
positive.

As to the risks that may affect the performance of
financial assets in Mexico, most members

mentioned that uncertainty persists with respect to
the bilateral relationship between Mexico and the
United States and to the credit rating outlook both for
Pemex’s debt and for Mexico’s sovereign debt. One
member highlighted the possibility of a deterioration
of public finances. In addition, another member
considered that although several uncertainty factors
persist in the external environment, the measures
adopted by the central banks of the main economies
have contributed to mitigate such risks. He/she also
considered that most domestic risks associated with
public policies such as those related with public


finances and Pemex, have been fading throughout
the year. He/she added that, in his/her opinion, the
most important financial risks for domestic financial
markets are low growth and maintaining an overly
restrictive monetary policy.

The majority of members highlighted that the current
environment continues to pose significant risks that
could affect the country’s macroeconomic

conditions, its ability to grow, and the economy’s
price formation process. In this regard, they pointed
out that it is particularly important that, in addition to
a prudent and firm monetary policy, measures to
foster an environment of confidence and certainty for
investment and higher productivity are adopted, and
that public finances are consolidated in a

sustainable way. In this context, they noted that it is
necessary to address the deterioration of both the
sovereign’s and Pemex’s credit ratings as well as
achieving both the fiscal targets for 2019 and the
goals set in the 2020 Economic Package. They also
stated that strengthening the rule of law, tackling
corruption, and fighting insecurity are equally
imperative. One member underlined the need to
increase productivity through the adoption of new
technologies and the strengthening of human
capital. Regarding the 2020 Economic Package,
most members agreed that the primary surplus
targets are appropriate and that, in general, it was
well received by economic agents, although one
member added that the new budget implies a
trajectory for both the public debt and the public
sector’s borrowing requirements as a percentage of
GDP slightly above those announced originally.
Some members warned that several analysts have
expressed that certain assumptions in the budget,
particularly regarding crude oil production and
income, are optimistic and, therefore, risk factors for
fiscal policy persist.

The majority of members noted that the fiscal
support package for Pemex and the recently
announced financial measures to strengthen the
state-owned company’s financial profile are efforts in
the right direction, which have led to a recovery in
the value of Pemex’s debt instruments and to a
decrease of its CDS premia. Nevertheless, some
members mentioned that most analysts agree that
such measures represent a short-term relief since
they do not solve the company’s structural problems.
One member highlighted that another problem that
Pemex faces is the possibility of observing a lower
oil platform than expected due to both the low levels
of investment and the cancellation of private
participation in new developments that may allow an
increase of crude oil production. Some members
warned that the risk of a downgrading of Pemex’s
credit rating persists and that this would imply the

7


-----

loss of its investment grade. Although one member
acknowledged that expectations of additional
actions by rating agencies have been delayed
temporarily, another member argued that one rating
agency has stated that significant increases of
Pemex’s net debt, an operational performance
below forecasts, and a decline of crude oil reserves
or of their expected duration, may lead to a
downgrading of Pemex’s rating, which would bring
about the loss of its investment grade. He/she also
pointed out that such agency considers that
Pemex’s capital expenditure for 2019 and 2020 is far
below the required to replace reserves in these
years. Thus, in his/her opinion, the risk of such event
taking place is high.

In this context, one member noted that Pemex
remains the main domestic risk factor given its
dependence on the federal government’s financial
support. He/she mentioned that, although financial
instruments continue to discount the downgrading of
Pemex’s credit rating, it cannot be ruled out that its
materialization would trigger forced sales that may
generate disorderly adjustments in financial
markets. He/she added that the cessation of bidding
rounds or the revision of contracts granted to the
private sector for the supply of natural gas, have
generated uncertainty and affected the confidence
of economic agents. He/she warned about several
sources of uncertainty for public finances, such as
the pressures associated with the growing pensions
and the financial support to Pemex. He/she also
pointed out that revenues may be lower than
expected, due to lower economic growth. He/she
noted that the abovementioned represents a
challenge, given that the resource gap would need
to be offset with greater public spending cuts, a
higher tax-collection capacity and, probably, with the
use of more resources from the Oil Revenues
Stabilization Fund (FEIP, for its acronym in Spanish)
which may lead to future pressures on public
finances, given that part of the reserves to face
future shocks would be depleted.

As for the monetary policy decision, considering the
reduction of headline inflation, the width of slack
conditions in the economy, and the recent behavior
of external and domestic yield curves, most
members considered that lowering the target for the
overnight interbank interest rate by 25 basis points
to 7.75% is consistent with the convergence of
inflation to the central bank’s target within the time
frame in which monetary policy operates. The
majority of members highlighted that maintaining a
prudent monetary policy is necessary given the
uncertain scenario that inflation faces. In this regard,
one member argued that the monetary policy stance
should be adjusted gradually, carefully assessing


the incoming information to better identify the
conditions in the economy, the process of inflation
reduction, and the balance of risks for both. He/she
underlined that, although in the baseline scenario
inflation converges to its target within the time frame
in which monetary policy operates, risks that may
affect this forecast and delay the consolidation of
lower inflation persist.

He/she pointed out that such has been the case in
the last two years with the presence of factors that
have affected the domestic economy, the price
formation process, and which have led to a greater
resistance of core inflation to decline. In addition,
such member mentioned that, although short-term
interest rate spreads remain high, the peso
exchange rate has been subject to pressures and
depreciation episodes. Another member explained
that the new level of the policy rate allows for
reducing the level of monetary restriction to facilitate
the efficient convergence of inflation to its target and
maintain the relative monetary policy stance in order
to avoid an unnecessarily widening of the spread
between short-term instruments denominated in
Mexican pesos and in US dollars. Another member
noted that, given the environment described above,
monetary policy in Mexico continues to face an
uncertain and contrasting outlook. On the one hand,
he/she stated that the additional cut of the US
federal funds rate opens up space for monetary
policy implementation in Mexico. He/she added the
weakness of the economy, which should be
reflected in the evolution of prices, and the
importance for the central bank to ensure an orderly
adjustment of inflation to the target. On the other
hand, he/she noted the need to take into
consideration core inflation’s continuing persistence;
that inflation expectations for 2020 and longer terms
are above the target; that the sovereign risk
increased in the last months; and, that a situation of
marked uncertainty may imply a significant shock for
the economy in a not-too-distant horizon. In this
context, he/she emphasized that, in his/her opinion,
it is not possible to determine a cycle for monetary
policy. He/she added that monetary policy must
prioritize prudence and effectively respond to the
needs that arise according to incoming data and the
circumstances at each point in time. He/she pointed
out that an important part of the environment of
concern that the economy is facing stems from
domestic factors that limit the scope of action for
monetary policy. He/she stated that the
implementation of decisive measures to solve such
challenges would allow not only for a more balanced
economic policy approach, but also to mitigate the
situation of uncertainty, the central problem behind
the complex performance of the economy.

8


-----

Some members considered that a 50 basis point
adjustment to the target rate was appropriate. One
member argued that taking into consideration the
latest reduction in the federal funds rate, a 25 basis
point reduction to the policy rate in Mexico would
leave the monetary policy stance relative to that of
the United States at historically high levels, despite
the fact that inflation is at 3%, that the economy is in
a slump with a persistent negative output gap which
is widening, and that global risks have declined.
He/she added that with a 50 basis point reduction to
the policy rate in Mexico, the interest rate spread
between Mexico and the United States would still be
very much above the spreads of all emerging
economies within the same group of assets. The
current spread between the target level for the
monetary policy rate and observed inflation in
Mexico is not only the widest among comparable
emerging economies, but also turns out to be
practically twice Russia’s, which has the second
highest rate in this group of economies and which
has reduced rates by 75 basis points so far this year.
Even with a 50 basis point reduction, in relative
terms we would have a spread with the United
States of 550 basis points, and that such spread
would still be very much above practically all relevant
emerging economies for our class of assets. The
only country that would be above Mexico would be
Turkey, a country which faces an inflation rate of
15%. For the same reason, the carry-trade that
many believe must be maintained given the risks
faced by the Mexican economy, would continue to
be the highest among this group of countries.

The same member added that a level of 7.5% is still
a rate above the ceiling of the risk-adjusted neutral
range. He/she added that considering that the
Mexican economy is still far from potential, the policy
rate in real terms that is consistent with the current
juncture would be below natural rate estimates,
which is the real rate consistent with GDP at its
potential level and with inflation at its target. In this
regard, he/she concluded that, considering the
economy’s cyclical position, the current monetary
policy stance is even more restrictive.

In this context, the same member pointed out that
although in the current conditions the monetary
policy stance must remain restrictive, there is wide
room for maneuver and a window of opportunity to
lower the monetary policy rate and still maintain its
restrictive character, but less so than currently,
considering that the present monetary policy stance
is the most restrictive in the last ten years in absolute
and relative terms, even above that observed in
periods in which inflation was higher and there was
significant uncertainty and greater risks.


Nevertheless, he/she acknowledged that currently
there are numerous risks and that looking ahead, the
Bank must act cautiously and according to incoming
information. He/she pointed out that the highly
restrictive monetary policy stance must be adjusted
to a less restrictive one, although the pace of such
an adjustment will have to weigh the risks to core
inflation.

The same member pointed out that it is essential to
maintain a prudent policy stance until the Bank
clearly fulfils its mandate in a more solid manner
given that in order to ensure that headline inflation
remains around 3%, it is necessary for core inflation
to converge to that same level, albeit currently it is
not very far from 3%.

Another member mentioned that, given the latest
reduction in the federal funds rate, a 25 basis point
reduction to the reference rate in Mexico would
make the monetary policy stance relative to that of
the United States remain unchanged, which could
give the impression that Banco de México is
following mechanically the US Federal Reserve.
He/she was of the opinion that it would be advisable
to send the signal that the Bank is acting
independently and is responding mainly to an
improvement of domestic conditions. He/she also
added that so far this year, other central banks in
Latin America have loosened their monetary policy
stances to a greater extent than Banco de México
and that currently their policy rates are lower. He/she
argued that the latter illustrates that Mexico’s
monetary policy stance is very restrictive, especially
taking into account that inflation is near its target.
He/she added that the current conditions allow for a
greater monetary policy easing in the Mexican
economy than in other advanced or emerging
economies, given that in some of these, the margin
of maneuver is limited because interest rates are
already at low levels. The same member

emphasized that domestic conditions in Mexico
have changed significantly over the last year. Such
member pointed out that in September 2018,
headline inflation was 5.02%, which implies that in a
year inflation decreased slightly more than 200 basis
points. In addition to the improvement in the
country’s economic outlook, he/she mentioned the
sharp economic deceleration in the last year, the
radical adjustment in the monetary policy outlook of
advanced economies, and the satisfactory outcome
of certain uncertainties that had been present,
especially regarding the fiscal situation that would
prevail under a new administration in Mexico. Such
member mentioned that if the policy rate were to be
reduced only by 25 basis points, it would only allow
a return to the rate that was in effect in September
2018 (7.75%), which would imply that Mexico’s

9


-----

monetary policy stance would have just remained
constant despite the fact that the present domestic
and international conditions are completely different
from those at that time.

Lastly, the same member pointed out that the tone
of the monetary policy statement should highlight the
significant decline of both inflation and its risks
during the year, and also the fact that inflation has
been below both market expectations and the
central bank’s forecasts. Such member argued that
this would send a message of certainty and
confidence, confirming that the central bank has
inflation under control and that it can loosen its
monetary policy stance, seeking to keep inflation at
its target with the least possible costs for the
Mexican economy.

The majority of members considered that the central
bank message must communicate clearly that the
future of monetary policy depends mainly on the
evolution of inflation and on how inflation deviates
from its expected trajectory, in an environment
characterized by high risks and high levels of
uncertainty. Such members highlighted that the
monetary policy statement must reflect that the
Governing Board considers that the present decision
is prudent and consistent with the 3% inflation target
and that the current situation, characterized
simultaneously by economic weakness and

persistently high core inflation in an environment of
uncertainty, requires following up closely the
incoming information. One member mentioned that
such follow up would allow to update the balance of
risks and inflation forecasts in a timely manner, in
order to be able to act appropriately, fulfil the price
stability mandate effectively, and preserve the
confidence gained over twenty five years of central
bank independence.

**3. MONETARY POLICY DECISION**

To guide its monetary policy actions, Banco de
México’s Governing Board follows closely the
development of inflation vis-à-vis its forecasted
trajectory, taking into account the monetary policy
stance and the time frame in which monetary policy
operates. In this process, it uses available
information on all inflation determinants as well as
on medium- and long-term inflation expectations,
including the balance of risks for such factors.
Monetary policy must also act prudently if for any
reason the uncertainty faced by the economy
increases significantly. In this context, considering
the reduction of headline inflation, the ample slack in
the economy, and the recent behavior of external
and domestic yield curves, Banco de México’s
Governing Board decided by majority to lower the


target for the overnight interbank interest rate to
7.75%, taking into account that under the current
environment such level is consistent with the
convergence of headline inflation to the central
bank’s target within the time frame in which
monetary policy operates. Two members voted for
lowering said target to 7.50%. In order to consolidate
a low and stable inflation, in an environment in which
price formation and slack conditions in the economy
are subject to risks, the Governing Board will
continue to follow closely all factors and elements of
uncertainty that have an impact on inflation and its
outlook, and will take the required actions based on
incoming information so that the policy rate is
consistent with the orderly and sustained

convergence of headline inflation to Banco de
México’s target within the time frame in which
monetary policy operates.

Banco de México’s Governing Board will maintain a
prudent monetary policy stance and, under the
current environment of uncertainty, will follow closely
the potential pass-through of exchange rate
fluctuations to prices, Mexico’s monetary policy
stance relative to that of the U.S.-in an external
environment that it is still subject to risks- and the
behavior of slack conditions and cost-related
pressures in the economy. In the presence and
possible persistence of factors that, by their nature,
involve risks to both inflation and its expectations,
monetary policy will be adjusted in a timely and firm
manner to achieve the convergence of inflation to its
3% target and to strengthen the anchoring of
medium- and long-term inflation expectations so that
they attain such target.

**4. VOTING**

Alejandro Díaz de León-Carrillo, Irene EspinosaCantellano and Javier Eduardo Guzmán-Calafell
voted in favor of lowering the target for the overnight
interbank rate by 25 basis points to 7.75%.

Gerardo Esquivel-Hernández and Jonathan Ernest
Heath-Constable voted in favor of lowering the
target for the overnight interbank rate by 50 basis
points to 7.50%.

**5. DISSENTING OPINIONS / VOTES**

**Vote. Gerardo Esquivel-Hernández**

Headline inflation has behaved better than expected
and is already at levels close to Banco de México’s
target. Inflation accumulated in the first three
quarters of the year will be below 1%, thus allowing
to foresee that inflation will end the year close to or
even below 3%. Although core inflation is still at

10


-----

relatively high levels, it is possible to anticipate that
it will diminish over the next months as a result of the
fading impact that the increase in energy prices at
the end of 2018 had on food prices. Looking ahead,
both headline and core inflation are expected to
converge to the target. In addition, both the
widespread reduction of interest rates worldwide
and the country’s significant economic deceleration
open up some room to lower the policy rate in
Mexico far more than the reduction observed in the
United States. For this reason, I consider that on this
occasion it is possible and desirable to lower the
overnight interbank interest rate by 50 basis points
without jeopardizing or compromising Banco de
México’s primary mandate.

**Vote.** Jonathan Ernest Heath-Constable

Although headline inflation is at the 3.0% point
target, such target was not attained by a reduction of
the core component, making it necessary to


maintain a restrictive monetary policy stance. The
question is if a rate as high as the current one is
justified, to the extent that in absolute and relative
terms it represents the most restrictive policy stance
maintained over the last ten years, even above the
observed during periods in which we faced higher
inflation levels, with high uncertainty and greater
risks. Under the current conditions, there is room to
lower the monetary policy rate and still keep its
restrictive character given: that the negative output
gap is still widening; a smaller deviation of inflation
from its target; global risk aversion has diminished
and accommodative monetary policies continue to
prevail in most economies. In other words, we must
maintain our monetary policy restrictive for as long
as necessary, but not as restrictive as the current
one. The present conditions provide a window of
opportunity to make this adjustment and for this
reason I am in favor of lowering our target rate by 50
basis points.

11


-----

**ANNEX**

The information in this Annex was prepared for this
meeting by the staff of Banco de México’s General
Directorate of Economic Research and General
Directorate of Central Bank Operations. It does not
necessarily reflect the considerations of the

members of the Governing Board as to the monetary
policy decision.

**A.1. External conditions**

**A.1.1. World economic activity**

Available indicators suggest that the moderation of
world economic growth continued during the third
quarter of the year. Several risk factors have
continued to negatively affect business confidence,
capital expenditure, manufacturing activity and
global trade (
Chart 1). Outstanding risk factors include the greater
uncertainty stemming from escalating trade tensions
worldwide; evidence pointing to a further weakening
of some major economies; the possibility of a no-deal
exit of the United Kingdom from the European Union;
the worsening of the political situation in the Middle
East; and, other geopolitical risks. Likewise, during
this period episodes of volatility in financial markets
have also taken place, mainly associated with trade
tensions between the United States and China,
although they have recently diminished. In addition,
the outlook for global growth has continued to be
revised downwards and other political and

geopolitical risks to the world economy persist. Thus,
the balance of risks for world economic activity
remains biased to the downside. In this environment
of economic weakness, in which headline and core
inflation in the main advanced economies are below
their central banks’ targets, several central banks
have implemented more accommodative monetary
policy stances and some economies, particularly in
Asia, have announced the adoption of greater fiscal
stimuli.


**Chart 1**

**World Trade Volume and Leading Indicators**

Diffusion index and annual change of 3-month

moving average in percent, s. a.

60 10

June

July

58 August 8

56 6

54 4

52 2

50 0

CPB Netherlands

48 RWI Worldwide container handling -2

New export orders

46 -4

s. a. / Seasonally adjusted figures.
Source: CPB Netherlands, Markit and RWI Leibniz Institute for Economic
Research.

In the United States, available indicators point to
certain moderation in the growth rate of GDP during
the third quarter due mainly to a lower dynamism of
private consumption vis-à-vis the previous quarter
(Chart 2). Non-residential investment and net exports
have remained weak, while inventories are expected
to continue having a negative contribution to growth.

**Chart 2**

**United States: Real GDP and its Components**

Annualized quarterly percentage change and

contributions in percentage points, s. a.

6

4

2

0

-2


-4

-6


Inventories Non-residential investment


I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV I II III

|Annualized quarterly percentage change and contributions in percentage points, s. a.|Col2|Col3|Col4|
|---|---|---|---|
|||||
|Public spending Net exports Inventories Non-residential investme Residential investment Private consumption Total Blue Chip||||
|I II III IV 2016|I II III IV 2017|I II III IV 2018|I II II 2019|


s. a. / Seasonally adjusted figures.
Note: The third quarter refers to GDPNow estimates of the Federal Reserve
Bank of Atlanta and to Blue Chip Survey of September 2019.
Source: Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA), Blue Chip and Federal
Reserve Bank of Atlanta.

12


-----

In August, US industrial production picked up,
growing at a monthly rate of 0.6%, after having
contracted 0.1% in July. Such improvement was
largely due to the recovery of mining, after having
been affected by hurricane Barry in July, and to a
moderate recovery of manufacturing, despite the fall
in car production. Thus, during July and August,
manufacturing production increased at an

annualized rate of 1.2% when compared with the
second quarter, after having contracted for two
consecutive quarters. Looking ahead, the

manufacturing sector Purchasing Managers’ Index
(PMI) suggests a certain stabilization of that sector in
September, although at low levels.

Some of the main US labor market indicators remain
strong. In particular, the growth of the non-farm
payroll remained solid, given that the 130,000 new
jobs created in August are above the level necessary
to absorb the growth of the labor force. In addition,
the labor force participation rate has been increasing,
particularly in the 25-54 year age group. The
unemployment rate remained at 3.7%, near its lowest
level in the last five decades. In this context, the
growth rate of wages has increased.

In the euro area, information drawn from indicators
and business surveys continues to suggest a
moderate growth of economic activity during the third
quarter of the year, driven by private consumption
and residential investment, items which have
continued to exhibit a relative strength stemming
from the adequate performance of the labor market.
Nevertheless, both external demand and the
manufacturing sector remain weak, reflecting the
contraction of Germany’s industrial activity, due, in
turn, to the lower global demand for automobiles and
machinery. The services and manufacturing sector
Purchasing Managers’ Index (PMI) resumed its
downward trend, which suggests that the weakness
of that economy may persist.

In Japan, available indicators for the third quarter
suggest that Japanese economic activity may grow
at a more moderate rate largely because of a
weakening of consumption and fixed business
investment. In addition, indicators on business
confidence continued to deteriorate, particularly
those associated with the manufacturing sector,
which indicates that the weakness of this economy
may intensify further.


In emerging economies, available information
indicates that their growth rate will remain weak
during the third quarter. In the case of China,
economic activity indicators continued to point to a
gradual deceleration, given that retail sales, industrial
activity and fixed investment grew at a more
moderate rate, despite the upturn of infrastructure
spending.

International commodity prices in general followed an
upward trend in the last weeks. In particular, after
having shown an erratic behavior in August, oil prices
recovered moderately at the beginning of September
driven by the greater expectations that the
agreement to cut oil production quotas among
members of the Organization of Petroleum Exporting
Countries (OPEC) and other producing countries
would be extended for a longer period, as well as to
a reduction in US commercial crude oil inventories.
Later, oil prices registered a sharp increase after the
attacks on Saudi Arabia’s oil facilities, although they
have partially decreased due to lower uncertainty as
to the time it will take this country to fully reestablish
its oil production. Grain prices recovered in the last
weeks due to greater Chinese demand and less
favorable sowing conditions in the United States.
Finally, at the beginning of September, industrial
metal prices recovered due to the perception of more
favorable conditions for trade negotiations between
the United States and China. Nevertheless, by midSeptember, these prices decreased once more after
indicators confirming the weakness of Chinese
industrial production were published.

**A.1.2. Monetary policy and international financial**
**markets**

Headline and core inflations in most advanced and
emerging economies are below their central banks’
targets. Headline inflation has decreased in some of
these economies over the last months partly because
of lower energy product prices. In turn, core inflation
has registered a moderate recovery in some of the
main advanced economies, driven partly by the
fading of some transitory factors (Chart 3). In the
United States, core inflation as measured by the
personal consumption spending deflator remained
stable at a 1.6% annual rate in July. In the euro area
and Japan, core inflation has remained at low levels,
despite the low unemployment rates. In most
emerging economies, headline and core inflation
have remained low and, in some cases, even below
their respective central banks’ targets.

13


-----

**Chart 3**

**Selected Advanced Economies: Core Inflation**


3

2

1


0

United States 1/
Euro area
Japan 2/
Canada 3/
United Kingdom

-1

2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019


1/ Refers to the Personal Consumption Expenditures Price Index (PCE).
2/ Excludes fresh food, energy, and the direct effect of the consumption tax
increase.
3/ Excludes food, energy, and the effect of adjustments on indirect taxes
(CPIX).
Source: Haver Analytics, BEA, Statistical Office of the European Union
(Eurostat), and Statistics Bureau (Japan).

In this context, the central banks of a large number
of economies have continued to adopt more
accommodative monetary policy stances, given the
lower inflation levels, lower growth expectations, and
the greater risks to world economic activity. In
addition, expectations that several central banks will
continue cutting their reference rates prevail (Chart
4).


3.0% **― US Federal Reserve***

**― Bank of England** Forecasts
**― Bank of Japan**

2.5% **― Bank of Canada**

**― European Central Bank deposit rate**
**― OIS implicit trajectory 23 Sep 2019**

2.0% **--- OIS implicit trajectory 12 Aug 2019**

**--- OIS implicit trajectory 31 Dec 2018**

1.5%

1.0%

0.5%

0.0%

-0.5%

-1.0% End of 2018 End of 2019 End of 2020

2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020

|elected Advanced Economie Annual percentage c|Col2|Col3|s: Core hange|Inflati|on|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|United States 1/ Euro area Japan 2/ Canada 3/ United Kingdom||||A|ugust July|
|14 2015 2016 2017|||2018|2019||
||||ures Price ect of the ustments o e of the of a lar to a stances expect nomic l centra ates pr Trajec|Index (PC consumpti n indirect European ge nu dopt, given ations, activity l banks evail (C tories i Forecasts||
|%||||||
|%||||||
|%||||||
|||||||


1/ OIS: Fixed floating interest rate swap where the fixed interest rate is the
effective overnight reference rate.

- In the case of the US observed reference rate, the average interest rate of
the federal funds target range is used (1.75% - 2.00%).
Source: Bloomberg.

In its September meeting, as anticipated, the US
Federal Reserve cut the target range for the federal
funds rate by 25 basis points (bps) to 1.75-2%. It is
worth noting that, although the majority of members


voted for cutting the federal funds rate, two members
voted in favor of leaving the rate unchanged and
another voted for cutting it by 50 basis points. In its
policy statement, this central bank mentioned that, in
light of the implications of global events for the
economic outlook, as well as muted inflation
pressures, it decided to lower the target range for the
federal funds rate. The Fed highlighted that such
action supports its baseline scenario of a sustained
economic activity and inflation near its symmetric 2%
target, although it mentioned that uncertainty about
this scenario prevails. It reaffirmed that, in
determining the path to be followed by monetary
policy, it will continue monitoring available

information and will take the appropriate measures to
keep a sustained economic expansion, a strong labor
market, and inflation levels around its target. In his
press conference, the Federal Reserve Chairman
also highlighted that the reduction in the federal
funds rate aims at maintaining the strength of
economic activity and providing insurance against
certain latent risks. It is worth noting that no
significant changes to the assessment of the
economy were made and that modifications to the
Fed’s economic projections were marginal. It is worth
highlighting that the median value of the Fed’s
projections for the federal funds rate does not
anticipate additional cuts in 2019 and 2020, although
seven of the Fed’s seventeen members are still
expecting an additional 25 basis points cut before the
end of the year. The implied path in federal funds
futures reflects an additional cut in 2019 and another
in 2020.

In its September meeting, the European Central
Bank (ECB) left its benchmark rate and key marginal
lending facility rate unchanged, at 0% and 0.25%,
respectively. Nevertheless, it announced several
measures to ease its monetary policy stance in order
to achieve its inflation target. Among them are the
reduction of its key deposit facility rate from -0.4 to
-0.5%; adjustments to the quarterly targeted longerterm refinancing operations (TLTRO III); the
implementation of a tiered interest rate system for
bank’s reserve requirements; and, the

implementation of a new €20 billion per month asset
purchase program (APP) starting November 1 that
will run for as long as necessary and end shortly
before the ECB starts raising its key policy interest
rates. This central bank also confirmed its plans to
continue reinvesting the principal payments from
maturing securities purchased under the APP for an
extended period of time past the date when it starts
raising its policy interest rates. As to its forward
guidance, the ECB stated that key policy interest
rates will remain at or even below the current levels

14


-----

at least until inflation clearly converges to a level
close but below 2%. In addition, it emphasized the
need for a high level of monetary stimulus and stated
that it is willing to adjust all its monetary policy tools
as required.

In its September meeting, the Bank of Japan left its
policy interest rates unchanged, reaffirming that it will
keep them at extremely low levels until at least the
spring of 2020. This central bank emphasized that
downward risks to economic activity have increased.
In this environment, the Bank of Japan highlighted
the need to analyze more closely the possibility that
the achievement of its price stability target is
jeopardized and, as a result, it will assess once again
developments in both economic activity and prices in
its October meeting when its growth and inflation
outlook is revised.

In its September meeting, the Bank of England left its
policy rate at 0.75% and did not modify its stock of
government bond purchases. This central bank
pointed out that recent political events may lead to a
sustained period of uncertainty as to the future
relationship between the United Kingdom and the
European Union. In this regard, it highlighted that the
longer this period is extended, the greater the
possibility that the growth of demand remains below
potential. Although the Bank of England pointed out
that the aforementioned would be reflected in lower
pressures on prices, it did not set out a position as to
its policy interest rates, stressing that its monetary
policy decision would not be automatic and would be
taken in whichever direction is necessary.

The Bank of Canada left its policy interest rate
unchanged at 1.75% in its September meeting. This
central bank mentioned that the growth rate of
economic activity during the second quarter was
higher than anticipated. Nevertheless, it highlighted
that the effects of escalating trade and geopolitical
tensions on both trade and investment have been
greater than anticipated and that the economy is
expected to grow at a more moderate rate during the
second half of the year. In this environment, the Bank
of Canada pointed out that the economy is operating
near its potential and inflation is at its target.
Considering the above, this central bank argued that
its accommodative monetary policy stance remains
appropriate and underlined that it will follow closely
the development of the global economy and its
impact on the Canadian economy.

In emerging economies, several central banks
continued to cut their policy rates, such as those of
Chile, Indonesia, Paraguay, Russia, and Turkey. The


People’s Bank of China loosened the reserve
requirement ratio (RRR) of all banks to the lowest
level observed since 2007, seeking to inject liquidity
into the economy and counteracting the domestic
deceleration and the negative effects of the trade
tensions with the United States. Looking forward,
additional monetary stimulus measures are expected
to be adopted by this group of economies.

In the last weeks of August, international financial
markets continued registering episodes of volatility
driven by the ups and downs in the trade negotiations
between the United States and China and the
presence of other geopolitical events. Nevertheless,
in September, financial markets exhibited certain
stability as some risks had diminished and given the
more accommodative monetary policy stances
adopted by most central banks of advanced
economies. In this context, a slight upward
adjustment was observed in the financial asset prices
that had registered significant falls since the second
quarter of the year. Thus, in advanced economies,
the main stock exchange markets posted gains,
interest rates increased, and safe-haven currencies,
such as the yen and the Swiss franc, depreciated
(Chart 5).

**Chart 5**

**Change in Selected Financial Indicators**

**from August 12 to September 23, 2019**

Percent, basis pointsPercentage, basis points


15%

12%


25

20


9%

6%


15

10


3%

0%


5

0


-3%


-5


-6% -10

1/ MSCI Emerging Markets Index (includes 24 countries).
2/ DXY: Weighted average of the nominal exchange rate of the six main
world-traded currencies (calculated by Intercontinental Exchange, ICE) with
the following weights: EUR (57.6%), JPY (13.6%), GBP (11.9%), CAD
(9.1%), SEK (4.2%), and CHF (3.6%).
3/ J.P. Morgan Index constructed from a weighted average of the nominal
exchange rate of emerging economies’ currencies with the following
weights: TRY (8.3%), RUB (8.3%), HUF (8.3%), ZAR (8.3%), BRL (11.1%),
MXN (11.1%), CLP (11.1%), CNH (11.1%), INR (11.1%), and SGD (11.1%).
4/ The steel index corresponds to the active contract traded in the New York
Mercantile Exchange.
5/ The aluminum index corresponds to the active contract traded in the
London Metal Exchange.
Source: Bloomberg and ICE.


15


-----

In contrast, in an environment of low liquidity, capital
outflows were registered in emerging economies.
While outflows were moderate in debt markets, in
stock markets they took place during practically all
the period. The deterioration of financial markets in
Argentina stood out (Chart 6).

**Chart 6**

**Emerging Economies: Financial Assets**

**Performance from August 12 to**

**September 23, 2019**
Percent, basis points


Thus, the peso/dollar exchange rate reached a
maximum level of 20.25 pesos per US dollar during
the period. The abovementioned took place in a
context of low liquidity due to seasonal effects.
However, in the last weeks the peso recovered by
0.63%, registering 19.49 pesos per US dollar at the
end of the period (Chart 7). Forward outright trading
conditions for the peso implied in FX spot options
remained stable (Chart 8).

**Chart 7**

**Mexican Markets’ Performance and**

**Trading Conditions**

Percent, pesos/US dollar, index and basis points


9.5

9.0

8.5

8.0

7.5

7.0

6.5


25

20


20.4

20.2

20.0

19.8

19.6

19.4

19.2

19.0

18.8

18.6

18.4


46,000

45,000

44,000

43,000

42,000

41,000

40,000

39,000

38,000


400

350

300

250

200

150

100

50

0


15

10


5

0


M Bono


Volatility


Range in year Range since last monetary policy decision 12-Aug-19 Last level


Note: Interest rates correspond to interest rate swaps for 2-year/10-year
maturities. In the case of Argentina, rates in US dollars are used since they
are the most liquid ones and those that reflect more adequately the
performance of the fixed income market in that country.
Source: Bloomberg.

Looking ahead, market participants will remain
attentive to the evolution of several risk factors that
may lead to higher volatility and to a deterioration of
international financial market conditions.

Outstanding risk factors include concerns regarding
trade tensions between the United States and its
main trade partners and their potential negative
impact on global economic growth. In addition, the
risks related to Brexit as well as other political and
geopolitical events persist, particularly the greater
instability in the Middle East.

**A.2. Current situation of the Mexican economy**

**A.2.1. Mexican markets**

Since Banco de Mexico’s previous monetary policy
decision to date, domestic financial markets have
reflected the effects of lower interest rates for all
terms in the main advanced economies as well as
episodes of volatility with exchange rate adjustments,
although these have diminished over the last weeks.


Note: For the Mexican peso volatility, the levels implied in 1-month
exchange rate options are considered. For the interest rate, a Garch model
(1,1) of daily fluctuations in all the curve since 2007 is considered. For
exchange rate volatility, the Vimex published by MexDer is considered.
Source: Prepared by Banco de México with Bloomberg and Proveedora
Integral de Precios (PIP) data.

**Chart 8**

**Mexican Foreign Exchange Market**

**Trading Conditions**

Index (5-day moving average) and pesos/US dollar


90

80


70

60


50

40


30

20


22.0

21.5

21.0

20.5

20.0

19.5

19.0

18.5

18.0

17.5

17.0


J F M M J J A S O D J F M A J J A S O N J F M A M J A S O N J F M A M J A S


2016 2017 2018 2019

Note: Index calculated using the mean, volatility, skewness, kurtosis, bidask spread and mean of simple differentials, all of them related to quotes of
intraday operations, and the total traded volume. After obtaining this data,
the percentiles since 2011 are calculated and the average of the 7
percentiles for each day is considered. The black vertical line represents
Banco de México’s latest monetary policy decision.
Source: Prepared by Banco de México with Reuters data.


16


-----

Since the last monetary policy decision, peso
exchange rate expectations by forecasters from
several financial institutions for the end of 2019
remained at 19.80 pesos per US dollar, while those
for the end of 2020 were adjusted upwards, from
20.00 to 20.23 pesos per US dollar (Chart 9).

**Chart 9**

**Analysts’ Mexican Peso Exchange Rate**

**Expectations for Each End of Quarter**

Pesos per US dollar


**Chart 10**

**Nominal Yield on Government Securities**

Percent, basis points

8.20

Trading range over COPOM period

8.00 Aug 12th 2019

Sep 23rd 2019 30

7.80 Change (Aug 12th 2019 to Sep 23rd 2019)6

5

7.60

7.40

7.20

7.00

6.80

6.60

Source: PIP.


9.5

9.0

8.5

8.0

7.5

7.0

6.5

6.0

5.5

5.0


D M J S D M J S Q4 2019D Q1 2020M Q2 2020 Q3 2020J S


Range 1 Minimum

Mexican peso 2019 year-end forecast Citibanamex

Bloomberg median


Note: The black vertical line represents Banco de México’s latest monetary
policy decision.
Source: Bloomberg and Citibanamex survey.

Interest rates of government securities have
continued to decrease for all terms. In particular,
interest rates with terms above one year exhibited
reductions of up to 52 bps (Chart 10). These
reductions were associated with the adjustments
observed in most debt markets worldwide driven by
expectations that the central banks of the main
advanced economies will adopt even more

accommodative monetary policy stances and that a
more benign environment for inflation will prevail.
The preceding occurred in a context of low trading
volume and in which trading conditions deteriorated
during certain days of the period (Chart 11).


E F M A M J A S O N E F M A M J A S O N E F M A M J A S O N D F M A M J A S

2016 2017 2018 2019

Note: Index calculated with the changes in bonds’ interest rates, volatility of
events, bid-ask spread, the average of the differences in quotes of intra-day
operations, and the daily interbank and customer traded volume.
Considering the aforementioned, percentiles since 2016 and the average of
percentiles for every day are calculated. The vertical line represents the
date of Banco de México’s latest monetary policy decision.
Source: Calculated by Banco de México with data from Bloomberg, PIP and
brokerage firms.

As to expectations regarding the path of the
monetary policy target rate implied in the yield curve
structure, these were adjusted downwards vis-à-vis
the levels observed in the previous period, although
an adjustment to the target rate for the September
monetary policy decision has not been completely
discounted (Chart 12). This contrasts with the
expectations of private sector analysts surveyed by
Citibanamex, who are anticipating a 25 bps cut to the
target rate for that decision. For the end of 2019, both
expectations implied in market rates as well as the
median of the latest survey among forecasters
anticipate a 50 bps cut in the policy rate, down to
7.50%.

17


**Chart 11**

**Mexican Government Debt Market Trading**

**Conditions and Jun-27 Bond Rate**

Index (10-day moving average), percent

80

70 Índice jun-27 →

60

50

40

30

20

10

Septiembre

0


-----

**Chart 12**

**Banxico Overnight Interbank Rate Implied in**

**TIIE IRS Curve**

Percent

8.75

Banxico overnight rate

8.50 12-Aug-19

8.25 Rest of period

23-Sep-19

8.00

7.75

7.50

7.25

7.00

6.75

6.50

6.25

6.00

abr. 18A           A            D            M            S            J             J ago. 18 dic. 18 may. 19 sep. 19 ene. 20 jun. 20

2018                        2019                              2020

Source: Banco de México with Bloomberg data.

**A.2.2. Economic activity in Mexico**

During the second quarter and beginning of the third
quarter of 2019, Mexico’s economic activity remained
stagnant (Chart 13). This behavior mainly reflects the
unfavorable performance that investment continues
to exhibit, the moderate recovery of private
consumption, and the rebound of exports.

Delving further into the evolution of external demand,
at the beginning of the third quarter, manufacturing
exports continued to recover despite the weakening
of world trade and the escalation of trade tensions
worldwide. Such recovery stemmed from the
dynamism of automotive exports, given the lackluster
performance of the rest of the manufacturing exports.
By destination, exports to the United States
continued trending upwards, while those to the rest
of the world continued to exhibit the same weakness
that has been observed since mid-2018 (Chart 14).


2

1

0

-1

-2 Q-II

I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV I II

2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019

s. a. Seasonally adjusted figures.
Source: Mexico’s National Accounts System (SCNM, for its acronym in
Spanish), INEGI.

**Chart 14**

**Total Manufacturing Exports**

Indices 2013 = 100, s. a.

150

Total

140 Rest of the world

United States

130

120

110

100

90

80

July

70

J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J

2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019

s. a. / Seasonally adjusted series and trend series based on data in nominal
USD. The former is represented by a solid line and the latter by a dotted
line.
Source: Prepared by Banco de México with data from the Tax
Administration Service (SAT, for its acronym in Spanish), the Ministry of the
Economy (SE, for its acronym in Spanish), Banco de México, the National
Institute of Statistics and Geography (INEGI, for its acronym in Spanish),
Mexico’s Merchandise Trade Balance, and the National System of
Statistical and Geographical Information (SNIEG, for its acronym in
Spanish).

As for domestic demand, according to its monthly
indicator, private consumption registered a moderate
recovery in June 2019, due mainly to the
improvements in domestic goods and services. In
addition, at the beginning of the third quarter, more
timely indicators of consumption, albeit of less
coverage, such as retailer’s earnings and sales of
manufacturing industries that are more correlated
with domestic consumption, continued trending
upwards. In contrast, sales of light vehicles continued
registering an unfavorable performance. For its part,
during the second quarter of 2019 the negative trend
followed by gross fixed investment since early 2018
became more evident. Indicators related with
investment, such as construction activity and capital

18


**Chart 13**

**Gross Domestic Product**

Quarterly percentage change, s. a.

|Col1|Banxico overnight rate 12-Aug-19 Rest of period 23-Sep-19|
|---|---|


-----

imports, suggest that such weakness could persist
during the early part of the third quarter.

As for production, the stagnation of economic activity
in the second quarter and in July 2019 was due to the
negative performance of secondary activities and the
weakness that tertiary activities have been showing
(Chart 15). Indeed, at the end of the second quarter
and the beginning of the third quarter of 2019,
industrial activity continued on a downward

trajectory, associated with the negative trends that
both mining and construction have continued to
display. In contrast, manufacturing production
continued trending upwards, vis-à-vis the slowdown
observed during the second half of 2018 and the
early part of 2019 (Chart 16). For its part, the
weakness of services in July 2019 is mainly
explained by the decline observed in wholesale and
retail trade; in arts, recreation and entertainment and
other services (except public administration); and, in
accommodation and food services.

**Chart 15**

**Global Index of Economic Activity**

Indices 2013 = 100, s. a.

120 140

Total

Secondary activities

Tertiary activities

115 130

Primary activities

110 120

105 110

100 100

July

July

95 90

J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J

2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019

s. a. / Seasonally adjusted and trend series. The former is represented by a
solid line and the latter by a dotted line.
Source: Mexico’s National Accounts System (SCNM, for its acronym in
Spanish), INEGI.


s. a. / Seasonally adjusted and trend series. The former is represented by a
solid line and the latter by a dotted line.
1/ Figures in parentheses correspond to its share in the total in 2013.
Source: Mexico’s National Accounts System (SCNM, for its acronym in
Spanish), INEGI.

As to the economy’s cyclical position, at the
beginning of the third quarter of 2019 slack
conditions continued at levels similar to those of the
previous one, with a persistent negative output gap
(Chart 17). As to labor market conditions, both
national and urban unemployment rates remained at
levels above those reported during most of 2018
(Chart 18), while the sharp deceleration in the growth
rate of the number of jobs enrolled at IMSS persisted.
With information available for the second quarter of
2019, given the behavior of productivity and real
average earnings, unit labor costs in the overall
economy followed an upward trend, while at the
beginning of the third quarter of 2019 manufacturing
unit labor costs remained at relatively high levels
(Chart 19).

19


**Chart 16**

**Industrial Activity [1/]**

Indices 2013 = 100, s. a.


120

110

100

90

80

70


J

2013


A J O J

2014


A J O J

2015


A J O J

2016


A J O J

2017


A J O J

2018


A J O J

2019


A J


-----

**Chart 17**

**Output Gap Estimates [1/]**

**Excluding Oil Industry [4/ ]**

Potential output percentages, s. a.


8

Global Economic Activity Indicator 2/

6 Gross Domestic Product 2/

95% Confidence interval 3/

4

2

0

-2

-4

-6

-8

-10

Q-II
July

-12

J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J

2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019


s. a. / Calculations based on seasonally adjusted figures.
1/ Output gap estimated with a tail-corrected Hodrick-Prescott filter; see
Banco de México (2009), “Inflation Report (April-June 2009)", p.74.
2/ GDP figures up to the second quarter of 2019 and of IGAE up to July
2019.
3/ Output gap confidence interval calculated with a method of unobserved
components.
4/ Excludes both oil and gas extraction, support activities for mining, and
petroleum and coal products' manufacturing.
Source: Prepared by Banco de México with INEGI data.

**Chart 18**

**National Unemployment Rate and**

**Urban Unemployment Rate**

Percent, s. a.

8.5

Urban unemployment rate

8.0

7.5 National unemployment rate

7.0

6.5

6.0

5.5

5.0

4.5

4.0

3.5

3.0

August

2.5

J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J A

2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019

s. a. / Seasonally adjusted and trend series. The former is represented by a
solid line and the latter by a dotted line.
Source: National Survey of Occupations and Employment (ENOE, for its
acronym in Spanish), INEGI.


**Chart 19**

**Global Indicator of Labor Productivity (IGPLE,**

**for its acronym in Spanish) and**

**Unit Labor Costs [1/]**

Indices 2013 = 100, s. a.

115

Unit labor costs

Productivity

110

105

100

95

July

90

J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J

2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019

s. a. / Seasonally adjusted and trend series. The former is represented by a
solid line and the latter by a dotted line.
1/ Productivity based on hours worked.
Source: IGPLE published by INEGI. Unit labor costs prepared by Banco de
México with INEGI data.

In July 2019, the growth rate of domestic financing to
the private non-fiancial sector continued to slow
down. As for its components, financing to private
non-financial firms continued to decelarate, due
mainly to the lower growth of both bank credit and
debt issuance. As for the household segment,
mortgages continued registering a high dynamism,
while consumer credit kept growing at a low rate. As
for interest rates, those related to firm financing did
not change significantly at the margin, although they
remain at high levels. Meanwhile, interest rates of
mortgages have remained stable since the second
quarter of 2017, whereas in the segment of
consumer credit those of credit cards continue
trending upwards. With regards to portfolio quality,
firms and mortgage delinquency rates remained at
low levels, while those related to consumption did not
register significant changes, although they are still at
high levels.

**A.2.3. Development of inflation and inflation**
**outlook**

Between July and the first fortnight of September
2019, annual headline inflation fell from 3.78 to
2.99% (Chart 20 and Table 1). Such reduction
reflected a decline of 4 bps in the incidence of core
inflation and of 75 bps in that of non-core inflation.

20


-----

**Chart 20**

**Consumer Price Index**

Annual percentage change


13

CPI

12

11 Core

10 Non-core

9

8

7

6

5

4

3

2

1 F1 Sep.

0

J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J

2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019

Source: Banco de México e INEGI.

Between July and the first fortnight of September
2019, annual core inflation decreased from 3.82 to
3.78%, thus continuing to show persistence. Within
this component, the annual rate of change of food
merchandise prices remains at high levels, although
it has decreased in the last months, while that of nonfood merchandise prices is at relatively stable levels
below 3% (Chart 21). As to the annual rate of change
of services prices, it remained at levels around 3.8%
(Chart 22). Nevertheless, the annual rates of change
of several food, transportation and recreation prices
persisted at levels above 5%.

**Chart 21**

**Merchandise Core Price Subindex**

Annual percentage change

8

Food, beverages and tobacco

Non-food merchandise

7

6

5

4

3

2

1

F1 Sep.

0

J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J

2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019


**Chart 22**

**Merchandise and Services Core Price Subindex**

Annual percentage change

7

Merchandise

6 Services

5

4

3

2

1

F1 Sep.

0

J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J

2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019

Source: Banco de México e INEGI.

Annual non-core inflation has followed a noticeable
downward trend, decreasing from 3.64 to 0.57%
between July and the first fortnight of September
2019 (Chart 23 and Table 1). This result is due to the
decline in the annual rates of change of energy and
agricultural and livestock product prices.

**Chart 23**

**Non-core Price Subindex**
Annual percentage change

20

Non-core
Agricultural and livestock products
Energy and government-authorized prices

15

10

5

0

F1 Sep.

-5

J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J

2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019

Source: Banco de México e INEGI.

The medians for short-term inflation expectations
drawn from Banco de México’s Survey of Private
Sector Forecasters exhibited mixed adjustments.
Indeed, between July and August, the medians for
headline inflation expectations for the end of 2019
and 2020 were adjusted downwards from 3.66 to
3.36% and from 3.60 to 3.56%, respectively. Such
adjustments are explained by the reduction in implied
non-core inflation expectations, which decreased
from 3.76 to 2.46% for the end of 2019 and from 4.34
to 4.10% for the end of 2020. The medians for coreinflation expectations for the end of 2019 and 2020
remained practically unchanged at levels around
3.67 and 3.40%, respectively. The medians for
headline inflation expectations for the medium term
(next four years) also remained unchanged at 3.50%,

21


Source: Banco de México e INEGI.


-----

while that for core inflation increased from 3.41 to
3.49%. As to the medians for headline and core
inflation expectations for the longer term (five to eight
years), these remained at 3.50 and 3.40%,
respectively. Thus, expectations for both headline
and core inflation remain above the 3% headline
inflation target. Finally, inflation expectations implicit
in long-term market instruments (drawn from 10-year
government bonds) decreased slightly between July
and August, although they remained at levels close
to 3.50%, while the inflation risk premium also
decreased marginally.

Among inflation risks, the following stand out. To the
upside, core inflation may continue to show
persistence and there is the possibility that the peso
exchange rate comes under pressure stemming from
external or domestic factors. Additional risks are the
threat by the United States to impose tariffs on
Mexican imports and the adoption of compensatory


measures, although these have dissipated

somewhat; that energy and agricultural and livestock
product prices increase; weak public finances; and,
that global protectionist measures escalate. In
addition, given the magnitude of several wage
revisions, that cost-related pressures arise, insofar
as such revisions exceed productivity gains.
Regarding downside risks, the peso exchange rate
may appreciate, possibly associated with a context
of more accommodative monetary policy stances
and lower interest rates worldwide or in case greater
certainty arises regarding the trade relation with the
United States. Another downside risk is that the
prices of certain goods included in the non-core
subindex register lower rates of change. In addition,
that slack conditions widen more than anticipated,
which would impact the behavior of core inflation.
Given the aforementioned, high uncertainty still
persists regarding the risks that might affect inflation.


**Table 1**

**Consumer Price Index and Components**

Annual percentage change

**1st fortnight Sep.**

**Item** **July 2019** **August 2019**
**2019**

**CPI** **3.78** **3.16** **2.99**

**SubyacenteCore** **3.82** **3.78** **3.78**

**Merchandise** **3.85** **3.76** **3.77**

Food, beverages and tobacco 4.87 4.63 4.65

Non-food merchandise 2.78 2.85 2.85

**Services** **3.79** **3.79** **3.79**

Housing 2.86 2.92 2.89

Education (tuitions) 4.91 4.66 4.73

Other services 4.40 4.40 4.41

**No SubyacenteNon-core** **3.64** **1.28** **0.57**

**Agricultural and livestock products** **6.33** **2.78** **2.45**

Fruits and vegetablesFruits abd vegetables 5.61 -0.75 -0.21

Livestock productsLivestock 7.06 5.77 4.67

**Energy and government-authorized prices Energéticos y Tarifas Aut. por Gobierno** **1.73** **0.20** **-0.78**

Energy productsEnergy 0.76 -1.53 -2.89

Government-authorized pricesTarifas Autorizadas por Gobierno 4.04 4.30 4.30

Source: INEGI.


22


-----

-----

-----

