-----

-----

**FOREWARNING**
This document is provided for the reader’s convenience
only. The translation from the official Spanish version was
made by Banco de México’s staff. Discrepancies may arise
between the original document in Spanish and its English
translation. For this reason, the original Spanish version is
the only official document.


**1. PLACE, DATE, AND PARTICIPANTS**

**1.1. Place:** Av. Cinco de Mayo Street no.2, 5[th] Floor,
Col. Centro, Mexico City

**1.2.** **Date** **of** **Governing** **Board** **meeting:**

December 19, 2018

**1.3. Participants:**

Alejandro Díaz de León-Carrillo, Governor

Irene Espinosa-Cantellano, Deputy Governor

Javier Eduardo Guzmán-Calafell, Deputy Governor

Manuel Ramos-Francia, Deputy Governor

Carlos Manuel Urzúa-Macías, Secretary of Finance
and Public Credit.

Arturo Herrera-Gutiérrez, Undersecretary of

Finance and Public Credit.

Eduardo Magallón-Murguía, Deputy Secretary of
the Governing Board

Prior to this meeting, preliminary work by Banco de
México’s staff analyzing the economic and financial
environment, together with the developments in
inflation and the determinants and outlook for
inflation, was conducted and presented to the
Governing Board (see Annex).

**2. ANALYSIS AND RATIONALE BEHIND THE**
**GOVERNING BOARD’S VOTING**

All members agreed that, during the fourth quarter
of 2018, the world economy grew at an apparently
lower rate than during the first half of the year and
with heterogeneity among regions and countries.
One member added that, although the global
economy’s dynamism has been gradually

moderating, some indicators suggest a possibly
larger weakening of the world economy than
currently expected, highlighting the cases of the
U.S., China, the Eurozone, and Japan. Most
members pointed out that the forecasts for global
economic activity have been revised downwards
and, for this reason, global economic activity is
expected to grow at a more moderate rate. In this
context, some members concorded that the balance
of risks for world economic growth continues biased
to the downside. Most members agreed that the


main risks for global economic growth include: i) the
escalation of trade disputes; ii) the tightening of
global financial conditions, although this risk has
declined recently; iii) several political and

geopolitical factors; and, iv) the volatility of crude oil
prices.

Regarding the first risk, most members mentioned
that the trade dispute between China and the U.S.
remains as one of the main factors of concern. In
this regard, one member added that, despite the
recent progress made in the trade negotiations
between these economies, a new stage of higher
tariffs between the U.S. and China cannot be ruled
out. In this sense, another member warned that
global trade has decelerated significantly and that
the Purchasing Managers’ Indices (PMIs) of the
manufacturing sector show a clear reduction,
particularly those regarding export orders. Finally,
another member noted that the intensification of the
above mentioned risk factor could affect global
value chains and exhaust the possibilities of an
early recovery of the global economy. As to political
and geopolitical risks, some members explained
that the persisting difficulties in some systemically
important economies continue to heighten the
climate of uncertainty. One member highlighted the
Brexit, where not only significant delays have
materialized, but also that the probability of an
agreement on terms reasonable for both the United
Kingdom and the European Union has diminished.
Furthermore, the same member added that,
although the agreement on fiscal matters reached
between the government of Italy and the authorities
of the European Union eliminates the possibility of
sanctions and reduces uncertainty, the risk of a
sustained deterioration of Italy’s public finances and
macroeconomic outlook persists. In this context,
one member underlined that political and

geopolitical issues in the United Kingdom, Italy,
France, and China, as well as idiosyncratic risks of
emerging economies, will continue contributing to
the environment of high uncertainty. Finally,
regarding the risks related to crude oil prices, one
member stressed that, in an environment of a global
economic slowdown, and due to the higher
production of crude oil by other producers, the
behavior of oil prices in the next months is still
uncertain, despite the production cuts agreed by
some of the main producing countries.

Most members pointed out that the divergence in
the performance of the main advanced economies
continues. In this regard, most members pointed out
that, although in the U.S., the growth rate of
economic activity moderated during the fourth
quarter 2018, it continues to expand at a higher rate
than the Eurozone, Japan, and the United Kingdom.

1


-----

In particular, one member stated that the dynamism
of the U.S. economy reflects, among other factors,
the procyclical fiscal stance adopted and the mature
phase of the business cycle the U.S. economy is
currently going through. As to the growth forecasts
of advanced economies, most members agreed that
these have been revised downwards. The members
stated that, in the case of the U.S., the latest
information from financial markets reflects the
expectations of an economic deceleration and that
considerable risk factors will be faced during this
process. In this regard, one member highlighted that
there is the perception that the aforementioned
deceleration will materialize when the effects of the
fiscal stimulus fade away, among other factors.
Some members mentioned that, although the
possibility of recession in the U.S. in the next years
is still low, it has been increasing.

As to emerging economies, one member mentioned
that their economic growth exhibits significant
differences and has weakened. The same member
noted that growth forecasts for this group of
countries have been revised downwards. In this
regard, most members highlighted the economic
deceleration of China and the downward revisions
in Chinese growth forecasts, given the escalating
trade tensions with the U.S. Finally, another
member noted that the risks for emerging
economies are expected to persist.

Most members added that less inflationary
pressures have been observed worldwide, albeit
with significant differences among countries. Some
members mentioned that recent information

indicates a tightening of labor markets. One of them
also stated that there have been gradual increases
in wages. Nevertheless, some members pointed out
that in the major advanced economies inflation
apparently has moderated its upward trend and one
member added that it seems to have already
reached its maximum levels in this cycle. Another
member emphasized that the current levels of
inflation are relatively low in historical terms. In the
case of the U.S., most members pointed out that its
lower economic dynamism, the recent fall in crude
oil prices and the further strengthening of the U.S.
dollar, have contributed to making headline and
core inflations lie around the Federal Reserve’s 2%
target. One member mentioned that, in contrast, in
the Eurozone and Japan, core inflation remains
clearly below their central banks’ targets. Another
member considered that the balance of risks for
global inflation remains relatively stable.

As for monetary policy in advanced economies,
some members pointed out that, given the
environment of lower inflationary pressures and


lower dynamism worldwide, the pace of monetary
policy normalization is expected to be slower than
as foreseen some months ago. One member
mentioned that in these economies the prices of
several financial assets are reflecting expectations
of a significant moderation in the speed of monetary
stimulus withdrawal. In the case of the U.S., all
members stated that, as expected, the Federal
Reserve raised the target range for the federal
funds rate in December and anticipates that the
pace of its monetary policy normalization will be
more gradual in the future. All members argued that
the abovementioned is due to the outlook of lower
inflationary pressures and to expectations of a
reduced economic dynamism. Some members
pointed out that the projections of the Federal Open
Market Committee (FOMC) are reflecting now two
additional increases for the target range in 2019 and
one in 2020. Another member stated that such
projections indicate a lower level of interest rates in
the coming years and for the long term. As for
market instruments, one member explained that
they are reflecting expectations of lower increases
in the reference rate, while another member added
that, at this time, they do not incorporate additional
adjustments in 2019. Additionally, one member
mentioned that the policy of quantitative tightening
will continue to be gradual, transparent, and
foreseeable. In this regard, another member
specified that although the U.S. Federal Reserve
has followed a gradual and pre-announced
monetary policy normalization process, the

escalating trade tensions and the significant fiscal
stimulus adopted in the mature phase of the
economy’s business cycle, have made the behavior
of the economy and of the outlook for inflation in that
country more complex and uncertain. As for the
Eurozone, one member pointed out that, although
the European Central Bank announced the end of
its assets purchase program, it also stated that the
level of the interest rate and the size of its balance
sheet may remain at their current levels for a long
period. As for the central banks of emerging
economies, one member noted that these have
maintained a more vigilant monetary policy rhetoric
with respect to inflation and emphasized their
interest in preserving financial stability.

Most members agreed that international financial
markets exhibited high volatility and that the prices
of financial assets of emerging economies have
deteriorated slightly, although their evolution has
improved in the last days. In this regard, some
members mentioned that the greater uncertainty
about economic activity, especially in the U.S., and
its implications for global financial conditions, have
led to adjustments in stock markets and to greater
risk aversion. One member stated that this adverse

2


-----

international environment was also due to the
combination of increased trade tensions between
the U.S. and China and to the perception of a certain
exhaustion of the effects of the fiscal stimulus on
economic activity. The same member explained that
this environment is particularly noticeable in the
countries that have vulnerable macroeconomic
fundamentals or are facing idiosyncratic risk factors.
Another member pointed out that decreases in the
interest rates of government bonds have been
observed recently in the main advanced countries
as well as a depreciation of the U.S. dollar against
other major currencies. One member pinpointed
that so far into the fourth quarter of 2018, the U.S.
stock market has exhibited an accumulated loss of
nearly 15%, and interest rates of 10-year Treasury
bonds went from 2.86% in early September to
3.24% by mid-October, and fell again to 2.82% on
December 18. Additionally, some members pointed
out that crude oil prices have continued to decline,
which has contributed to this environment of
uncertainty. One member also warned that it is
important to take into account that market
adjustments can be considerably abrupt in face of
the events related with the deceleration of the
Chinese economy, in a context where it is not
foreseen that new wide-scale measures will be
implemented to offset such downturn. In this regard,
one member highlighted that, in this environment,
the financial assets of emerging economies
registered moderate losses and investors continue
to reduce their exposure to fixed-income assets of
these economies while they have increased their
exposure to equity assets. One member noted that,
recently, expectations of a more gradual monetary
policy normalization process in advanced

economies has eased the volatility in international
financial markets and allowed for a certain recovery
in the asset prices of emerging economies.  Finally,
most members pointed out that, given the possible
persistence and/or materialization of some of the
above mentioned risk factors, the potential for new
episodes of financial turbulence persists.

Regarding economic activity in Mexico, most
members considered that in the fourth quarter of
2018 the economy underwent a deceleration as
compared to the upturn observed in the previous
quarter. One member mentioned that, although
available information is limited, several indicators
published to date, including those of industrial
production, opinion surveys of the business sector
and figures related to IMSS-insured jobs, point to a
lower growth. As for aggregate demand, most
members agreed that the negative trend of
investment persists, one member highlighting the
lower expenditure on construction and in machinery
and domestic equipment. Another member pointed


that the trajectory of investment continues to be a
cause for concern and noted that gross fixed
investment has been following, up to September, a
downward trend starting from very low levels. The
same member added that it seems unlikely that this
indicator will strengthen in the short term and that
although there are several determinants of
investment weakness, the lack of confidence is
clearly one of the most relevant, and if no decisive
actions are taken to revert this situation, the
recovery of investment will be significantly limited.
Most members stressed that, in the opinion of
economic analysts surveyed by Banco de México,
the current juncture to make investments is going
through difficult times. One of them warned that this
scenario worsened considerably in the last survey.
Another one stated that in recent months business
confidence indicators have deteriorated overall,
those of the manufacturing, commercial, and
construction sectors reaching levels considered as
pessimistic. Most members underlined the

expansion of private consumption. Regarding
external demand, some noted that, at the margin,
the dynamism of manufacturing exports has
moderated. One of them highlighted the case of
automotive exports. Another member stated that,
despite the downturn observed in October,
manufacturing exports remain on an upward trend.
As for the production side, one member added that,
although the dynamism of services has prevailed,
industrial activity weakened at the margin,

especially manufacturing and mining, which showed
a marked deterioration associated with crude oil
extraction.

Most members stated that forecasts for economic
growth for the end of this year and for 2019 have
been revised downwards by international

organizations as well as by public agencies and
private sector organizations. One member

highlighted that the growth environment for 2019 is
subject to high levels of uncertainty and will depend
on the public policies that are implemented and their
effects on private investment and consumption. In
this context, most members expressed that the
balance of risks to growth remains biased to the
downside and has deteriorated. One member
added that the downward bias is observed in both a
short- and a medium-term horizon. In addition to the
global risks described above, some members
mentioned additional risks, such as: i) facing
obstacles in the ratification of the trade agreements
reached between Mexico, the United States and
Canada; ii) that factors that lead to greater domestic
uncertainty and less confidence in the outlook for
the Mexican economy arise; and, iii) that certain
delays arise in the execution of public expenditure
related to the change of administration. Most

3


-----

members argued that there are considerable risk
factors for the medium and long terms, indicating
one member that these are even of greater concern
than those for the short term. Among the risks
mentioned by most members are those of a
structural nature derived from the possible adoption
of policies that could lead to deep changes in the
economy and in growth capacity; as well as those
derived from the lack of rule of law, public insecurity
and impunity, which are significantly affecting the
prospects for investment and economic growth.
One member added that the challenges are even
more complex considering that no increase in the
ratio of public investment to GDP is foreseen in the
coming years; that it is difficult to expect that the
dynamism of consumption will continue in an
environment of persistently weak investment; and
that exports might be affected given the outlook of
lower world trade growth.

Most members considered that the slack conditions
in the economy have remained relatively less tight
than those observed at the beginning of the year.
Some members mentioned that the phase of the
business cycle that the Mexican economy is going
through has not changed significantly since the last
monetary policy decision. In this regard, some
members indicated that most slack indicators,
except those of the labor market, remain in neutral
territory. One member specified that the economy
operates with an output gap close to zero. Some
members commented that the labor market
maintains tight conditions, and one of them added
that wages have increased. Some members argued
that aggregate demand pressures are not perceived
in the short term. One of them pointed out that this
is due to the fact that some moderation in economic
activity is expected in such horizon. In this regard,
another member added that the output gap is still
expected to continue to decrease in the following
quarters, reaching levels around zero towards the
end of 2019 and moderately below zero towards the
end of 2020.

The majority indicated that headline inflation fell
from 4.90% in October to 4.72% in November,
exhibiting reductions in both its core and non-core
components. One member pointed out that after
reaching a maximum level of 6.77% in December
2017, headline inflation has followed a slow
decreasing trend. Another member specified that
from October to November headline inflation
decreased for the second consecutive month, while
another member warned that it is still early to
conclude that the inflationary trend has resumed a
downward trajectory and added that most indicators
on the present juncture confirm that inflationary
pressures persist. One member highlighted that,


since June, headline inflation has been affected by
considerable increases in non-core inflation,

particularly in energy prices.

As for headline inflation components, some
members mentioned that non-core inflation fell from
8.50% in October to 8.07% in November, reflecting
the lower increases in energy prices. They added,
however, that such effects were partially offset by
the higher increases in the prices of some
agricultural products, so that non-core inflation
remains at high levels. In this respect, some
members specified that the prices of fruits and
vegetables have increased significantly in recent
weeks. Regarding core inflation, all members
agreed that the shocks that have affected non-core
inflation have also influenced core inflation due to
the indirect effects they have had in production
costs. The majority indicated that despite the
reduction in core inflation from 3.73% in October to
3.63% in November, it shows a high resistance to
decline due to the aforementioned shocks and also
to structural factors. One member emphasized that
core inflation has decreased with noticeable
sluggishness. Another member mentioned that the
recent behavior of core inflation does not yet reflect
a general decline in all of its components. A member
noted that, after decreasing in the first half of the
year, core inflation was 3.62% in June and 3.63% in
November, and that it has been affected by an
increase in the annual price variation of services
other than housing and education. Finally, another
member added that the high persistence in the
merchandise and services subindex, as well as the
indirect effects of the exchange rate, have also
contributed to the evolution of core inflation.

Most members mentioned that headline inflation
expectations for different terms have increased. In
particular, those for the end of 2019 increased from
3.71% to 3.89% between October and December,
while those for the end of 2020 were revised
upwards from 3.50% to 3.79% during the same
period. The majority also indicated that during the
same period, core inflation expectations for the end
of 2019 were adjusted from 3.45% to 3.50%, while
those for the end of 2020 increased from 3.33% to
3.37%. Most members noted that medium- and
long-term headline inflation expectations are still
above the permanent 3% target, at levels around
3.5%. One member warned that medium-term
expectations (up to four years) were adjusted
upwards and that the dispersion of long-term
expectations has increased. As for information
drawn from market instruments, the majority pointed
out that medium- and long-term inflationary risk
premia remain at high levels.

4


-----

The majority of the members pointed out that
inflation forecasts were revised upwards. One
member stated that the indirect effects on core
inflation have caused its deviation from the
trajectory anticipated in the forecast. In this context,
some members highlighted that the upward revision
of forecasts is mainly due to a path for the exchange
rate more depreciated-than-previously anticipated
and to higher prices of agricultural products,
particularly, fruits and vegetables. One of the
members stated that the upward revision in the
prices of such categories —as a result of adverse
weather conditions— partially offsets the fall in
energy prices. Another member added the recent
increase in minimum wages to the factors affecting
the projections for inflation.

The majority of the members considered that the
balance of risks for the expected trajectory of
inflation has deteriorated and remains biased to the
upside, in an environment of marked uncertainty.
Some members noted that, in an adverse external
environment and with significant factors of domestic
uncertainty, some of the risks to the upside for
inflation have materialized. One of the members
highlighted that, under such an environment, the
outlook for medium- and short-term inflation has
become more uncertain. One member estimated
that, at the margin, the stabilization in the exchange
rate market as well as a slightly less unfavorable
external environment have improved the outlook for
inflation in the short term. However, that member
also acknowledged that considerable risks for the
longer term persist for inflation and that core
inflation continues to show an elevated degree of
uncertainty. Some members agreed that there is a
high risk that the convergence of headline inflation
to its 3% target is delayed. One member added that
such risks increase in an environment in which
survey-based expectations for headline inflation
and, to a lesser extent, for core inflation, for the next
two years have been adjusted upwards, even
without incorporating the recent increase in
minimum wages.

As for the main cyclical risks to the upside for
inflation, most members highlighted: the possibility
that the peso exchange rate continues to be subject
to pressures stemming from external and domestic
factors; that additional pressures on energy prices
or increases in the prices of agricultural products are
observed; that a possible escalation of worldwide
protectionist or retaliatory measures materializes;
and, that public finances deteriorate. The majority
also mentioned that considering the magnitude of
the recent minimum wage increases, in addition to
their possible direct impact, there is the risk that
these bring about wage revisions that exceed


productivity gains and create cost pressures,
affecting formal employment and prices. Some
members mentioned that due to the observed
shocks and the levels reached by inflation, there is
the risk of second-round effects on the price
formation process. Most members pointed out that
inflation also faces structural risks related to the
possible adoption of policies that could lead to
significant changes in the economy’s price

formation process. In this respect, some members
noted that a structural weakening of public finances
could be observed, and one member added that, in
his/her opinion, this is one of the main risks for
inflation. Another member mentioned the possibility
that the economy registers a lower potential growth
rate.

All members highlighted that since the last
monetary policy decision, the prices of financial
assets in Mexico continued to exhibit marked
volatility. Most members coincided that in addition
to the aforementioned external factors, such
environment continued to reflect the uncertainty
regarding the policies of the new administration, one
of them stating that in his/her opinion, this latter
factor has been the most relevant. Most members
underscored the following as factors that have led
to an environment of uncertainty: the intention to
cancel the project of the New Mexico City
International Airport, concerns about the business
model of Mexico’s state-owned oil company
(Pemex), and the potential effect of different
legislative proposals. The majority pointed out that
in such environment, the exchange rate has been
under pressure, although some members

mentioned that the operating conditions of the
foreign exchange market remain adequate, while
one of them added that the foreign exchange
market has maintained stable levels of liquidity,
depth and volume. Most members indicated that
interest rates, mainly medium and long term, as well
as sovereign risk premia remain at high levels. They
also pointed out that medium- and long-term
interest rates reached their highest levels in the last
ten years and that operating conditions in that
market have deteriorated significantly. In this
regard, one member argued that primary auctions
have exhibited lower participation from investors,
both domestic and foreign, especially for

instruments with longer terms and duration. Another
member highlighted that interest rate differentials
with respect to those of the United States are also
at high levels. Some members added that stock
indexes fell as well, and one of them emphasized
that the Mexican Stock Exchange is currently at
levels not observed since 2014. The majority stated
that, despite the volatility observed in domestic
financial markets, in the last days these have had a

5


-----

better performance, with a moderate reversion in
the depreciation of the Mexican peso, and a
reduction of both medium- and long-term interest
rates, and of sovereign risk premia. One member
elaborated along the same lines that long-term
interest rates have fallen by more than 50 basis
points and that, as a result, the yield curve
steepening that had been observed has significantly
reverted. The majority argued that this improvement
was caused by the favorable response of markets
to the submittal of the 2019 Economic Package by
the Ministry of Finance (SHCP, for its acronym in
Spanish) to Congress, as well as to external factors,
particularly expectations of fewer increases in the
federal funds rate by the U.S. Federal Reserve.

Most members considered that both the domestic
and external environment as described before imply
medium-and long-term risks that could affect the
country’s macroeconomic conditions and thus, it is
particularly important that, in addition to continuing
with a prudent and sound monetary policy,
measures to foster an environment of confidence
and certainty for investment are adopted, public
finances are consolidated sustainably, and actions
that lead to higher levels of productivity are
implemented. One member argued that all this has
become necessary not only to promote greater
economic growth and development, but also to
avoid the materialization of risk factors that could
lead to capital outflows. As some of the measures
to improve investor confidence, most members
mentioned the need to offer greater clarity on
Pemex's business model and, in general terms, on
the energy policy to be implemented in the coming
years. In this regard, one member stressed that
there are strong concerns about the future of Pemex
and the Federal Electricity Commission (CFE, for its
acronym in Spanish), while another member argued
that obtaining a higher confidence could require
additional efforts in different fronts and would also
take a long time. As for public finance consolidation,
most members stressed that the 2019 Economic
Package submitted by the Ministry of Finance
(SHCP) to Congress is consistent with the
strengthening required in this matter and that it was
prepared considering a macroeconomic scenario
based on realistic assumptions. Most members
argued that, as part of the measures to strengthen
the country’s macroeconomic fundamentals, it is
particularly relevant that the fiscal targets included
in the Economic Package are met. Some members
considered the strict implementation of the fiscal
targets a challenge, given the ambitious nature of
the new projects by the Federal Government and
the uncertainty inherent to the macroeconomic
assumptions used. One member stated that this
challenge is the most far-reaching one for public


finances in 2019 given the deterioration of
confidence. Among the risks to which the
assumptions for 2019 are subject, most members
pointed out the possibility that lower tax rates at
Mexico’s northern border cause a higher-thanexpected reduction in tax collection; that the
economy grows at a rate lower than the 2%
considered in the budget as a result, for example, of
a lower-than-expected global growth; and that the
oil production platform turns out to be below that
considered in the Federal Income Law. As
additional risks, one of the members mentioned
greater cuts in public spending, which typically
occur at the beginning of a new administration as a
result of the departure of experienced public service
officials due to the austerity measures, and that a
sovereign credit rating revision takes place, hence
leading to a higher financial cost for public debt.

With regards to the measures aimed at

strengthening productivity and potential growth,
some members highlighted the need to reduce the
country’s insecurity levels, corruption and the weak
rule of law. One of them noted that doubts prevail
as to the effectiveness of the fight against corruption
and the improvement in public security. The same
member stated that economic analysts surveyed by
Banco de México continue mentioning these two
obstacles and, in general terms, the lack of rule of
law, as significant drags on growth and investment.
Some members pointed out that, in addition to the
aforementioned, the low effectiveness of the
policies to promote economic competition have also
hindered the country’s potential growth and have
been a source of inflationary inertia. In the same
line, some members considered that the federal
government policies may generate market

distortions and affect the efficiency in allocating
resources in the economy and, therefore,

productivity. One member pointed out that it will be
necessary to assure that the government actions,
the multiannual projects considered and the
assumptions used mainly on the estimates for
economic growth and oil production, are consistent
with the soundness of public finances in the medium
and long terms. Some members warned that the
Economic Package does not improve the

composition of public spending and that the new
strategy of the government seems to privilege
consumption rather than human and physical
capital formation, which could also affect the
economy’s potential growth. They also mentioned
that, in the new budget, the ratio of public
investment to GDP does not increase and that
public investment will be allocated to projects whose
financial and social returns are not evident. One of
them added that the new social programs do not
seem to include a clear structure of intertemporal

6


-----

incentives oriented to improve productivity and
efficiency, which could imply a significant cost for
the population’s welfare. Another member stated
that the combination of investment stagnation and
consumption strengthening might have major
implications for both economic growth and the
conduct of monetary policy. One member

highlighted that the new government still needs to
reveal its new strategies regarding key sectors for
development, such as education and energy, in
which there were already in place processes for the
implementation of reforms with medium- and longterm reach and maturity. The same member
mentioned that, in the future, it will be key for both
fiscal and monetary authorities to keep an open and
direct communication in order to identify any
possible deterioration of macroeconomic

fundamentals on time and for each to act rapidly and
prudently in their spheres of competence.

One member delved into the factors to be
considered in the conduct of monetary policy,
highlighting that since mid-2015 the economy has
been facing an adverse shock to its potential
growth, together with a tighter external financing
constraint. In this context, the same member
mentioned that in recent years, the reduction in the
current account deficit from around 2.5% of GDP in
2015 to slightly above 1.5% in 2017 occurred in an
orderly manner, with a cost on growth of slightly
over one percentage point, from 3.29% in 2015 to
2.04% in 2017, and close to 2.2% in 2018. The
same member stated that in the presence of these
shocks, the fiscal policy stance tightened, and
therefore public sector borrowing requirements
decreased by approximately three percentage
points of GDP between 2015 and 2018, from 4% in
2015 to 1.1% in 2017. Such member mentioned
that, in turn, monetary policy responded by
tightening significantly its stance, in order to prevent
inflation expectations in the long term from unanchoring and to restrain the decompression of the
term premium, raising the target rate from 3% to its
current level of 8.25%. The same member pointed
out that due to the referred shocks, both the real
exchange rate and real interest rates exhibited
adjustments. The relative magnitude of the
adjustment in the real exchange rate and real
interest rates depends on the relative magnitude of
the adjustment between the fiscal and monetary
policies. To the extent that fiscal policy undergoes a
higher adjustment, a larger part of the adjustment is
reflected on the real exchange rate, whereas if
monetary policy undergoes a higher adjustment, a
larger part is reflected on real interest rates. The
same member noted that the strong inertia exhibited
by both core and fundamental core inflation. This
member noted that it has been driven by null


productivity growth, which makes it difficult for the
economy to absorb supply shocks without having a
high cost in terms of inflation. Such member added
that there are other distortions that make inflation
show a high persistence, such as the high market
power prevailing in certain sectors of the economy,
which makes core inflation exhibit a high resistance
to decline. Moreover, the same member highlighted
that under such market distortions, monetary policy
is not an effective instrument in bringing down
inflation. Such member mentioned that a case that
illustrates the aforementioned is having real wages
growing above productivity, which could lead to
higher levels of inflation, putting at risk the goal of
raising the purchasing power of earnings. This
member argued that implementing a decisive policy
to promote competition in some sectors of the
economy should contribute to reduce the relative
prices of goods and services with low levels of
competition, and in turn prompt an increase in
wages’ purchasing power, without creating risks or
putting pressure on inflation. Such member
highlighted that this situation is particularly relevant
in the case of the consumption baskets of those
segments of the population with the lowest incomes,
given that it is possible that nearly 50% of the goods
and services that make up their consumption
baskets come from sectors with a high degree of
market concentration. The same member warned
that the fact that minimum wages have been below
extreme poverty levels makes it more urgent to
create an effective policy to promote competition.
Such member highlighted that other factors that
might be contributing to inflation’s strong

persistence are public policies related to price
determination of energy products and hysteresis in
the economy’s price formation process. Also, that
there are several distortions in the economy which
might be playing a role on the high degree of inertia
exhibited by core inflation and that, in some cases,
monetary policy is and must continue to be the main
instrument to fight inflation, while, in other, it can
turn out to be a less effective instrument, depending
on the distortions that are generating inflation’s
persistence.

All members agreed that monetary policy continues
facing a complex situation, characterized by a high
degree of uncertainty in which the balance of risks
for inflation remains biased to the upside, in which
some of the foreseen inflationary risks from a shortand medium-term perspective have materialized,
and in which there is a possibility of medium- and
long-term inflation expectations being affected.
Most members stated that among the factors to
consider for the monetary policy decision are: that
non-core inflation remains high, affecting headline
inflation and putting pressure on core inflation; that

7


-----

core inflation has shown a resistance to decline; that
short-term inflation expectations have been

adjusted upwards; and, that inflation risk premia has
reached high levels. One member added that the
aforementioned takes place together with an
outlook of a negative output gap and a balance of
risks to growth tilted to the downside.

Some members warned about core inflation
deviating from the forecasted trajectory and
continuing to exhibit a high degree of uncertainty,
which constitutes a risk for monetary policy. In this
regard, most members agreed that the central bank
must strengthen its monetary policy stance
consistent with the attainment of the inflation target
in the expected time frame and mitigate the risk of
an un-anchoring of inflation expectations. Another
member highlighted that the convergence to the
inflation target during 2020 might require further
increases in the reference rate. Nevertheless, such
member stated that in order to define the above, it
will be necessary to assess thoroughly the latest
information on the outlook for inflation and its
determinants, including the domestic and external
factors of uncertainty that might affect inflation, in
order to attain the abovementioned convergence at
the lowest possible cost for economic activity.
Another member emphasized that considering the
U.S. Federal Reserve’s recent increase in the target
for the federal funds rate, as well as the uncertainty
surrounding the development of the Mexican
economy and the volatility that domestic financial
markets have exhibited, the short-term interest rate
differentials can help the Mexican economy to
transit through an environment of higher uncertainty
in an orderly manner and keeping inflation
expectations anchored. Most members highlighted
that given the current environment, the monetary
policy stance must remain prudent in the next
months. One member mentioned that despite
expectations of an economic slowdown in Mexico,
prudence in the conduct of monetary policy is
necessary given the shocks that have affected
inflation, the possible persistence of an environment
of uncertainty, and expectations of a continuing
process of monetary policy normalization in the U.S.
In this regard, the same member added that it is
important to keep in mind that a deterioration of
confidence in the central bank would imply higher
costs in terms of both inflation and economic
growth. Also, that maintaining credibility on the
inflation target is necessary and, for this reason,
Banco de México must focus on such target but
always analyzing the implications for economic
activity, which requires a balanced approach.
Another member considered relevant that the
monetary policy statement should include that
under the present environment of high uncertainty,


the Governing Board must remain vigilant to the
development of inflation, its determinants and its
expectations and, if necessary, act once more in a
timely manner to reinforce its commitment with price
stability. The same member mentioned that with
these actions the central bank contributes to the
attainment of the economic development goals and
to improve the population’s welfare. One member
added that it is important to present a forward
guidance of monetary policy that communicates that
given the inertia exhibited by core inflation and the
prevailing uncertainty, the target rate will probably
need to be kept high for a long period.

**3. MONETARY POLICY DECISION**

To guide its monetary policy actions, Banco de
México’s Governing Board follows closely the
development of inflation vis-à-vis its forecasted
trajectory, taking into account the monetary policy
stance adopted and the time frame in which
monetary policy operates, as well as available
information on all inflation determinants and on
medium- and long-term inflation expectations,
including the balance of risks for such factors.
Monetary policy must also respond prudently if for
any reason the uncertainty faced by the Mexican
economy increases significantly. In this context,
considering the environment of high uncertainty, in
which the balance of risks for inflation is biased to
the upside and some of the risks that might affect it
in both the short and long terms have materialized,
and in view of the possibility that medium- and longterm inflation expectations may be affected, Banco
de México’s Governing Board has decided
unanimously to raise the target for the overnight
interbank interest rate by 25 basis points to 8.25%.
Considering the challenges to consolidate a low and
stable inflation, as well as the risks that the
economy’s price formation process is subject to, the
Governing Board will take the necessary actions,
specifically, maintaining or, in its case,

strengthening the monetary policy stance, so that
the reference rate is kept at a level consistent with
the convergence of headline inflation to Banco de
México’s target within the period of influence of
monetary policy.

Banco de México’s Governing Board will maintain a
prudent monetary policy stance and, under the
current environment of uncertainty, will follow
closely the potential pass-through of exchange rate
fluctuations to prices, the monetary policy stance
relative to that of the U.S. under an adverse external
environment, and the conditions of slack in the
Mexican economy. In the presence and possible
persistence of factors that, by their nature, involve
risks to both inflation and inflation expectations,

8


-----

monetary policy will be adjusted in a timely and
robust manner to achieve the convergence of
inflation to its 3% target and to strengthen the
anchoring of medium- and long-term inflation
expectations so that they attain such target.


**4. VOTING**

Alejandro Díaz de León-Carrillo, Irene EspinosaCantellano, Manuel Ramos-Francia and Javier
Eduardo Guzmán-Calafell voted unanimously in
favor of raising the target for the overnight interbank
rate (target rate) by 25 basis points, to 8.25%.

9


-----

**ANNEX**

The information in this annex was prepared for this
meeting by the staff of Banco de México’s General
Directorate of Economic Research and General
Directorate of Central Bank Operations and Payment
Systems. It does not necessarily reflect the
considerations of the members of the Governing
Board as to the monetary policy decision.

**A.1. External conditions**

**A.1.1. World economic activity**

During the fourth quarter of 2018, the world economy
is estimated to have grown possibly at a lower rate
than during the first half of the year, and with
heterogeneity among regions and countries (Chart
1). For the medium term, global economic activity is
expected to continue to expand, albeit at a lower rate
than in 2018. Such deceleration may be exacerbated
if the risks stemming from the escalation of trade
disputes or from the tightening of global financial
conditions materialize, although the latter has
decreased recently. Additionally, the risks of volatility
in the prices of crude oil and of various elements of
political and geopolitical uncertainty in some regions
of the world are also present.

**Chart 1**

**World GDP Growth**

Annual percentage change, s. a.

12

10

8

6

4

2

0

-2

World

-4 Advanced economies

Emerging and developing economies Q3

-6

2001 2003 2005 2007 2009 2011 2013 2015 2017

s. a. / Seasonally adjusted figures.
Note: The sample of countries used in the calculations accounts for 84.6%
of world GDP measured by purchasing power parity.
Source: Prepared by Banco de México with information from Haver
Analytics, J.P. Morgan and International Monetary Fund.


In the U.S., available indicators suggest that the
growth rate of economic activity moderated during
the fourth quarter of 2018, after expanding 3.5% at a
seasonally adjusted annualized rate (SAAR) in the
third quarter (Chart 2). Private consumption
continued to be driven by the fiscal stimuli, the growth
of employment, household confidence and, recently,
by lower gasoline prices. In contrast, residential
investment has continued losing dynamism and is
expected to contract further, due partly to higher
interest rates, high costs of construction and lower
fiscal incentives for housing. Similarly, available
figures for international trade point to a negative
contribution of net exports, reflecting an appreciation
of the U.S. dollar and the implementation of tariff
measures worldwide. Additionally, the uncertainty
regarding the economic outlook in the short and
medium terms for the United States has grown, as a
result of the latent risk of an intensification of trade
disputes and an additional tightening of financial
conditions.

**Chart 2**

**USA: Real GDP and Components**

Annualized and seasonally adjusted quarterly

percentage change and contribution in percentage

points, s. a.

6

Forecasts

4

2

0

-2 Public spending

Net exports
Inventories
Non-residential investment

-4

Residential investment
Private consumption
Total

-6

I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV

2016 2017 2018 2019

s. a. / Seasonally adjusted figures.
Source: BEA and Blue Chip December 2018.

10

|points, s. a.|Col2|Col3|Col4|
|---|---|---|---|
|Forecasts Public spending Net exports Inventories Non-residential investment Residential investment Private consumption Total||||
|I II III IV 2016|I II III IV 2017|I II III IV 2018|I II III IV 2019|


-----

U.S. industrial production increased its rate of growth
in November, from a monthly rate of 0.1% in October
to 0.6% in November. The higher dynamism was due
to the continued growth of mining, quarrying and oil
and gas extraction and to the strong upturn of
utilities, which resulted from a higher demand for
energy goods due to the unusually low temperatures
in several regions of the U.S. In contrast,
manufacturing continued to exhibit weakness,
possibly reflecting the effects of the U.S. dollar
appreciation and a weak external demand.

The U.S. labor market kept on strengthening,
although at a more gradual pace. The non-farm
payroll increased by 155,000 jobs in November,
figure below the 200,000 monthly jobs that had been
created on average in the previous months, but
above the necessary to cover for the growth of the
labor force. Thus, the unemployment rate remained
at 3.7% in November, its lowest level in almost five
decades, and below the natural unemployment rate
estimated by the U.S. Congressional Budget Office
(CBO). Other indicators also show signs of a lower
rate of tightening in the labor market, among which
the increase in initial unemployment insurance
claims and the lower percentage of companies with
vacancies stand out. It is worth pointing out that,
despite the lower rate of tightening in the labor
market, both the dynamism and reduced slack
conditions that this market has exhibited throughout
2018 with respect to the previous year, have
contributed to a faster growth of wages.

In the Eurozone, available indicators for the fourth
quarter of 2018 point to a lower-than-expected
recovery of economic growth, after having expanded
only 0.6% (SAAR) during the third quarter. The
weakness observed during the last quarter of the
year is attributable to a slower fading of the transitory
factors that affected some of the region’s countries
(particularly Germany and Italy) during the third
quarter. Indeed, the Purchasing Managers’ Indexes
of the manufacturing sector and Business

Confidence Indexes continued on a negative trend.
Similarly, in October, the unemployment rate
continued to stand at 8.1% for the fourth consecutive
month, reflecting a slower rate of tightening of labor
market conditions. Nevertheless, according to
information up to the third quarter, wages grew at a
faster rate, due to a narrower labor market slack in
the region.


In Japan, available figures on industrial production
and retail sales suggest a rebound in economic
activity during the fourth quarter, after having
contracted 2.5% (SAAR) during the third quarter due
to severe weather conditions and to the effects of
certain natural disasters. Several indicators

continued signaling that tight conditions in the labor
market prevail, with an unemployment rate nearing
its lowest level in the last 25 years. Nevertheless, the
Japanese economy faces risks to growth arising from
the trade tensions between China and the U.S. and
from the VAT increase that will go into effect at the
end of 2019.

In emerging economies, during the fourth quarter the
economy’s growth rate appears to be stabilizing at a
lower level than that of the first half of the year, albeit
with a high divergence among economies. In China,
the latest information reflects a more pronounced
weakness of economic activity, while other countries,
such as Turkey and Argentina, continue reflecting the
negative effects of the deterioration of their financial
conditions.

International commodity prices posted mixed results
in the last weeks. On the one hand, crude oil prices
have been falling since October due to the high levels
of crude oil production in the U.S., Russia, and Saudi
Arabia, as well as to concerns about a lower rate of
expansion of the world economy leading to a weaker
demand for crude oil. This led at the beginning of
December to an agreement between the

Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries
(OPEC) and other crude oil producers to cut crude oil
production by 1.2 million daily barrels for a period of
six months starting in January 2019. Nevertheless,
crude oil prices continued to decrease due to the fear
that such reduction may be insufficient to balance the
supply and demand for crude oil at the then
prevailing prices. On the other hand, the prices of
industrial metals exhibited an erratic behavior given
the uncertainty stemming from the trade tensions
between the U.S. and China, as well as from the
slowdown of economic activity in China. Finally, grain
prices rebounded as a reflection of the expected
increase in the demand for these goods by China, the
trade truce between China and the U.S., and the
expected negative impact on the supply of these
goods due to the first snowfalls on U.S. crop fields.

**A.1.2. Monetary policy and international financial**
**markets**

In the last months, the upward trend of inflation
moderated in most major advanced economies, in a
context of reduced energy prices and lower

11


-----

economic dynamism. In particular, in the U.S.,
although the growth of the personal consumption
expenditures price index is still near the central
bank’s target, its core component was again below
2%. Moreover, in the Eurozone and Japan, core
inflation remained at low levels and below their
central banks’ targets (Chart 3).

**Chart 3**

**Selected Advanced Economies: Core Inflation**


3 USA 1/
Eurozone
Japan 2/
Canada 3/
United Kingdom

2

1


0

-1

2014 2015 2016 2017 2018


1/ Refers to the Personal Consumption Expenditure (PCE) deflator.
2/ Excludes fresh foods, energy, and the direct effect of the consumption
tax increase.
3/ Excludes food, energy, and the effect of adjustments on indirect taxes
(CPI-XFET).
Source: Haver Analytics, BEA, Eurostat, and Statistics Bureau.

In this environment, although monetary authorities
are expected to continue their monetary policy
normalization processes, the adjustment is foreseen
to be of a lower magnitude than what was expected
some months ago, and to take place at a slower rate
(Chart 4).


3.5% **― U.S. Federal Reserve*** Forecasts

**― Bank of England**

3.0% **― Bank of Japan**

**― Bank of Canada**

2.5% **― European Central Bank reference rate**

**― European Central Bank deposit facility rate**
**--- OIS implicit trajectory 12 Nov 2018**

2.0% **― OIS implicit trajectory 17 Dec 2018**

1.5%

1.0%

0.5%

0.0%

-0.5%

-1.0% End of 2018 End of 2019 End of 2020

2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020

|Col1|Col2|es: Cor change|e Infla|tion|
|---|---|---|---|---|
|||017|No 2018|October vember|
|||diture (PCE ct effect of djustments Statistics Bu monetar ir mon justmen what w lace at Trajec / Forecasts|) deflator. the cons on indire reau. y autho etary t is fore as exp a slowe tory in||
|% % %|― Bank of Canada ― European Central Bank reference rate ― European Central Bank deposit facility rate --- OIS implicit trajectory 12 Nov 2018 ― OIS implicit trajectory 17 Dec 2018||||
|%|||||
|% %|||||


1/ OIS: Fixed floating interest rate swap where the fixed interest rate is the
effective overnight reference rate.

- In the case of the U.S. observed reference rate, the average interest rate
of the federal funds target range is used (2.00% - 2.25%).
Source: Bloomberg.


As expected, in December, the U.S. Federal Reserve
raised the target range for the federal funds rate by
25 basis points (bps), to a range of between 2.25%
and 2.50%. Looking forward, the Fed anticipates the
pace of its monetary policy normalization to be more
gradual than previously announced. It also stated
that factors such as the global economic situation,
the financial conditions, as well as their implications
on the economic outlook, will be taken into
consideration when determining the course of its
monetary policy stance. The members of the Federal
Open Market Committee (FOMC) revised

downwards their growth and inflation projections for
2018 and 2019 in relation to those of September,
albeit describing that the economy’s rate of growth as
still high. The median for the FOMC projections for
the number of increases in the reference rate during
2019 decreased from three to two 25 bps raises
during 2019, while maintaining the

expectation of a single increase for 2020. Similarly,
estimates for the long-term interest rate were revised
downwards, from 3% to 2.75%. Furthermore, the
probabilities in financial market variables imply fewer
than one increases in the target range for the federal
funds rate during 2019 and are even starting to
incorporate a possible cut in 2020. Similarly, some
brokerage firms have adjusted downwards their
forecasts of reference rate increases for the next
year, although their estimates vary considerably.

In its December meeting, the Bank of Canada left its
reference rate unchanged at 1.75%, although its tone
was more cautious than in previous decisions. In
particular, it emphasized that trade conflicts have had
a strong impact on global demand. This central bank
also noted that, due to the fall in crude oil prices, the
performance of the Canadian energy sector could be
weaker than currently expected and that its inflation
rate may decrease more than anticipated. Finally, it
pointed out that future raises in the reference rate will
depend on the evolution of economic data and of
other factors, highlighting the impact of previous
reference rate increases on economic activity, the
evolution of crude oil prices, and global trade
policies. In this context, expectations of the next
increase in the reference rate implied in market
variables were postponed from the beginning to mid2019.

In its December meeting, the European Central Bank
(ECB) left its reference rate unchanged at 0% and its
key deposit and lending facility rates at -0.4% and
0.25%, respectively, reiterating that interest rates will
remain at those levels at least until the summer of
2019, and, in any case, until necessary to ensure that
inflation converges around 2% in the medium run.

12


-----

Similarly, it restated that the purchase of assets will
conclude this year and reiterated its intention to
reinvest the principal payments from maturing
securities for a period of time that will extend even
beyond the first increase in the ECB’s benchmark
rate. The ECB also adjusted downwards its growth
rate for this year and the next due to the further
deterioration of its balance of risks, while inflation is
expected to converge to the target in the medium
term.

In most emerging economies, headline inflation
continued to increase gradually, as a result of the
increase in energy prices observed up to the
beginning of October, the previous depreciation of
their currencies, the higher core inflation arising from
the reduced slack in many of these economies, as
well as various idiosyncratic factors. Consequently,
most central banks in these economies have
maintained a tighter monetary policy rhetoric. Thus,
the central banks of Indonesia, the Philippines,
Israel, South Africa, and Korea raised their interest
rates during the abovementioned period.

Nevertheless, inflationary pressures are expected to
moderate in this group of countries given the recent
fall in gasoline prices, particularly in those countries
where this item contributes significantly to the
computation of inflation. This could lead to a pause
in the process of reference rate increases in some of
these economies.

In this environment, and given the signs of an
economic deceleration in advanced countries and
the persistence of several risk factors, international
financial markets displayed higher volatility in the last
month, although they have exhibited some

improvement in the last days (Chart 5 and Chart 6).
In particular, despite the 90-day trade truce that the
U.S. and China reached during the G20 Leaders’
Summit in Argentina, several stock indexes fell
significantly, between 3% and 5%. There were also
outflows in corporate bond markets and the prices of
these bonds fell significantly, while the demand for
safe haven assets rose. In the fixed-income markets,
government bonds’ interest rates fell between 15 and
30 basis points. In the U.S., these adjustments were
also due to expectations that the Federal Reserve
may follow a more moderate pace of interest rate
increases in 2019. It is worth pointing out that the
yield curve on U.S. Treasury bills flattened
considerably, even inverting for the first time since
2007 in some of its segments. Finally, in foreign
exchange markets, the U.S. dollar depreciated
moderately against the currencies of other major
advanced economies.


**Chart 5**

**Selected Indexes of Implied Volatility**

Dec.31, 2015=100

220 US stock market 1/

European stock market 2/

200 Currencies 3/

US fixed income market 4/

180 Oil 5/

160

140

120

100

80

60

40 December

J A J O J A J O J A J O

2016 2017 2018

1/ VIX: Weighted index of volatility implied in 1-month options for the
S&P500 published by the Chicago Board Options Exchange.
2/ V2X: Weighted index of volatility implied in 1-month options for the Euro
Stoxx50 published by Deutsche Borse and Goldman Sachs.
3/ CVIX: Index of volatility implied in 3-month most traded foreign
exchanges with the following weights: EURUSD (35.9%), USDJPY
(21.79%), GBPUSD (17.95%), USDCHF (5.13%), USDCAD (5.13%),
AUDUSD (6.14%), EURJPY (3.85%), EURGBP (2.56%), and EURCHF
(1.28%).
4/ MOVE: Index of volatility implied in at-the-money options with a 1-month
maturity over T-bills with 2-year, 5-year, 10-year and 30-year maturities.
Index calculated by Merrill Lynch.
5/ OVX: Weighted index of volatility implied in 1-month crude oil options.
Note: The vertical line represents Banco de México’s latest monetary policy
decision.
Source: Prepared by Banco de México with Bloomberg data.


1/ MSCI Emerging Markets Index (includes 24 countries).
2/ DXY: Weighted average of the nominal exchange rate of the six main
world-traded currencies (calculated by Intercontinental Exchange, ICE) with
the following weights: EUR (57.6%), JPY (13.6%), GBP (11.9%), CAD
(9.1%), SEK (4.2%), and CHF (3.6%).
3/ J.P. Morgan Index constructed from a weighted average of the nominal
exchange rate of emerging economies’ currencies with the following
weights: TRY (8.3%), RUB (8.3%), HUF (8.3%), ZAR (8.3%), BRL (11.1%),
MXN (11.1%), CLP (11.1%), CNH (11.1%), INR (11.1%), and SGD (11.1%).
Source: Bloomberg and ICE.

In emerging economies, the prices of financial assets
exhibited volatility due to several factors, among
which the global trade tensions, the behavior of
energy asset prices, as well as several geopolitical
and idiosyncratic events, stand out (Chart 7). Thus,

13


**Chart 6**

**Change in Selected Financial Indicators**

**(November 12 – December 12, 2018)**

Percent, basis pointsPercentage, basis points


2.5%

0.0%


25

0


-2.5%

-5.0%


-25

-50


-7.5%


-75


-----

both currencies and stock markets of these countries
had a mixed performance, in an environment of high
volatility. On the other hand, in most emerging
countries, government securities’ yield decreased, in
line with the developments in fixed-income markets
of advanced countries.

**Chart 7**

**Performance of Emerging Economies’ Assets**

**since November 12, 2018**

Percent, basis points


**Currencies**

Percentage


**Equities**

Percentage


India

Argentina


Brazil


Russia

Israel


Colombia

-30% -20% -10% 0% 10% 20%


Depreciation Appreciation Loss Gain

|4% Gain 2% TurkeR yu Hs us niI aTn ghd aai ra yilaP no dla Cn zd Ie nMc deh oox R nic ee sp i. a 0%South Afri Cc Ca h oil le ombiaMa K Pla o hy r is le ipi aa pines -2% Israel -4% Brazil -6% Loss Argentina -51% -8% -30% -20% -10% 0% 10% Depreciation Appreciation|10% Philippines 8% 6% Indonesia In 4% Hungary Arg 2% Poland 0% Korea Chile Turkey -2% South Africa Malaysia Thailand -4% Czech Rep.Is -6% Mexico Col -8% -10% -30% -20% -10% 0%1 Loss|
|---|---|


**2Y interest rates**

Basis points


**10Y interest rates**

Basis points

80 138 Argentina

500 Turkey

60 605

40

20

0 IndonesiaMalaysia **MexicoIsrael** PhilippinesRussia

Korea South Africa

-20

Chile

Thailand

Czech Rep.

-40 Poland Colombia

India

Hungary

-60

Brazil

-80

-150 -50 50 150 250

Decrease Increase

**Performance during the year**


**CDS**

Basis points

|20 10 Russia Increase 0Malaysia ThailaIsnrdael Indonesia Mexico Philippines -10Korea South Africa Chile -20Poland Czech Rep. -30 Hungary Tu 7rk 8e 4y Colombia -40 India Argentina -50 562 Decrease -60 Brazil -70 -100 0 100 200 300 Decrease Increase|80 138 Argentina 20 500 Turkey premium Increase 60 605 15 HIgher 40 10 20 5 0 InM doa nla ey ss ii aa MIs er xa ie cl oPR hu is lips pia 0 ines K Korea South Africa -20 -5 Chile Thailand Czech Rep. -40 Poland Colombia -10 India Decrease premium Hungary -60 -15 Lower Brazil -80 -20 -150 -50 50 150 250 Decrease Increase Lo|190 Argentina 532 Turkey Colombia 215 Chile Czech Rep. India Poland Hungary orea IsraelMex Mic ao laysia Thailand Brazil South Africa Philippines Russia Indonesia -20 0 20 40 60 80|
|---|---|---|
|||wer premiumHigher premium|


Asia LatinAmerica Europe Mexico

Note: Interest rates correspond to 2-year and 10-year swaps, respectively.
For the case of Argentina, interest rates in US dollars are used (since they
are the most liquid ones and those that best reflect the performance of the
fixed-income market in that country).
Source: Bloomberg.

There are risk factors that could create greater
volatility in markets and which are foreseen to persist
in 2019. Among these are a lower rate of growth and
the possibility of a further deterioration in household
and business confidence due to the trade tensions
between the U.S. and other countries. In particular,
although China and the United States have agreed
on a trade truce, uncertainty prevails as to the
possibility of a long-term agreement that prevents
economic dynamism from deteriorating and global
production chains from being affected. There is also


a series of political risk factors such as the Brexit
negotiations, the negotiation of the fiscal budget in
Italy, and idiosyncratic events in emerging

economies. Finally, the high valuations of certain
financial assets and the high leveraging of the
corporate sector in some advanced economies
continue being latent risks.

**A.2. Current situation of the Mexican economy**

**A.2.1. Mexican markets**

In the weeks after Banco de México’s last monetary
policy decision, the prices of financial assets in
Mexico exhibited once more a negative performance,
in an environment of high volatility. In addition to the
aforementioned external factors, domestic markets
were significantly sensitive to the uncertainty
regarding the economic policies to be implemented
by the new administration and news related to
legislative initiatives. Nevertheless, in the days prior
to the monetary policy decision of December, a slight
improvement was observed in the behavior of
Mexican financial assets, due, among other factors,
to the 2019 economic package submitted by the
federal government.

The Mexican peso was traded at levels above 20
pesos per U.S. dollar during the entire period (Chart
8), in a context where operating conditions in the
foreign exchange market remained stable practically
throughout the entire period (Chart 9). Similarly,
forward-looking conditions implied in exchange rate
options (FX options), such as volatility and bias
toward depreciation in the short term, stabilized,
albeit at high levels vis-à-vis those reached three
months ago. Finally, exchange rate expectations of
different financial institutions were revised upwards
once more. For 2018, economists adjusted their
forecast for the end of the year from 19.63 to 20.20
pesos per U.S. dollar, while for the end of 2019, from
19.35 to 20.63 pesos per U.S. dollar (Chart 10).

14


-----

**Chart 8**

**Mexican Peso and Intraday Depth**

Pesos per US dollar Pesos per dollar

**Depth**

**(Mexican**

**peso cents)**

Source: Calculated by Banco de México with "tick by tick" data from Reuters
Matching platform.


**Chart 10**

**Forecasters’ Expectations for the Exchange**

**Rate for the End of the Year**

Pesos per US dollar

22.00


21.00

20.00


19.00

18.00


17.00

J

2017


F M A M J J A S O N D J

2018


F M A M J J A S O N D


**Depth**

**(Mexican**

**peso cents)**


**Chart 9**

**Mexican Foreign Exchange Market Operating**

**Conditions and Peso-dollar Exchange Rate**

Index (5-day moving average), pesos per US dollar Index (mean average 5 days), pesos per US dollar


Note: The horizontal line represents the date of Banco de México’s latest
monetary policy decision.
Source: Bloomberg and Citibanamex Survey.

Mexico’s equity market exhibited negative results. In
particular, the BMV Mexican Stock Exchange Index
(IPC, for its acronym in Spanish) fell by 6.9% during the
period, reaching its lowest levels since March 2014
(Chart 11). In this context, it is worth highlighting that,
after the fall in their share prices, different companies
implemented buy-back programs, in order to signal
confidence to their investors.

**Chart 11**

**Daily Change in the BMV Mexican Stock**

**Exchange Index (IPC, for its acronym in**

**Spanish)**

Percent


90

80

70

60

50

40

30

20


22.0

21.5

21.0

20.5

20.0

19.5

19.0

18.5

18.0

17.5

17.0


J F M A M J J A S O N D J F M A M J J A S O N D J F M A M J J A S O N D


2016 2017 2018

Note: Index calculated using the mean, volatility, skewness, kurtosis, bidask spread and mean of simple differentials all of them related to quotes of
intraday operations, and the total traded volume. After obtaining this data,
the percentiles since 2011 are calculated and the average of the 7
percentiles for each day is considered. The black vertical line represents
Banco de México’s latest monetary policy decision.
Source: Prepared by Banco de México with Reuters data.


12%

Daily changes Percentile 2.5% and 97.5%

10%

8%

6%

4%

2%

0%

-2%

-4%

-6%

December

-8%

2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018


Source: Banco de México with Bloomberg data.

During most part of this period, interest rates on
government bonds increased, mainly for long-term
maturities. Nevertheless, in the days after the 2019
economic package was released, the yields along
the entire curve decreased, partly reversing the
above mentioned increases. The slope of the yield
curve, measured with the spread between 30- and 3year bonds, steepened by around 5 bps, to 53 bps. It

15


-----

should be noted that during the same period yields
reached their highest levels in ten years (Chart 12).
The abovementioned took place in an environment
of a significant deterioration of operating conditions,
which improved slightly in the days prior to Banco de
Mexico’s monetary policy decision (Chart 13).

**Chart 12**

**Nominal Rates of Government Securities**

Percent

12

11

10

9

8

7

6

5

4

December

3

O O O O O O O O O O O O O

2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018

Source: PiP. 3 years 5 years 10 years 20 years 30 years

Note: The vertical line represents the date of Banco de México’s latest
monetary policy decision.
Source: PIP.

**Chart 13**

**Index of Mexican Government Debt Market**

**Operating Conditions by Type of Tenor**

Index (10-day moving average) Index (mean average 10 days)

90

3-year 10-year 20-year 30-year

80

70

60

50

40

30

December

20

J F M A M J J A S O N

2018

Note: Index calculated with the changes in bonds’ interest rates, volatility of
events, bid-ask spread, the average of the differences in quotes of intra-day
operations, and the daily interbank and customer traded volume.
Considering the aforementioned, percentiles since 2016 and the average of
percentiles for every day is calculated. The vertical line represents the date
of Banco de México’s latest monetary policy decision.
Source: Calculated by Banco de México with data from Bloomberg, PIP and
brokerage firms.

The adjustment of sovereign risk premia in domestic
equity markets (Chart 14) was also reflected in a
widening of spreads between the yield of Mexican
debt denominated in foreign currency (Chart 15), of
other debt instruments placed by State Productive
Companies and of Mexico City’s New International
Airport (NAICM in Spanish) bonds (Chart 16), relative
to that of U.S. Treasury bonds. Such sovereign risk


premia compressed after the proposal of the federal
budget for 2019 was announced and Mexico City’s
airport managing operator (Grupo Aeroportuario de
la Ciudad de Mexico, GACM) launched a buy-back
offer of bonds denominated in U.S. dollars for up to
USD 1,800 million.

**Chart 14**

**Spread between Nominal Interest Rates in**

**Mexico and the United States in Mexican Pesos**

Basis points

680

3-year 5-year 10-year 30-year

630

580

530

480

430

380

330

280

December

230

D J D J D J D J D J D J D J D J D J

2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018

Source: Banco de México with Bloomberg data.

**Chart 15**

**Spread between Nominal Interest Rates in**

**Mexico and the United States**

**in Foreign Currency**

Basis points

350

3-year 5-year 10-year 30-year

300

250

200

150

100

50

December

0

J F M A M J J A S O N D J F M A M J J A S O N D J F M A M J J A S O N D

2016 2017 2018

Note: The vertical line indicates the date of Banco de México’s latest Source: Bloomberg.
monetary policy decision.
Source: Banco de México with Bloomberg data.

16


-----

**Chart 16**

**Yield on Mexico City’s New International Airport**

(NAICM, for its acronym in Spanish) Bonds

Percent

8.00 2047 2046 2028 2026

7.50

7.00

6.50

6.00

5.50

5.00

4.50

4.00

December

3.50

J F M A M J J A S O N D

2018

Note: The vertical line represents the date when the referendum on Mexico
City’s New International Airport (NAICM) concluded.
Source: Bloomberg.

Finally, expectations regarding the level of monetary
policy’s reference rate implied in the yield curve
structure consider an increase of 25 bps for
December’s monetary policy statement (Chart 17)
with a 70% probability. The above is in line with the
consensus of the main forecasters. As to

expectations regarding the reference rate for the end
of 2019, the market anticipates such rate will reach
8.50%, while the median of forecasters’ expectations
is that it will reach 8.25% at that point.

**Chart 17**

**Banxico Overnight Interbank Rate Implied in**

**28-day TIIE IRS Curve**

PercentPercentage

9.00

Banxico overnight interbank rate (target rate)

8.75 15-Nov-18

8.50 Rest of the period

17-Dec-18

8.25

8.00

7.75

7.50

7.25

7.00

6.75

jun. 17J nov. 17N           M           J           D           A           S   mar. 18 jul. 18 dic. 18 abr. 19 ago. 19

2017                  2018                              2019

Source: Calculated by Banco de México with PIP data.

**A.2.2. Economic activity and determinants of**
**inflation**

During the third quarter of 2018, economic activity
rebounded, after having contracted in the previous
quarter (Chart 18). This behavior reflected the higher
growth rate of non-oil exports, as well as the
continuous expansion of private consumption. In


I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV I II III

2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018

s. a. / Seasonally adjusted figures.
Source: Mexico’s National Accounts System (SCNM, for its acronym in
Spanish), INEGI.

In particular, in October 2018, manufacturing exports
declined, although they continue to exhibit a positive
trend. The latter results reflected the fact that during
that month non-automotive exports remained

practically unchanged and that automotive exports
fell (Chart 19). By destination, exports to the rest of
the world continued to exhibit a weak performance,
while those to the U.S. continued to trend upward. As
for domestic demand, according to its monthly
indicator, private consumption kept on expanding
towards the end of the third quarter of 2018. At the
beginning of the fourth quarter, revenues of retail
stores, which are a more timely indicator of
consumption, although of less coverage, continued
to show a positive trend. In contrast, despite the
increase observed in September 2018, gross fixed
investment remained on a downward trend. The
aforementioned reflected mainly the weakness of
both investment in construction and spending in
machinery and equipment.

17


contrast, gross fixed investment remained on a
negative trend. Although available information in this
regard is limited, a certain deceleration in activity is
foreseen for the fourth quarter vis-à-vis the third
quarter.

**Chart 18**

**Gross Domestic Product**

Quarterly percentage change, s. a.

2

1

0

-1


-2


Q-III

II III


-----

**Chart 19**

**Total Manufacturing Exports**

Indices 2013 = 100, s. a.


**Chart 20**

**Global Index of Economic Activity**

Indices 2013 = 100, s. a.


140

130

120

110

100

90


170

160

150

140

130

120

110

100

90

80

J

2012


A J O J A J O J

2013 2014


A J O J

2015


A J O J

2016


A J O J

2017


A J O J

2018


A J O


120

115

110

105

100

95


A J O J

2013


A J O J

2014


A J O J

2015


A J O J

2016


A J O J

2017


A J O J A J O

2018


s. a. / Seasonally adjusted series and trend series. The former is
represented by a solid line and the latter by a dotted line.
Source: Prepared by Banco de México with data from the Tax
Administration Service (SAT, for its acronym in Spanish), the Ministry of the
Economy (SE, for its acronym in Spanish), Banco de México, the National
Institute of Statistics and Geography (INEGI, for its acronym in Spanish),
Mexico’s Merchandise Trade Balance, and National System of Statistical
and Geographical Information (SNIEG, for its acronym in Spanish).

As for production, during the third quarter of 2018,
the expansion of economic activity reflected mostly
the continuous upward trajectory followed by
services, although a certain loss of dynamism was
observed towards the end of the quarter (Chart 20).
The aforementioned was mainly the result of the
contributions of the components of trade;

accommodation and food services; management of
companies and enterprises; arts, entertainment and
recreation; finance and insurance; and real state and
rental and leasing. Industrial production contracted
significantly at the beginning of the fourth quarter,
after having rebounded in September 2018.
Manufacturing, in particular, reverted its performance
relative to the rebound registered in the third quarter,
while construction continued to show weak results,
and mining, quarrying and oil and gas extraction
continued trending downwards (Chart 21).


s. a. / Seasonally adjusted and trend series. The former is represented by a
solid line and the latter by a dotted line.
1/ Figures up to September 2018.
2/ Figures up to October 2018 from IGAE’s Monthly Industrial Production
Index.
Source: Mexico’s National Accounts System (SCNM, for its acronym in
Spanish), INEGI.

**Chart 21**

**Industrial Activity**

Indices 2013 = 100, s. a.

120

110

100

90 Total

Mining (22.3%)

Manufacturing (49.7%)

80

Construction (23.3%)

Utilities (4.7%)

October

70

J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O

2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018

s. a. / Seasonally adjusted series and trend series. The former is
represented by a solid line and the latter by a dotted line.
Source: Mexico’s National Accounts System (SCNM, for its acronym in
Spanish), INEGI.

As for the economy’s cyclical position, slack
conditions are considered to have remained less tight
than those observed at the beginning of the year
(Chart 22). In regards to the labor market, both
national and urban unemployment rates remained at
low levels at the beginning of the fourth quarter
(Chart 23), while the number of IMSS-insured jobs
continued following an upward trend, albeit with a
slight deceleration. The fact that the urban
unemployment rate registered its lowest level since
INEGI’s first National Survey of Occupation and
Employment (ENOE, for its acronym in Spanish) was
conducted in 2005 deserves mention. At the
beginning of the last quarter of this year, unit labor
costs of the manufacturing industry continued to
trend upwards (Chart 24).

18


J

2012


-----

**Chart 22**

**Output Gap Estimates [1/]**

**Excluding Oil Industry [4/ ]**

Potential output percentages, s. a.


**Chart 24**

**Manufacturing Labor Productivity and Unit**

**Labor Costs[1/]**

Indexes 2013 = 100, s. a.


8

6

4

2

0

-2

-4

-6

-8

-10

-12


J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S

2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018

s. a. / Seasonally adjusted figures.
1/ Output gap estimated with a tail-corrected Hodrick-Prescott filter; see
Banco de México (2009), “Inflation Report (April-June 2009)", p.74.
2/ GDP figures up to the third quarter of 2018; IGAE figures up to September
2018.
3/ Output gap confidence interval calculated with a method of unobserved
components.
4/ Excludes both oil and gas extraction, support activities for mining, and
petroleum and coal products' manufacturing.
Source: Prepared by Banco de México with INEGI data.

**Chart 23**

**National Unemployment Rate and Urban**

**Unemployment Rate**

Percent, s. a.

8.5

Urban unemployment rate

8.0

7.5 National unemployment rate

7.0

6.5

6.0

5.5

5.0

4.5

4.0

3.5

3.0

October

2.5

J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O

2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018

s. a. / Seasonally adjusted and trend series. The former is represented by a
solid line and the latter by a dotted line.
Source: National Survey of Occupations and Employment (ENOE, for its
acronym in Spanish), INEGI.


110

Unit labor costs

Productivity

105

100

95

October

90

J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O

2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018


s. e. / Seasonally adjusted and trend series. The former is represented by a
solid line and the latter by a dotted line. Trend series estimated by Banco
de México.
1/ Productivity based on hours worked.
Source: Prepared by Banco de México with seasonally adjusted data from
the Monthly Survey of the Manufacturing Industry and the industrial activity
indexes of Mexico’s National Accounts, INEGI.

In October 2018, domestic financing to the private
non-financial sector continued following the

decelerating trend that began to be observed at the
start of the third quarter of this year. The
aforementioned was due to the moderate growth rate
of financing to companies and to the persistently low
growth rate of lending to households. The latter
occurred in an environment where the costs of
financing to companies increased vis-à-vis the first
half of the year, while interest rates of credit to
households remained, in general terms, at levels
similar, on average, to the first half of 2018. Business
and housing delinquency rates remained at low and
stable levels, while indicators of consumption credit
delinquency rates stopped deteriorating as they had
been doing since the end of 2016, though they still
remain at relatively high levels. Financing to the
private non-financial sector has decelerated, in a
context in which, from the perspective of financing
sources, there was a contraction in the balance of
domestic financial assets, which resulted from
adjustments in the valuation of these assets in
October 2018.

19


-----

**A.2.3. Developments in inflation and inflation**
**outlook**

Between October and November 2018, annual
headline inflation fell from 4.90% to 4.72%. This
result is explained by the lower contributions of both
its core and non-core components (Chart 25 and
Table 1). It should be pointed out that non-core
inflation remains high and that the shocks that have
been affecting it have also influenced the

development of core inflation through their indirect
effects on production costs, which, together with
other factors, has contributed to the high resistance
to decline shown by this subindex.

**Chart 25**

**Consumer Price Index**

Annual percentage change

13 CPI

12 Core

Non-core

11

10

9

8

7

6

5

4

3

2

1

0

J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O

2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018

Source: Banco de México and INEGI.

Annual core inflation fell from 3.73% in October to
3.63% in November, due to the lower variations
observed in the price subindexes of merchandise
and services (Chart 26). In the case of merchandise,
the annual rate of change of both food and non-food
goods prices decreased, although that of food prices
remains at high levels (Chart 27). In the case of
services, the decline in their annual rate of change
reflected mainly the lower price increases of services
other than housing and education, especially those
of tourist services (Table 1).

As for annual non-core inflation, it fell from 8.50% in
October to 8.07% in November due to the lower
increases in energy prices. This effect was partly
offset by the higher increases in the prices of
agricultural products, particularly those of fruits and
vegetables (Chart 28 and Table 1).


The medians for short-term inflation expectations
drawn from surveys registered an overall increase. In
particular, the medians for headline inflation
expectations from Banco de México’s Survey of
Professional Forecasters for the end of 2019 and
2020 were adjusted upwards from 3.71% to 3.89%
and from 3.50% to 3.79%, respectively, between
October and December. This upward adjustment is
attributed mostly to a significant increase in the
expectations implied for the non-core component
(from 4.51% to 5.10% and from 4.03% to 5.09%,
respectively), given that the medians for core inflation
increased to a lesser extent from 3.45% to 3.50%
and from 3.33% to 3.37%, respectively). In line with
the above, the medians for headline inflation
expectations for the following 12 months, relative to
the month in which data is collected and to the
subsequent month, were revised upwards from 3.83
to 3.89% and from 3.80% to 3.87%, respectively. The
median for headline inflation expectations for the
medium term (next four years) increased by 5 bps to
3.55% in December’s survey. In contrast, the median
for longer terms (next five to eight years) remained
stable at around 3.50%. However, as for mediumand long-term inflation expectations, it should be
pointed out that: i) the medians for core inflation have
increased in recent readings to levels close to 3.4%;
and, ii) the levels of these medians are above the 3%
inflation target. Finally, as for information drawn from
market instruments, medium- and long-term

inflationary risk premia remain high.

**Chart 26**

**Merchandise and Services Core Price Subindex**

Annual percentage change

7

Merchandise

6 Services

5

4

3

2

1

November

0

J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O

2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018

Source: Banco de México and INEGI.

|CPI|Col2|Col3|
|---|---|---|
|CPI Core|||
|Non-core|||
||||
||||
||||

|nual percentage change|Col2|Col3|Col4|
|---|---|---|---|
|Merchandise Services||||
|||||
|||||
|||||
|||||
|||||
|November||||


20


-----

**Chart 27**

**Merchandise Core Price Subindex**

Annual percentage change


8

7

6

5

4

3

2

1

0


J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O

2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018

Source: Banco de México and INEGI.

**Chart 28**

**Non-core Price Subindex**
Annual percentage change

20 Non-core

Agriculture
Energy and government-authorized prices

15

10

5

November

0

-5

J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O

2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018


As for inflation forecasts, the higher-than-anticipated
increases in fruit and vegetable prices are expected
to affect the trajectory of annual headline inflation
temporarily, but this indicator will afterwards resume
a downward trend towards its 3% target, nearing it
during the first half of 2020. Among the risks that
inflation faces, the following stand out: that the peso
exchange rate continues to be subject to pressures
stemming from external and domestic factors;
considering the magnitude of the recent minimum
wage increases, in addition to their possible direct
impact, these may bring about wage revisions that
exceed productivity gains and create cost pressures,
possibly putting pressure on prices and affecting
formal employment; that pressures on agricultural
product prices persist or that new increases in energy
prices arise; that an escalation of worldwide
protectionist and retaliatory measures materializes;
that public finances deteriorate; and, that f) given the
observed shocks and the levels reached by inflation,
that second-round effects on the price formation
process materialize. Additionally, there are risks of a
structural nature arising from the possible adoption
of policies that could lead to deep changes in the
economy’s price formation process. Considering all
of the above, the balance of risks for the expected
trajectory of inflation has deteriorated and is biased
considerably to the upside, in an environment of high
uncertainty.

21


Source: Banco de México and INEGI.


-----

**Table 1**

**Consumer Price Index and Components**

Annual percentage change

**December 2017** **October 2018** **November 2018**

**CPI** **6.77** **4.90** **4.72**

**SubyacenteCore** **4.87** **3.73** **3.63**

**Merchandise** **6.17** **3.98** **3.90**

Food, beverages and tobacco 6.82 4.84 4.79

Non-food merchandise 5.62 3.24 3.13

**Services** **3.76** **3.48** **3.37**

Housing 2.65 2.59 2.60

Education (tuitions) 4.74 4.69 4.69

Other services 4.63 4.30 3.98

**No SubyacenteNon-core** **12.62** **8.50** **8.07**

**Agriculture** **9.75** **2.43** **4.78**

Fruits and vegetablesFruits abd vegetables 18.60 2.06 6.02

Meats, poultry, fish and eggsLivestock 4.50 2.52 3.15

**Energy and government-authorized prices Energéticos y Tarifas Aut. por Gobierno** **14.44** **12.62** **10.30**

Energy productsEnergy 17.69 17.10 13.26

Government-authorized pricesTarifas Autorizadas por Gobierno **8.36** **3.45** 3.39

Source: INEGI.


22


-----

-----

-----

