-----

-----

**FOREWARNING**
This document is provided for the reader’s convenience only.
The translation from the official Spanish version was made
by Banco de México’s staff. Discrepancies may arise
between the original document in Spanish and its English
translation. For this reason, the original Spanish version is
the only official document.


**1. PLACE, DATE, AND PARTICIPANTS**

**1.1 Place: Av. Cinco de Mayo street no.2, 5[th] floor,**
Col. Centro, Mexico City.

**1.2. Date of Governing Board meeting:** June 26,
2019.

**1.3. Participants:**
Alejandro Díaz de León-Carrillo, Governor
Irene Espinosa-Cantellano, Deputy Governor
Gerardo Esquivel-Hernández, Deputy Governor
Javier Eduardo Guzmán-Calafell, Deputy Governor
Jonathan Ernest Heath-Constable, Deputy Governor
Elías Villanueva-Ochoa, Secretary of the Governing
Board

Prior to this meeting, preliminary work by Banco de
México’s staff analyzing the economic and financial
environment, together with the developments in
inflation and the determinants and outlook for
inflation, was conducted and presented to the
Governing Board (see annex).

**2. ANALYSIS AND RATIONALE BEHIND THE**
**GOVERNING BOARD’S VOTING**

All members highlighted that available information
suggests that during the second quarter of 2019 the
world economy decelerated as a reflection of
moderation of growth in some of the main advanced
and emerging economies. Most members stated that
this performance was caused by a more adverse
environment for world trade, with periods of
significant tension and tariff threats. Some members
stressed that indicators related to international trade
and the manufacturing sector point to such
weakness. Some members noted that business
confidence and investment have been affected by
this environment to a larger degree. With respect to
growth expectations, most noted that these have
declined again for 2019 and 2020. One member
added that projections corresponding to international
trade point to the lowest dynamism of cross-border
flows of goods and services since the global financial
crisis.

Most members indicated that the balance of risks for
global growth remains biased to the downside. They


stated that among the major risks those that stand
out are: i) a further escalation of trade tensions
between the U.S. and its main trade partners; ii) that
the weakness of some of the main economies lasts
longer than anticipated; iii) that new episodes of
international financial volatility occur; and, iv) that
some political and geopolitical risks intensify.
Regarding the latter, one member stated that such
risks could affect the market for energy goods and
global financial stability. He/she added that an
additional risk factor is the historically high level of
corporate and public sector leverage in many
countries, which, he/she considered leaves little
room for maneuver for fiscal policy to serve as a
buffer in the event of a greater deceleration or a
recession. Finally, he/she underlined that all of the
above could bring about systemic financial

vulnerabilities.

As for economic activity in advanced economies,
most members argued that growth during the second
quarter of the year suggests a new deceleration. One
member stressed the case of the euro area, which
displays clear signs of weakness both in business
confidence indicators and in those associated with
manufacturing activity. In the case of the U.S.,
he/she pointed out that both residential and nonresidential investment show an incipient weakness,
while exports have started to slow down. In this
context, another member mentioned that, although
the yield curve of Treasury bonds has inverted in
certain tranches, the lower risk premium suggests
that such performance points more to a deceleration
than to a recession, although all members pointed
out that the US economy is expected to undergo a
gradual deceleration while most of them indicated
that the risk of US recession has increased. Most
members stated that although job creation has
slightly decreased in advanced economies,

unemployment rates remain at low levels and wages
continue recovering gradually. One member

mentioned that unemployment gaps have remained
at historic lows. In this respect, he/she stated that
services, which are more labor intensive and less
associated with trade activity, have continued to
exhibit a better performance, supporting

consumption and employment.

Most members mentioned that latest information
suggests a deceleration in different emerging
economies. One member argued that in the current
environment, emerging economies that are more
open to world trade face significant challenges to
boost investment. He/she explained that

idiosyncratic risk factors have increased uncertainty
regarding these economies’ growth outlook and that

1


-----

in some of them, such as Mexico’s, they have
hindered investment. Another member warned that
the materialization of events of variable but high
likelihood, such as the referred global risks, would
have severe repercussions for emerging economies,
beyond the financial volatility that would be
generated. He/she added that regarding economic
activity, recent World Bank estimates show that a
simultaneous one percentage point deceleration in
the growth of the U.S., the euro area and China
would generate a negative impact of 1.4 percentage
points on growth of emerging economies in the first
year alone, followed by a further fall of approximately
one percentage point during the second year.
Another member delved into downward risks to
emerging economies’ growth, highlighting the
possibility of a greater deceleration of the Chinese
economy and of a recomposition of world trade. In
this regard, he/she argued that lower bilateral deficits
of the major economies could reduce trade
opportunities of other economies and break the links
of global value chains.

All members stressed that global inflationary
pressures are biased to the downside. Some of them
agreed that lower commodity prices, especially those
of energy products, have contributed to the above.
One member claimed that, despite the risk of
additional increases in oil prices as a result of
geopolitical tensions and/or agreements regarding
supply among the main producing countries,
downward pressures on inflation could intensify over
the next months, which is a cause of concern for
some of the main advanced economies. Delving into
the case of such economies, most members
emphasized that headline and core inflation are
below their central bank’s targets, and that this has
taken place despite the solid performance of their
labor markets and the increase, albeit contained, of
wages. Some added that the economic weakness is
expected to contribute to maintain inflation at low
levels. One of them elaborated on the different
factors that have kept inflation structurally low in
advanced economies. In this regard, he/she
highlighted technological change and the integration
of regions with abundant labor force into

globalization, which have allowed for the

fragmentation of productive processes according to
comparative advantages and to the cost structure of
different countries and regions. He/she stressed that
this has led to productivity gains and more
competitive markets, which has made it more difficult
for companies to raise their prices. In this context,
he/she stated that marked differences have been
observed between the inflation of goods and that of
services. He/she pointed out that the future behavior


of inflation in these economies will largely depend on
the permanence or the weakening of such factors.
Finally, he/she mentioned that expectations of
inflation remaining at low levels and without
considerable pressures in these economies prevail,
although this scenario is subject to risks.

All members pointed out that, given the lesser
inflationary pressures and the deceleration of the
global economy, expectations that the central banks
of the main economies will maintain more
accommodative monetary policies have

strengthened. In this regard, one member highlighted
that in several countries like Australia, Chile, India
and Russia, policy rates have already been cut,
given the improved outlook in the balance of risks for
inflation, in what appears to be the beginning of a
new cycle of rate cuts at the global level. Most
members mentioned that the recent communications
of the European Central Bank point to a greater
monetary policy easing. Some members pointed out
that it has shown willingness to use all its available
tools to support economic activity and to ensure that
inflation converges to its target. In addition to the
above, one of them stressed that both the Bank of
Japan and the Bank of England reaffirmed their
commitment to take the necessary actions to reach
their targets. As for the US Federal Reserve, most
members stated that in its June meeting the target
range for the federal funds rate was left unchanged.
They stressed the change in the tone of the monetary
policy statement towards greater easing, as well as
the commitment to adopt the appropriate measures
to sustain the economic expansion in view of the
increased uncertainty faced by the US economy.
They added that the projections for the federal funds
rate of the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC)
declined for the end of this year and the following.
Most members agreed that the future trajectory of the
federal funds rate implied by financial instruments
shows a decrease of over 100 basis points
accumulated for the end of 2020, and some of them
specified that a reduction of at least 25 basis points
is anticipated for July’s meeting.

Some members stressed that the more adverse
environment for world trade which has prevailed
since the beginning of May, had a negative effect on
international financial markets, in particular, on
riskier assets. However, most members argued that,
recently, expectations of a more accommodative
monetary policy stance by the central banks of major
advanced economies has contributed to a decline in
interest rates throughout the entire yield curve, both
in advanced and emerging economies, as well as to
an increase in risk appetite. In this respect, some

2


-----

members mentioned the increase in stock market
indices, mainly in advanced economies, as well as
the strengthening of emerging economies’

currencies. In this context, they emphasized that
global financial conditions have eased. One of them
specified that portfolio flows to emerging economies
have resumed and that sovereign borrowing costs in
these economies have declined. Nevertheless, some
members noted that, given the idiosyncratic
deterioration in some emerging economies and the
lower commodity prices, it is possible that capital
flows to such economies will not be of the same
magnitude as observed in other episodes of
increasing risk appetite. One member mentioned that
some segments of these markets continue

registering outflows and therefore similar patterns of
behavior for longer periods or more generalized,
cannot be ruled out. Among the risk factors for
international financial markets, some members
highlighted those previously mentioned with regard
to the global economy. One member added the
possibility of an intensification of tensions related to
investment and technological development as well
as a greater slowdown of the Chinese economy.
Another member considered that risks to

international financial markets have decreased.

All members underlined that available information
suggests that economic activity in Mexico exhibits a
greater-than-anticipated deceleration, with a

contraction in the first quarter of 2019 and signs of
weakness in the second quarter. One member added
that there is no evidence of a rebound in economic
activity, as was anticipated after it was affected by
transitory factors in early 2019. Some members
specified that an environment of weakness persists
in most components of aggregate demand, mainly
domestic demand. One of them added that all
components exhibited negative variations during the
last quarter of 2018, and that similar dynamics are
observed for the first quarter of 2019. Delving into
domestic demand, most members highlighted the
slowdown of consumption and the lack of vigor of
investment. One member stated that households’
consumption exhibits signs of weakness after having
contributed strongly to growth during previous
periods, while public spending exhibits negative
growth rates. He/she specified that although in the
first quarter of 2019 gross fixed investment
registered a positive growth rate, this was due to an
unusual increase in January, a trend that did not
continue during the subsequent months. In this
respect, some members added that timely

information points to a continuing negative trend in
investment, mainly associated to the uncertainty
derived from domestic and external factors. As for


external demand, some members mentioned that,
despite the deceleration of global trade,

manufacturing exports have strengthened

throughout 2019.

From a longer-term perspective, one member
highlighted the secular slowdown in private

consumption that has been observed since 2016 as
well as the stagnation of private investment during
the same period. He/she indicated that nowadays
investment is even lower than that registered during
2015. He/she considered that the cost of financing
for households and firms has increased constantly
since 2016, and that the growth rate of commercial
banks’ credit has declined since then. In his/her
opinion, the transmission mechanism of the tight
monetary policy is operating through channels that
affect real variables.

On the supply side, most members pointed out that
available information suggests that economic activity
registered a marginal monthly increase in April in
seasonally adjusted terms, below market

expectations. Some members highlighted that the
Global Economic Activity Indicator (IGAE, for its
acronym in Spanish) shows signs of weakness in all
of its components. Most members emphasized the
slowdown of the services sector, and some members
highlighted that a significant unfavorable change in
the trend of this sector can already be observed, after
having peaked at the end of last year. One of them
stated that the latter is worrisome, not only due to the
importance of this sector in GDP, but also because
for a long time services seemed to have been
isolated from the fluctuations in the rest of the
economy and were an important growth driver.

Most members pointed out that, given the recent
evolution of economic activity in Mexico, the growth
outlook has continued to deteriorate. One member
specified that downward adjustments have been due
to a weaker international environment as well as to
domestic factors. He/she added that the economy’s
weakness is expected to persist, that investment is
estimated to continue showing lack of vigor, and that
consumption is anticipated to continue loosing
dynamism. Another member added that growth
expectations among business analysts surveyed by
Banco de México have declined and reached 1.35%
in May and noted that these figures did not include
IGAE’s latest data yet and, therefore, they can be
expected to continue adjusting to the downside.
He/she also mentioned that some private analysts
are already forecasting a growth rate as low as 0.5%.
In this context, most members noted that during 2019
growth could be lower than expected. One member

3


-----

pointed out that, in his/her opinion, growth could lay
around the lower bound of the range estimated in the
latest Quarterly Report, and then exhibit some
improvement in 2020, although he/she emphasized
that this outlook should be considered with caution,
due to the limited information published so far.
Another member stated that the growth rates of the
last two quarters and the results of the Coincident
and Leading Composite Indicators System (SICCA,
for its acronym in Spanish) already suggest the
possibility of a mild recession. In this sense, the
same member noted that for 2019 Mexico is
expected to grow at a rate lower than that observed
during the last ten years and below that forecasted
for most emerging economies. One member
considered that the economic outlook for 2019
continues to include high uncertainty due to both
domestic and external factors.

Most members pointed out that the balance of risks
to growth had expanded its downward bias as a
result of both external and domestic factors, and
some members mentioned that the balance of risks
has become more uncertain. Among external factors,
in addition to the already described global risks, they
added: i) the possibility that there are difficulties in
the ratification of the United States-Mexico-Canada
Agreement (USMCA) by the legislative bodies of the
U.S. and Canada; and, ii) that there are new threats
of tariffs on Mexican imports by the U.S. In this
regard, one member underlined that, although the
negotiations between the governments of these two
countries led to the indefinite suspension of tariffs,
such agreement is a temporary solution and will be
revised in mid-July, and the way in which the results
of Mexico’s commitments will be measured is not
clear. He/she stressed that the mere perception of
the U.S. authorities that Mexico is not fulfilling its
commitments, as well as the electoral cycle in the
U.S., could prolong the threat of the imposition of
tariffs. He/she emphasized that the ratification of the
USMCA in the U.S. and Canada could become more
complex, and that, even if the agreement is ratified
by the congresses of the three countries, the
continuous threat of tariffs by the U.S. towards
Mexico could hinder the implementation of the new
trade agreement.

Among domestic risks, some members mentioned
the possibility of additional reductions to the
sovereign credit rating and to that of Pemex’s. One
member pointed out that a similar situation could
occur with the Federal Electricity Commission (CFE,
for its acronym in Spanish), whose credit rating and
outlook were also revised downwards by an agency,
although its debt continues maintaining investment


grade. Another member mentioned the risk of a
greater decrease in public revenues. Finally, one
member pointed out the direction taken by public
policies in different areas. These elements are
addressed in detail further in this document.

Most members mentioned that slack conditions in the
economy have loosened even more than expected.
In this regard, some noted that the risk of economic
slack widening in the next quarters persists. One
member mentioned that, despite the economic
weakening, different indicators point to relatively high
wage pressures. He/she added that the combination
of weak economic activity and wage pressures has
affected the evolution of employment. He/she noted
that a broad range of labor market indicators, such
as the unemployment rate, the share of employed
population that became unemployed, or the
withdrawals from individual AFORE accounts due to
unemployment, show the greater lassitude exhibited
by this market. Some members mentioned that the
labor market shows a lower rate of job creation. One
member pointed out that informal sector employment
has increased and formal employment has

contracted. He/she specified that across different
regions of Mexico, the weakening of employment is
more evident in the Northern border free zone, where
the larger wage adjustments have been observed,
and that the lessons derived from this experience
should be taken into consideration.

Most members mentioned that between April and the
first fortnight of June 2019, headline inflation
decreased from 4.41 to 4.00%. One member
highlighted that this indicator lay at the upper limit of
the variability interval around the target. All members
indicated that the decline of headline inflation was
due to a significant decrease of the non-core
component. In turn, most members pointed out that
core inflation remains at high levels. One member
pointed out that headline inflation has shown a clear
downward trend since September, when it was at
5.02%, although it rebounded temporarily in March
and in April due to calendar factors. He/she stressed
that the recent evolution of inflation has been better
than anticipated, and that the figure of the first
fortnight of June turned out to be far below the
forecast in the Quarterly Report published in May.
He/she added that observed inflation has been
considerably below the expectations at the end of
2018, when analysts expected cumulative inflation
up to May 2019 to be 0.68%, while it was only 0.21%.
In this context, another member stated that
cumulative headline inflation for the first five months
of 2019 was the third lowest for a similar period since
Banco de México adopted the current inflation
4


-----

targeting regime, and that with June’s figure, which
again surprised on the downside, the cumulative rate
of the first half of the year points to be the second
lowest after the historically low figure registered in
2015. He/she emphasized that this responds to the
fact that cumulative non-core inflation of the last five
months is the lowest for this statistic since the
measurements of core and non-core inflation have
been on record, and that the random and volatile
nature of non-core inflation should be stressed, given
that cumulative core inflation during the same period
was 1.60%, the fourth highest in the last 20 years.
One member pointed out that although the decline in
headline inflation has been fundamentally due to
non-core inflation developments, it is possible to
anticipate that over the next months core inflation will
also begin to decrease.

As to the performance of the non-core and core
components, all members highlighted that the former
has been following a downward trend and the
majority indicated that it decreased from 6.08 to
4.34% between April and June 2019. The majority
also highlighted that such reduction was mainly the
result of the lower increases in energy products,
which were partly due to the fall in their international
references. Some members also added the lower
increases observed in the prices of fruits and
vegetables. As for core inflation, most members
pointed out that it was 3.87% both in April and June
2019. One member noted that it surprised again to
the upside in June. Most members mentioned that
core inflation has been affected by the indirect effects
of pressures on energy prices and that, within it, the
higher rates of change of food merchandise and
services prices are noteworthy. Some members
stated that core inflation’s resistance to decline is
worrisome, since a greater economic slack should
lead to lower pressures on this component. One
member argued that core inflation’s persistence may
be partly due to the fact that both the labor gap and
wage pressures have offset the effects that a
negative output gap and slack conditions may have
otherwise had. Another member underlined that this
subindex, in addition to remaining at high levels, has
registered new increases in recent months. Such
member noted that this performance is not explained
by the behavior of some of the items within it but
rather by widespread pressures on core inflation, as
shown by trimmed mean indicators, the median of
the rates of change, and the re-weighted estimates
which smooth the influence of extreme variations.
He/she pointed out that, in the case of services,
significant increases in education and figures close
to 6% in services other than housing and education,
excluding tourist and telecommunication services, as


well as an upward trend in the prices of housingrelated services, although still below 3%, are
observed. He/she added that, due to their nature, the
factors that explain these trends probably stem from
the shocks on food merchandise and energy prices
as well as the wage adjustments that took place in
previous months. Another member stated that, to
understand the latest inflation dynamics, it is useful
to consider an indicator such as the six-month
moving average of the seasonally adjusted

annualized monthly rate of change, as it does not
carry forward the performance of inflation from
relatively distant periods and is not affected by
problems related to the base of comparison. The
same member noted that, according to such
indicator, core inflation displays a clear downward
trend, laying at around 3.5%, while headline inflation
is close to 3.1%.

Most members mentioned that, between early May
and mid-June, short-, medium- and long-term
headline inflation expectations did not register
significant adjustments. Some members pointed out
that, in the same period, core inflation expectations
for 2019 and 2020 increased slightly. The majority
highlighted that, for all terms, expectations remained
above the 3% target. One member emphasized that
they are also above Banco de México’s forecasts.
Another member emphasized that although

observed inflation from December to May has been
significantly below inflation expectations registered
at the end of 2018, headline and core inflation
expectations for the end of 2019 have been adjusting
upwards. The same member added that these
upward adjustments are surprising given that
between December and May, observed inflation was
below expectations and several inflation risk factors
for inflation have mitigated in relation to their levels
of December of last year. As to information drawn
from market instruments, most members mentioned
that medium- and long-term breakeven inflation
expectations remain at high levels. In this regard,
one member warned that the latter suggests the
perception of high risks for inflation in the long run.
Nevertheless, another member pointed out that such
premium decreased slightly at the margin.

The majority of members pointed out that both
headline and core inflation are expected to follow a
downward trend in the following months. Some
members stated that headline inflation may improve
slightly, mainly due to lower pressures on non-core
inflation. Another member noted that average annual
headline inflation figures for the second quarter of
2019 may be below the forecasts in the two Quarterly
Reports published this year. He/she mentioned that

5


-----

if the monthly rates continue exhibiting a relatively
favorable performance, the annual rates of change
of headline inflation and core inflation may eventually
converge to lower levels, once the effects related to
the base of comparison fade. Delving into the outlook
for core inflation, some members noted that it should
begin to decline, partly due to the lower indirect
effects of energy prices, as well as to the weakness
of the economy. In this context, they pointed out that
headline inflation is still expected to attain the target
towards mid-2020. One member considered that it is
feasible to attain the 3% target in the first half of 2020
and a figure below 3.5% towards the end of 2019.
Another member pointed out that core inflation
should begin to decrease once the temporary indirect
effects on food prices that resulted from increases in
energy products during the second half of 2018 begin
to dissipate. These effects were due to the
confluence of supply shocks in energy and food
products, which will eventually end up fading.

As for inflation risks, most members pointed out that
some have diminished and others have gained
relevance. Among risks to the upside for headline
inflation, most members highlighted the possibility
that the peso exchange rate comes under pressure
stemming from external or domestic factors. In this
regard, one member considered that it is unclear how
relevant the risk of a greater exchange rate
depreciation passing through on prices is, since the
pass-through coefficient is either extremely low or
very close to zero. He/she stated that the passthrough is practically insignificant for economies with
inflation targeting regimes, central bank

independence from the fiscal authority, and with
flexible exchange rates. Nevertheless, he/she
acknowledged that this risk cannot be entirely ruled
out since the pass-through is not static and may have
an unexpected non-linear behavior. In this regard,
another member highlighted the risk of exchange
rate pressures due to Pemex’s loss of investment
grade by a second rating agency and that such risk
has increased due to the lack of a credible business
plan for Pemex. The majority stated as an additional
upward risk the threat of the United States imposing
tariffs on Mexican imports and the adoption of
compensatory measures, although this risk has
decreased as a result of the recent agreement. One
member also included the risk associated to the
USMCA ratification. Some members mentioned the
possibility of protectionist measures escalating
worldwide and that core inflation’s persistence
leading to a greater resistance to decline of mediumand long-term inflation expectations. Most members
also underlined the risk that public finances
deteriorate.


The majority of members highlighted the risk that,
given the magnitude of several wage revisions, costrelated pressures arise, insofar as such revisions
exceed productivity gains. One member highlighted
that the above may affect formal employment and put
pressure, particularly on core inflation. Another
member noted his/her concern that such cost
pressures are being observed in the overall economy
and, especially, in the manufacturing sector. He/she
added that such pressures may intensify at the
beginning of 2020 if minimum wages are adjusted
above productivity gains. One member underlined
that a lower-than-expected capacity of the economy
to absorb labor cost increases, may put pressure on
the most labor-intensive sectors, as is the case of
several of the service sectors. He/she mentioned as
additional risks that the indirect effects of energy
prices and of the IMSS-insured workers’ wage
materialize into higher pressures on housing prices
and those of other services, as well as the possibility
of greater increases in food merchandise prices due
to increases in international prices. Another member
added that, despite the greater economic slack, core
inflation’s resistance to decline may continue, just as
has been the case in the last quarters, in which
despite economic activity having weakened more
than expected, core inflation has continued to show
resistance to decline and has even increased at the
margin. As to the risks to the upside that may affect
the non-core component directly, most members
mentioned the possibility that energy prices revert
their trend or that agricultural and livestock product
prices increase. One member stated that, in an
environment of geopolitical tensions, the

international price of crude oil may differ from its
forecast. He/she warned that a higher crude oil price
affects gasoline prices, limiting the scope of action of
the federal government to stabilize them through
adjustments to the special excise tax on production
and services (IEPS, for its acronym in Spanish).

As for risks to the downside for headline inflation, the
majority of members highlighted that the peso
exchange rate appreciates, which may possibly be
associated with a context of more accommodative
monetary policy stances and lower interest rates
worldwide, or in case greater certainty regarding the
trade relation with the United States is achieved.
They also pointed out the possibility that slack
conditions widen more than anticipated, as

suggested by the latest information on economic
activity, which might influence the behavior of core
inflation. One member added the possibility that
public finances improve. Regarding the risks to the
downside that affect non-core inflation directly, most
members mentioned that there may be lower rates of

6


-----

change in the prices of some of the goods included
in this subindex, as has been the case with energy
prices. One member pointed out that the price of
gasoline may decrease if there is a fall in crude oil
prices, given the greater weakness of the world
economy.

Most members agreed that significant uncertainty
persists regarding the risks that might affect inflation.
They considered that the net impact of inflation risks
is uncertain since opposite effects are taking place.
One member argued that, in his/her opinion, inflation
risks have decreased significantly vis-à-vis those
observed in December 2018, adding that this is due
to several factors, such as the improvement in global
financial conditions, which lessens the pressure on
the peso exchange rate and, eventually, on inflation.
The same member added that energy prices are
expected to remain stable, in line with the federal
government’s price fixing policy. He/she highlighted
that the impact of the minimum wage on inflation has
been only slightly significant, that slack conditions in
the economy have been increasing, and that the
balance of risks for growth remains clearly biased to
the downside. Another member expressed that the
balance of risks remains tilted to the upside, despite
expectations of a greater economic slack and the
recent monetary policy statements by the US Federal
Reserve, as it remains to be seen if specific actions
by this central bank materialize and in that case what
their impact on inflation would be. The same member
highlighted that as evidenced by the recent
experience with the trade tensions with the U.S., and
the changes in the credit rating or in the credit outlook
of sovereign debt and of Pemex’s debt, the exchange
rate might suddenly adjust due to domestic and
external events. Such member added the risks of
wage pressures being above productivity gains and
of the behavior of non-core inflation. He/she noted
that in his/her opinion, the convergence of inflation to
the target in 2020 implies figures for that item of
around 3%, when it is the case that its long-term
average has been above such figure. One member
argued that, as to the balance of risks for inflation, it
is important to analyze the risks to non-core inflation
on one side, and those to core inflation on the other,
since the factors determining each component are
different. He/she stated that, on the one hand, risks
to non-core inflation are more symmetrical; that is,
their occurrence may either favor or harm their
dynamics, and they are also not affected by
monetary policy; on the other hand, risks to core
inflation are more asymmetrical and, in principle,
susceptible to monetary policy actions. He/she
considered that the balance of risks for core inflation


seems to be biased to the upside, while that for noncore inflation is slightly biased to the downside.

All members highlighted that, since the last monetary
policy decision, domestic financial markets displayed
episodes of volatility due to the threat of tariffs on US
imports of Mexican products. The majority pointed
out that the revisions to the outlook or the credit
rating of the sovereign debt and that of Pemex by
some rating agencies also contributed to the greater
volatility. Nevertheless, they underlined that, in
recent weeks, long- and medium-term nominal and
real interest rates of government securities

decreased significantly and that the peso exchange
rate reverted the depreciation that was previously
observed. Most members considered that this
improvement was driven by the agreement reached
between the governments of Mexico and the United
States, the increase in risk appetite among investors
given the outlook for more accommodative monetary
policy stances in advanced economies, and the
interest-rate spreads between Mexico and other
economies. In this regard, one member mentioned
that such spreads have mitigated capital outflows,
mainly in public and private fixed income, although,
given the prevailing uncertainty, there has been a
rebalancing of government bond holdings towards
long-term instruments, which partly explains the yield
curve’s inversion. One member mentioned that longterm nominal and real interest rates provide useful
information regarding the risk premia in the
economy. He/she added that both yield curves are
inverted, which may provide insights for the
assessment of both the economy and the monetary
policy stance. One of them pointed out that, in line
with the significant improvement in global financial
conditions since June, long-term interest rates on
government securities are at their lowest levels of the
year and have decreased in more than 100 basis
points, the sovereign risk premium has slightly
decreased and the Mexican Stock Exchange
resumed an upward trend, after having fallen in May.
The same member also highlighted that the peso has
appreciated with respect to the levels observed at the
end of 2018 and noted that the level of the exchange
rate is sustained by interest rate spreads, by the
trade agreement with the U.S. and Canada (USMCA)
and its recent ratification by the Mexican Senate, by
investors’ consent to the New Mexico City
International Airport bond buyback offer, by the fight
against fuel theft, and by the new administration’s
commitment to fiscal discipline. In this regard,
another member added that although long-term
interest rates decreased in Mexico, they did so to a
lesser extent than in other emerging economies.
He/she pointed out that although Mexico’s favorable

7


-----

interest rate spread with respect to that observed in
other emerging economies, has mitigated the
adjustment of the exchange rate in the presence of
shocks, the peso exchange rate against the US
dollar has accumulated an appreciation similar to
that observed in other Latin American currencies in
2019, which evidences the risk perception about the
Mexican economy.

Most members warned that there are factors that
may deteriorate the performance of financial assets
in Mexico, such as the risks regarding the credit
outlook of the sovereign debt and that of Pemex, as
well as the uncertainty regarding the US-Mexico
bilateral relationship. One member noted that, given
the aforementioned risks, domestic assets are being
traded at a discount vis-à-vis other similar emerging
economies’ assets. Another member considered that
the risks for domestic financial markets have been
decreasing, although he/she acknowledged that
those related to global and domestic economic
weakness, as well as with Pemex’s situation, remain
latent.

Some members stated that the credit rating of both
sovereign debt and Pemex’s debt were downgraded
by one rating agency and that their credit outlook was
revised from stable to negative by another one. One
member pointed out that it is worth recalling that,
although several Mexican financial assets and their
derivatives —such as the credit default swaps— had
already discounted the adjustment from BBB+ to
BBB since several months ago, there is still concern
regarding additional adjustments due to possible
vulnerabilities coming from public finances. Another
member noted that the rating agencies highlighted
the following aspects to justify their decisions on their
sovereign credit rating: i) the uncertainty regarding
the implementation of public policies and their impact
on investor’s confidence; ii) the changes and lack of
clarity as to the energy policy; iii) the risks regarding
Pemex’s financial situation and the uncertainty about
its business plan; and, iv) the implications of the
above described factors on public finances and on
economic growth.

Most members considered that addressing the
deterioration of both the sovereign credit rating and
that of Pemex is necessary. With regards to this
company, one member highlighted that the rating
agency that recently downgraded its credit rating
mentioned that such adjustment reflected: i) the
downgrading of the sovereign credit rating; ii) the
continuing deterioration of Pemex’s financial profile;
and, iii) the lack of investment to revert the decline in
its production capacity. Another member stated that


the fact that the decision to revise downwards the
credit rating or outlook of Pemex’s debt was taken
before the company announced its business plan is
noteworthy. The majority emphasized that Pemex’s
risk premium has deteriorated significantly. One
member attributed such deterioration to the rating
agencies’ actions, pointing out that, although the
increase of Pemex’s debt risk premium has affected
its financial cost, the impact on the financial cost of
the sovereign debt has been limited, given that the
sovereign debt risk premium decreased even while
that of Pemex’s was increasing. Some members
noted that markets are discounting the loss of
Pemex’s investment grade by a second credit rating
agency. They stated that the confirmation of this
event might lead to forced sales of the company’s
debt by investors, a process that may already be
underway. One member mentioned that this would
complicate even further not only the company’s
financing capacity but of the overall economy, it
could affect volatility in financial markets and
compromise the consolidation of public finances.
He/she noted that the price of Pemex’s external debt
has deteriorated in the secondary market, which may
imply a lower availability of resources in the future.
Another member argued that Pemex’s loss of
investment grade would not necessarily lead to
episodes of financial volatility since such risk has
already been discounted and the adjustments in
investors’ portfolios may take place gradually.

In this context, most members noted the importance
of preventing an additional deterioration in the credit
rating of Pemex’s debt. They noted that to improve
the situation of the company, a clear and credible
business plan is necessary, together with a mediumand long-term strategy focused on value generation
and that improves the company’s access to financial
markets. Nevertheless, one member warned that a
solution for the company’s problems has not been
offered yet. He/she noted that only isolated
measures that affect the development of the energy
sector have been announced, such as the
cancellation of the last bidding rounds; the
construction of the oil refinery in Dos Bocas; and the
international arbitration process started by CFE
against the builders of the Texas-Tuxpan sea-bed
pipeline. Some members mentioned that in case the
actions taken to reactivate oil production and restore
the health of Pemex’s finances are insufficient, this
would have important implications for public finances
and in general for the economy. One member
deemed it increasingly urgent to implement

measures that address the challenges faced by this
company. Some members warned that CFE’s

8


-----

financial situation also contributes to increase the
vulnerability of public finances in Mexico.

Most members highlighted that the current

environment continues to pose significant mediumand long-term risks that could affect the country’s
macroeconomic conditions, its capacity to grow, and
the economy’s price formation process. One member
noted that in light of a highly complex external
situation and insufficient actions domestically to
offset such complexity, the impact on investment and
on potential growth might be significant, in an
environment in which the latter seems to already be
decreasing. In this regard, such member highlighted
that private sector analysts’ expectations for
Mexico’s economic growth rate over the next ten
years lay only slightly above 2%. In this context, the
majority pointed out that, in addition to a prudent and
firm monetary policy, public finances must be
consolidated in a sustainable way. One member
argued that such consolidation is of paramount
importance given that monetary policy’s room for
maneuver increases in an environment of robust
public finances. The majority added that measures to
foster an environment of confidence and certainty for
investment and higher productivity should be
adopted, with one member pointing out the adoption
of new technologies and the strengthening of human
capital. Most members also mentioned that

strengthening the rule of law, tackling corruption, and
fighting insecurity are equally imperative. In this
context, one member underlined the need to avoid
the combination of an economic deceleration along
with actions that could affect price formation, and
pressure inflation above its target.

As to public finances, most members warned that, in
an environment of lower revenues, fiscal policy has
little room for maneuver. In particular, one member
pointed out that public sector’s total budgetary
revenues, including Pemex, CFE, and other
government agencies under direct budgetary control,
were below the expected in the program. He/she
noted that such reduction was due to the contraction
of the oil production platform and to transitory
decreases in VAT tax collection. He/she also stated
that this situation may worsen if there is a greaterthan-expected economic deceleration. In addition,
he/she emphasized that there is an under-spending
of programmable budgetary resources in various
items and that projections suggest that public sector
revenues and spending will end the year with
negative deviations vis-à-vis the levels programmed
for 2019. Under such scenario, he/she noted that the
public sector has limited room for maneuver to offset
the revenue shortfalls. He/she emphasized that this


may lead to a policy of raising the IEPS for fuels
and/or to withdrawals from the Budget Revenue
Stabilization Fund (Fondo de Estabilización de los
_Ingresos Presupuestales, FEIP). Nevertheless,_
another member added that, given its explicit
commitment to fiscal consolidation, the federal
government would not have margin to finance the
deficit with debt nor have room for adjusting
spending, which has already been reallocated to
social programs that are difficult to cut down. In this
regard, he/she highlighted that the lack of clarity and
predictability regarding the direction of several public
policies in strategic sectors, and an expenditure
policy that has favored the redistribution of resources
towards social transfers in detriment of public
investment, are factors that continue undermining
investors’ confidence and putting pressure on the
dynamics of the economy and of public finances.

Finally, one member highlighted that domestic banks
have a robust capitalization level and a high liquidity
level. He/she mentioned that these indicators reflect
that banks are capable of responding to unexpected
losses or stress situations that may arise in the short
run. He/she concluded that the stress tests published
in the last Financial Stability Report confirm the
resilience of the Mexican banking system.

The majority considered that the current monetary
policy stance is consistent with the convergence of
inflation to the target. However, they expressed their
concern about the resistance to decline displayed by
core inflation. One member stressed that such
persistence has occurred despite the tight monetary
policy stance and has been an obstacle to headline
inflation’s convergence to the target. Another
member argued that the core component is the one
that more adequately reflects inflationary pressures
in the economy and that it has remained at high
levels despite the slowdown of economic activity.
The majority mentioned that it is essential to monitor
closely the evolution of core inflation and that it
resumes its downward trend. One member added
that core inflation’s persistence, coupled with the
volatility of non-core inflation and a balance of risks
for inflation that, in his/her opinion, is biased to the
upside, could lead to a persistence of long-term
headline inflation expectations above the target or to
a de-anchoring of such expectations. Another
member expressed his/her concern about the level
of short-, medium- and long-term inflation

expectations reflecting a lack of credibility in the
central bank’s actions.

The majority pointed out that expectations of a more
accommodative monetary policy stance by the US

9


-----

Federal Reserve provides Banco de México greater
room for maneuver. One member pointed out that
monetary policy in Mexico is one of the most
restrictive among emerging economies, adding that
since May 2017, the policy rate in Mexico has been
adjusted in a synchronized manner with that of the
Fed, in such a way that the yield spread between
Mexico and US interest rates has remained at
around 575 basis points. He/she considered that
given the latest developments observed in the path
of inflation, economic growth and financial stability
risks, a widening yield spread cannot be justified, so
that in the event of a monetary policy easing in the
United States, Banco de México should act
accordingly, so that the current spread is maintained.
Another member added that if a cut in the Fed’s
target range for the federal funds rate were to take
place, it would represent a challenge for monetary
policy conduction in Mexico, since a widening in the
yield spread between both countries could generate
and additional tightening in monetary conditions in
Mexico, although he/she stressed that this has not
yet materialized.

Some members mentioned that given the complex
environment faced by inflation, it would not be
convenient to ease the monetary policy stance if
inflation does not show a clear trend towards the 3%
target. One of them added that the possibility of weak
economic growth coupled with persistent inflationary
pressures in which the convergence of inflation to its
target is delayed cannot be ruled out, and that if such
a scenario materializes, monetary policy decisionmaking would become more complex. Another
member argued that a downward adjustment of 25
basis points to the policy rate is necessary, given
inflation’s favorable evolution, unfavorable

expectations regarding economic growth and the
outlook of a monetary policy easing in the United
States. He/she added that, in his/her view, this
adjustment in Mexico’s monetary policy stance would
be consistent with the convergence of inflation to its
target within the time frame in which monetary policy
operates. He/she argued that the monetary policy
statement should highlight that risks for inflation have
decreased since December of last year, that inflation
has behaved as expected by the central bank, and
that it is foreseen to attain the inflation target in the
near future. He/she mentioned that this would send
a message of certainty and confidence to markets
that inflation is under control and on the path towards
the target. In this regard, he/she stated that the
information provided by the central bank to economic
agents serves to shape their own beliefs regarding
the state of the economy, and therefore the tone of
the central bank’s communications can become a


mechanism for coordinating or confirming private
agents’ beliefs. He/she stressed that the pessimistic
tone of the recent monetary policy statements cannot
be ruled out as being one of the reasons behind the
recent increase in inflation expectations. Another
member pointed out that if the behavior of inflation
continues to be aligned with the convergence to its
target, it will be necessary to begin a cycle of
monetary policy easing in a relatively short horizon.
He/she pointed out that there is the risk of
maintaining a tight monetary policy for a prolonged
period, to the detriment of economic growth, public
finances and financial costs. However, he/she added
that given the inflation risks, the decision to begin a
cycle of policy rate cuts must be taken very prudently
and cautiously. He/she pointed out that a premature
easing of monetary policy could generate volatility in
domestic financial markets and affect key variables
for financial stability. In light of the aforementioned,
he/she considered that, although the policy rate
should not be adjusted on this occasion, the
monetary policy statement should have a less
restrictive tone.

Most members agreed that monetary policy faces a
complex juncture in which a high degree of
uncertainty prevails and in which certain factors are
putting downward pressure on inflation, while others
are pushing it upwards. One member highlighted that
it is to be expected that over the next months, the
path of inflation will be very much influenced by the
combined impact of the deceleration of economic
activity, supply shocks from several sources, and the
persistence of a situation of high uncertainty with
potential effects on the exchange rate. He/she
mentioned that the incidence in opposite directions
on inflation of the above mentioned factors requires
monetary policy to be managed with extreme
caution. Such member underlined that there is still no
evidence of a decline in core inflation and that
although some inflation risks have slightly

decreased, others such as those stemming from the
trade relationship with the U.S. and with the
sovereign and Pemex’s credit rating persists or have
even intensified. He/she pointed out that under such
circumstances, there is the risk that the path of the
exchange rate exhibits fluctuations that are

incompatible with the attainment of the inflation
target in 2020. Such member concluded that the
monetary policy adjustment must be based on
convincing evidence of a sustained decrease of
inflation towards the target, and that in an
environment of increased economic slack and such
high levels of uncertainty, Banco de México’s
Governing Board must be prepared to respond in
case of surprising events. Another member stated

10


-----

that although greater economic slack, together with
an external environment of prevailing lower interest
rates and a certain lack of vigor in the outlook for
growth, point to an environment of lower inflationary
pressures within the time frame in which monetary
policy operates, there are other elements that are
also influencing the domestic economy and price
formation, especially when headline and core
inflation are at levels above 3%, and have shown a
resistance to decline, and several risks are still
present. The majority agreed that under such
challenges the central bank must maintain a prudent
and cautious policy stance and monitor closely all
determinants of inflation, its outlook, its balance of
risks and the possible materialization of certain risks,
in order to guarantee the convergence of inflation to
its target. Finally, they stated that the central bank's
communication should reflect that it will be attentive
to taking the required monetary policy actions based
on incoming information, and will act in a timely
manner to guarantee the orderly convergence of
inflation to its goal.

**3. MONETARY POLICY DECISION**

To guide its monetary policy actions, Banco de
México’s Governing Board follows closely the
development of inflation vis-à-vis its forecasted
trajectory, taking into account the monetary policy
stance and the time frame in which monetary policy
operates. In this process, it uses available
information on all inflation determinants as well as on
medium- and long-term inflation expectations,
including the balance of risks for such factors.
Monetary policy must also respond prudently if for
any reason the uncertainty faced by the economy
increases considerably. In this context, considering
that the current monetary policy is consistent with the
convergence of inflation to its target within the time
frame in which monetary policy operates, Banco de
México’s Governing Board decided by majority to
maintain the target for the overnight interbank
interest rate at 8.25%. One member voted to reduce
the target by 25 basis points. Considering the
challenges to consolidate a low and stable inflation
as well as those the economy’s price formation is
subject to and the amount of slack in the economy,
the Governing Board will continue to follow closely all
factors and elements of uncertainty that have an
impact on inflation and its outlook and will take the
required actions based on incoming information so
that the policy rate is consistent with the orderly
convergence of headline inflation to Banco de
México’s target within the time frame in which
monetary policy operates.


Banco de México’s Governing Board will maintain a
prudent monetary policy stance and, under the
current environment of uncertainty, will follow closely
the potential pass-through of exchange rate
fluctuations to prices, Mexico’s monetary policy
stance relative to that of the U.S. —in an external
environment that it is still subject to risks— and the
behavior of slack conditions and cost-related
pressures in the economy. In the presence and
possible persistence of factors that, by their nature,
involve risks to both inflation and its expectations,
monetary policy will be adjusted in a timely and firm
manner to achieve the convergence of inflation to its
3% target and to strengthen the anchoring of
medium- and long-term inflation expectations so that
they attain such target.

**4. VOTING**

Alejandro Díaz de León-Carrillo, Irene EspinosaCantellano, Javier Eduardo Guzmán-Calafell and
Jonathan Ernest Heath-Constable voted in favor of
maintaining the target for the overnight interbank rate
at 8.25%.

Gerardo Esquivel-Hernández voted in favor of
reducing the target for the overnight interbank rate by
25 basis points to set it at a level of 8.00%.

**5. DISSENTING VOTES**

**Vote. Gerardo Esquivel-Hernández**

Inflation has exhibited a better performance than the
one forecasted in previous Quarterly Reports and is
on a convergent path to Banco de México’s target.
Cumulative inflation for the first semester of the year
will fluctuate around 0.30% and will be the second
lowest figure so far this century. Annual figures for
both headline as well as core inflation have been
influenced (either directly or indirectly) by the increase
in energy prices during the second semester of 2018.
These effects, however, must fade in the second half
of the year. Thus, I estimate that by December 2019,
inflation will be very close to or even below 3.4%, that
is, in line with the forecasts of last year’s Quarterly
Reports. In addition to the above, there are other
elements that must be considered in the

determination of the target interest rate: the
announced loosening of the monetary policy of
advanced economies and the noticeable economic
deceleration in the country. These factors open a
space to be able to cut the interest rate in 25 basis
points without putting at risk nor compromising the
fundamental mandate of Banco de México.

11


-----

**ANNEX**

The information in this Annex was prepared for this
meeting by the staff of Banco de México’s General
Directorate of Economic Research and General
Directorate of Central Bank Operations. It does not
necessarily reflect the considerations of the

members of the Governing Board as to the monetary
policy decision.

**A.1. External conditions**

**A.1.1. World economic activity**

Available information suggests that the world
economy decelerated during the second quarter of
the year, due to moderation of growth in some of the
main advanced and emerging economies. Similarly,
indicators on world trade, business confidence, and
investment have also weakened further over the last
months, partly due to the environment of greater
uncertainty regarding the trade relations between the
United States and some of its main trade
partners. Additionally, forward-looking indicators,
such as the manufacturing and services Purchasing
Managers’ Index (PMI), suggest a further weakening
of the global economy during the following months
(Chart 1). The scenario described above has led to
new downward adjustments in the global growth
outlook by several international organizations.
Headline and core inflation in the main advanced
economies have remained at low levels and their
expectations have decreased. The aforementioned
environment has strengthened expectations that
central banks of the major economies will adopt more
accommodative monetary policy stances.

Notwithstanding all of the above, the balance of risks
for the global economy remains biased to the
downside. In particular, there is a possibility of further
escalations of trade tensions between the United
States and its main trade partners, that the weakness
of some of the major economies extends for longer
than previously foreseen, that new episodes of
volatility arise in international financial markets, and
that certain political and geopolitical risks intensify,
including the possibility of a disorderly exit of the
United Kingdom from the European Union (Brexit)
and the escalation of tensions between the United
States and Iran.


**Chart 1**

**Global Purchasing Managers’ Index**

Diffusion indices, s. a.

58 Manufacturing

Services

56

54

52

50

48

46

May

44

2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019

s. a. / Seasonally adjusted figures.
Source: IHS Markit.

In the United States, available indicators suggest that
GDP will grow at a seasonally adjusted annualized
quarterly rate below the 3.1% registered during the
first quarter (Chart 2). These expectations can be
associated with the greater weakness exhibited by
both residential and non-residential investment and,
as expected, with a sharp deacummulation of
inventories and a lower growth of net exports. In
contrast, private consumption and public spending
are expected to rebound, thus mitigating the weak
performance of the aforementioned indicators.

**Chart 2**

**United States: Real GDP and Components**

Annualized quarterly percentage change and

contributions in percentage points, s. a.

6

4

2

0

-2

Public spending Net exports

-4 Inventories Non-residential investment

Residential investment Private consumption

Total

-6

I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV

2016 2017 2018 2019 2020

s. a. / Seasonally adjusted figures.
Source: Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA) and Blue Chip.

U.S Industrial production grew at a monthly rate of
0.4% in May, after having contracted 0.4% in April.
The improvement in May was mainly associated with
the strong recovery of 2.1% in electricity and gas
production, given that the mining and manufacturing
sectors grew at more moderate rates of 0.1 and
0.2%, respectively. The lack of vigor of

manufacturing continued to reflect the impact of trade

12

|Chart 2 United States: Real GDP and Components Annualized quarterly percentage change and contributions in percentage points, s. a.|Col2|Col3|
|---|---|---|
|Public spending Net exports Inventories Non-residential investment Residential investment Private consumption Total|||
|I II III I 2016|V I II III IV I II III IV I 2017 2018|II III IV I II III IV 2019 2020|


-----

tensions and the weakness of world growth. In
addition, forward-looking indicators, such as the
component of new orders of the Purchasing
Managers Index (PMI), continue to suggest that the
weakness of manufacturing production may persist
in the short run.

The US labor market exhibited signs of lower
strength. In particular, the non-farm payroll increased
by only 75,000 jobs in May, while employment figures
for March and April were revised downwards; thus,
the three-month moving average decreased from
238,000 jobs in January 2019 to 151,000 in May.
Nevertheless, the US unemployment rate remained
at 3.6% in May, while other indicators such as job
openings and initial unemployment insurance claims
continued to reflect tight labor market conditions. In
this context, both nominal and real wages continued
to grow.

In the euro area, although private consumption
remained strong, driven by the increase in
employment and wages, as well as by the high levels
of consumer confidence, available figures point to a
lower GDP growth during the second quarter. Such
weakness is related to a further deterioration of
international trade stemming, in turn, from lower
world growth. In this regard, forward-looking
indicators, such as the Manufacturing PMI and
business confidence, suggest that this sector’s
lassitude may persist in the following months.
Nevertheless, the labor market continued to
strengthen, as it displayed a decline in the
unemployment rate from 7.7 in March to 7.6% in
April.

In Japan, available indicators for the second quarter
of 2019 show a moderation of economic activity, after
having increased at a seasonally adjusted

annualized quarterly rate of 2.2% in the first quarter
of this year. The weakening of economic activity in
this country seems to be related to the continuous
deterioration of net exports, while consumption and
public investment appear to be contributing positively
to growth. The negative trend of the Manufacturing
Purchasing Managers’ Index intensified, increasing
the possibility of a contraction in that sector during
the second quarter. In this context, the strengthening
of Japan’s labor market moderated its pace, although
it remained tight. Indeed, the unemployment rate in
April remained at 2.4%, in line with the average of the
past year, although wage growth decreased.

In emerging economies, forward-looking indicators
suggest a moderation of economic activity during the
second quarter. In China, economic activity


indicators reflect a slight weakening during the
second quarter, after the stabilization of the rate of
GDP growth observed during the first quarter. The
main European emerging economies, notably
Turkey, Hungary, and Poland, are also expected to
weaken. In turn, timely indicators suggest an upturn
of economic activity in countries such as India,
Korea, the Philippines, and some of the main Latin
American economies.

As for international commodity prices, these have, for
the most part, followed a downward trend.
Particularly, crude oil prices decreased until midJune as a result of several factors that affected the
global demand for crude oil, such as the escalation
of trade tensions between the United States and its
main trade partners; the unexpected surge in US
crude oil and fuel inventories; and, the slowdown of
global economic activity. Nevertheless, in recent
weeks, the intensification of geopolitical tensions
between the United States and Iran contributed to a
partial recovery of such prices. Industrial metal prices
continued to fall, given the lower dynamism in
industrial activity worldwide and the U.S.-China trade
standoff. In contrast, grain prices, particularly wheat
and maize, rose sharply due to the unfavorable
climate conditions for crop sowing observed recently
in the United States.

**A.1.2. Monetary policy and international financial**
**markets**

In most advanced economies, core inflation has
remained relatively stable and at low levels (Chart 3).
The possibility that economic activity continues to
weaken and that inflation expectations decline further
may increase the risks of persistently low inflation
rates. In the United States, the annual rate of change
of the personal consumption expenditure deflator
(PCE) remained below the Federal Reserve’s target,
while core inflation, as measured by the Consumer
Price Index (CPI), continued to decrease in May,
going from 2.1 to 2%. In the euro area, core inflation
has remained at low levels, in part due to the
apparent decision by firms to reduce their profit
margins rather than to raise consumer prices in the
face of gradual increases in their labor costs. In
recent weeks, inflation expectations implicit in market
instruments for advanced economies have

decreased, among which those for the euro area that
are at historically low levels, stand out (Chart 4).

13


-----

**Chart 3**

**Selected Advanced Economies: Core Inflation**


**Chart 5**

**Reference Rates and Implied Trajectories in**

**OIS Curves[1/]**

Percent


3

2

1


0

-1


United States Euro area

Japan 1/ Canada 2/

United Kingdom May


2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019

1/ Excludes fresh food, energy, and the direct effect of the consumption tax
increase.
2/ Excludes food, energy, and the effect of adjustments on indirect taxes
(CPI-XFET).
Source: Haver Analytics, BEA, Statistical Office of the European Union
(Eurostat), and Statistics Bureau (Japan).

**Chart 4**

**Selected Advanced Economies: Inflation Implied**

**in 5-year Inflation Swaps in Five Years**

Percent

4.0%

3.5%

3.0% United States

Euro area

United Kingdom

2.5%

2.0%

1.5%

1.0%

D J F M A M J J A S O N D J F M A M J

Note: An inflation swap is a contract in which one of the parties is bound to
pay the expected inflation rate (fixed rate) and receive the realized inflation
rate during the period (variable rate).The vertical line represents the day of
the latest monetary policy decision.
Source: Bloomberg.

The aforementioned environment has strengthened
the expectation that the central banks of the major
economies will adopt more accommodative

monetary policy stances, especially if risks to
economic growth in their countries intensify (Chart 5).

|d Advanced Economies: Core Annual percentage change United States Euro area Japan 1/ Canada 2/ United Kingdom 2015 2016 2017 2018|Inflation May 2019|
|---|---|

|Col1|― Bank of Canada ― ECB deposit rate ― OIS implicit trajectory 26 Jun 2019 --- OIS implicit trajectory 13 May 2019 --- OIS implicit trajectory 31 Dec 2018|Col3|Col4|Col5|
|---|---|---|---|---|
||||||
||||||
||||||
||||||


1/ OIS: Fixed floating interest rate swap where the fixed interest rate is the
effective overnight reference rate.

- In the case of the US observed reference rate, the average interest rate of
the federal funds target range is used (2.25% - 2.50%).
Source: Bloomberg.

In its June meeting, the US Federal Reserve left the
target range for the federal funds rate unchanged at
2.25-2.5% as expected, although one member voted
for reducing it by 25 basis points. In its policy
statement, the Federal Open Market Committee
(FOMC) expressed that, although growth of
household spending appears to have picked up,
business investment has remained weak, while
inflation remains below its 2% target. The FOMC
mentioned that the uncertainty faced by the US
economy has increased, in a context in which there
is an absence of inflationary pressures and, hence,
its members will follow closely the economic
developments. The FOMC added that its members
would take the appropriate measures to sustain the
economic expansion with a strong labor market and
inflation at levels close to its 2% symmetric objective.
The median of the FOMC’s economic projections
reflected the expectation of lower growth for 2020
and a decline in headline and core inflation for 2019
and 2020. In this context, the median of its
projections on the policy rate suggest that it may
remain at its current level during 2019, although eight
out of seventeen members are anticipating a lower
target rate before the year ends. The median of the
policy rate for 2020 was also revised downwards
from 2.625 to 2.125%, while that for 2021, from 2.625
to 2.375%. Market instruments are anticipating
between two and three 25 basis points decreases for
this year and an additional one for 2020.

In its June meeting, the European Central Bank
(ECB) left its benchmark rate unchanged at 0%, its

14


3.0% **―― U.S. Federal Reserve* Bank of England** Forecasts

**― Bank of Japan**

2.5% **― Bank of Canada**

**― ECB deposit rate**
**― OIS implicit trajectory 26 Jun 2019**

2.0% **--- OIS implicit trajectory 13 May 2019**

**--- OIS implicit trajectory 31 Dec 2018**

1.5%

1.0%

0.5%

0.0%

-0.5%

-1.0% End of 2018 End of 2019 End of 2020

2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020


-----

key deposit facility rate at -0.4% and its key marginal
lending facility rate at 0.25%. Regarding its forward
guidance, the ECB stated that key interest rates will
remain at the current levels at least until the first half
of 2020, instead of until the end of 2019, as
expressed in its last policy statements. Later, as part
of his speech at the ECB Forum in Sintra, ECB
President Mario Draghi highlighted that, in the
absence of improvement in economic activity, such
that the convergence of inflation to the ECB target is
threatened, an additional monetary stimulus would
be required. In this regard, he pointed out that, if
necessary, the ECB has tools to ease its monetary
policy, stating that, in its last meeting, some
measures were discussed, such as the possibility of
adjusting the bias and conditionality of its forward
guidance, cutting its key interest rates, and extending
its targeted longer-term refinancing operations
(TLTRO).

In its June meeting, the Bank of Japan left its shortterm policy interest rate unchanged at -0.1% and its
long-term interest rate (indexed to its 10-year bond)
at 0%. Although this central bank stated that the
economy is expected to continue growing at a
moderate pace, it highlighted that external risks will
continue to be significant. As to its forward guidance,
the Bank of Japan reaffirmed that it will keep shortand long-term interest rates at extremely low levels
until at least the spring of 2020, although it
underscored that it will assess the risks to its
conduction of monetary policy and make the
appropriate adjustments, taking into account the
developments regarding economic activity, prices,
and financial conditions. Nevertheless, in a press
conference, Governor Kuroda mentioned that the
Bank of Japan will ease its monetary policy stance if
the upward trend of inflation weakens.

In its May meeting, the Bank of Canada left its policy
interest rate unchanged at 1.75%, as expected. In its
communication, this central bank declared that the
Canadian economy has behaved in accordance with
its estimates and that available figures suggest a
rebound of economic activity during the second
quarter of 2019, after the weakening of economic
activity observed in the last part of 2018 and early
2019. However, it argued that, in an environment of
escalating trade risks, an accommodative monetary
policy stance remains appropriate. The Bank of
Canada also highlighted that it will closely follow the
development of household spending, oil markets,
and trade policies worldwide. In this environment,
market variables incorporate a cut in its policy
interest rate in the next twelve months.


In its June meeting, the Bank of England left its base
rate (Bank rate) unchanged at 0.75%. This central
bank emphasized that the latest figures on economic
activity are consistent with its May projections,
although it acknowledged that downward risks have
intensified, particularly the higher possibility of a nodeal exit of the United Kingdom from the European
Union and the growing uncertainty regarding the
outlook for the global economy. With regard to its
monetary policy, the Bank of England reaffirmed that
although the most appropriate stance continues to be
that of a gradual and limited increase of the policy
rate, such rate will be adjusted in whatever direction
is necessary. In particular, it stated that this
adjustment will depend on the conditions under
which the United Kingdom exits from the European
Union and its consequent impact on aggregate
supply and demand and on the pound sterling
exchange rate.

In most emerging economies, inflation increased
driven by the rise in energy prices in the first months
of 2019, and recently, in food prices. Nevertheless,
core inflation has remained low, and only with certain
exceptions, without significant changes (Chart 6). In
this context, some central banks started or continued
easing their monetary policy stances. In particular,
the Central Bank of India cut its policy interest rate in
a context in which the negative output gap has
widened and inflation is below target; the Central
Bank of Chile cut its monetary policy rate,
highlighting that economic growth during the first
quarter was below forecast; and the Central Bank of
the Russian Federation lowered its key rates,
emphasizing that it may further reduce the rate once
or twice in the remainder of 2019. The People’s Bank
of China adopted additional measures to increase
the liquidity ratio of small-sized banks.

**Chart 6**

**Emerging Economies: Core Inflation**

Annual percentage change

12 Brazil China

Russia Mexico

10 South Africa Poland

Thailand Philippines

8 Chile India

6

4

2

0

May

-2

2016 2017 2018 2019

Source: Haver Analytics.

15


-----

Expectations of the event that a more

accommodative monetary policy stance will be
adopted by the central banks of some of the major
advanced economies, led to a decline in interest
rates throughout the entire yield curve and to an
increase in risk appetite in international financial
markets (Chart 7). In advanced economies, stock
market indices registered moderate gains in
anticipation of the possibility of lower financing costs
in the near future, while the US dollar depreciated
slightly against most currencies, given expectations
that the Federal Reserve will reduce its target rate in
the coming months. In this context, the prices of
financial assets of emerging economies overall
registered a positive performance, with a slight
appreciation of their currencies, a decrease in
interest rates of government securities, and a certain
recovery of most stock market indices (Chart 8). As
to capital flows to these economies, they exhibited
mixed results, with inflows to debt markets and
outflows from stock markets.

**Chart 7**

**Change in Selected Financial Indicators**

**(May 13, 2019 – June 26, 2019)**

Percent, basis points


**Chart 8**

**Emerging Economies: Financial Assets**

**Performance (May 13, 2019 – June 24, 2019)**

Percent, basis points


20%

15%

10%

5%

0%


40

30

20

10

0


-5%

-10%

-15%

-20%

-25%


-10

-20

-30

-40

-50


1/ MSCI Emerging Markets Index (includes 24 countries).
2/ DXY: Weighted average of the nominal exchange rate of the six main
world-traded currencies (calculated by Intercontinental Exchange, ICE) with
the following weights: EUR (57.6%), JPY (13.6%), GBP (11.9%), CAD
(9.1%), SEK (4.2%), and CHF (3.6%).
3/ J.P. Morgan Index constructed from a weighted average of the nominal
exchange rate of emerging economies’ currencies with the following
weights: TRY (8.3%), RUB (8.3%), HUF (8.3%), ZAR (8.3%), BRL (11.1%),
MXN (11.1%), CLP (11.1%), CNH (11.1%), INR (11.1%), and SGD (11.1%).
Source: Bloomberg and Intercontinental Exchange (ICE).


Note: Interest rates correspond to interest rate swaps for 2-year/10-year Note: Interest rates correspond to interes rate swaps for maturities of 2 and 10 years. For Argentina, because of
maturities. In the case of Argentina, rates in US dollars are used since they
are the most liquid ones and those that reflect more adequately the
performance of the fixed income market in that country.
Source: Bloomberg.

Going forward, market participants will remain
attentive to the evolution of several risk factors that
may lead to higher volatility and to a deterioration of
financial market conditions. Among those that stand
out are an unfavorable outcome of trade negotiations
between the U.S. and its main trade partners; the risk
of a sharper deceleration of economic activity in a
context in which the scope of action of central banks
is limited; and, an escalation of geopolitical tensions
worldwide.

**A.2. Current situation of the Mexican economy**

**A.2.1. Mexican markets**

Since Banco de Mexico’s latest monetary policy
decision to date, the prices of financial assets in
Mexico underwent episodes of volatility associated
with different events that took place in the country.
Among those that stand out are:

  - The announcement by the US government of
the potential imposition of tariffs on all
Mexican imports, which was averted given
the temporary agreement reached between
both governments on matters of migration.



- The downgrading of the long-term sovereign
credit rating by Fitch Ratings from BBB+ to
BBB and the later adjustment of Petróleos
Mexicanos’ (Pemex) credit rating from BBBto BB+. With this adjustment, Pemex’s debt
lost its investment grade in this credit rating
agency’s scale.

16


-----

  - Although Moody’s rating agency confirmed
its A3 long-term foreign-currency debt rating
for Mexico, it reviewed the country’s outlook
from stable to negative for both the
sovereign and Pemex’s credit ratings.

Thus, the peso exchange rate fluctuated widely
against the US dollar, reaching a maximum level of
19.80 pesos per US dollar. Nevertheless, in recent
weeks, given the agreement reached with the United
States, which averted the previously announced
tariffs, and the greater risk appetite among investors
in view of the outlook for more accommodative
monetary policies in advanced economies, the peso
exchange rate appreciated by 0.10%, ending the
period at 19.18 pesos per US dollar (Chart 9).
Similarly, both FX spot and forward outright trading
conditions deteriorated after the announcement of
the possible trade tariffs on Mexican products, and
stabilized after the migration agreement was reached
(Chart 10).


**Chart 10**

**Mexican Foreign Exchange Market Trading**

**Conditions**

Index (5-day moving average) and pesos/US dollar


Note: Index calculated using the mean, volatility, skewness, kurtosis, bidask spread and mean of simple differentials, all of them related to quotes of
intraday operations, and the total traded volume. After obtaining this data,
the percentiles since 2011 are calculated and the average of the seven
percentiles for each day is considered. The black vertical line represents the
date of Banco de México’s latest monetary policy decision.
Source: Banco de México with data from Reuters.

As for the peso exchange rate, expectations by
several financial institutions’ forecasters were
adjusted upwards. For the end of 2019 such
expectations were revised from 19.85 to 19.90 pesos
and from 20.00 to 20.23 pesos per US dollar for the
end of 2020 (Chart 11).

**Chart 11**

**Analysts’ Mexican Peso Exchange Rate**

**Expectations for Each End of Quarter**

Pesos/US dollar


90

80

70

60

50

40

30

20


22.0

21.5

21.0

20.5

20.0

19.5

19.0

18.5

18.0

17.5

17.0


J F A M J J A O N D J M A M J J S O N D F M A M J A S O N J F M M J


2016 2017 2018


2019


**Chart 9**

**Mexican Markets’ Performance and Trading**

**Conditions**

Percent, pesos/US dollar, index and basis points


9.5

9.0


25

20


46,000

45,000

44,000

43,000

42,000

41,000

40,000


400

350

300

250

200

150

100

50

0


8.5

8.0


15

10


7.5

7.0


20.0

19.8

19.6

19.4

19.2

19.0

18.8

18.6

18.4


5

0


M Bono


Volatility


Range in year Range since last monetary policy decision 13-May-19 24-Jun-19


Note: For the Mexican peso volatility, the levels implied in 1-month
exchange rate options are considered. For interest rate, a Garch model (1,1)
of daily fluctuations in all the curve since 2007 is considered. For exchange
rate volatility, the Vimex published by MexDer is considered.
Source: Bloomberg and Proveedora Integral de Precios (PIP).


22.5

22.0

21.5

21.0

20.5

**19.00** 20.0

19.5

19.0

18.5

18.0

17.5

D M J S D M IIQ 2019J IIIQ 2019S IVQ 2019D IQ 2020M


Bloomberg interquartile range Bloomberg expectations range

Mexican peso 2019 year-end forecast Citibanamex

Bloomberg median


Note: The black vertical line represents the date of Banco de México’s latest
monetary policy decision.
Source: Bloomberg and Citibanamex survey.

Interest rates on government securities decreased by
up to 69 basis points, primarily for medium and long
term instruments (Chart 12). This movement was
associated on the one hand to the adjustments
observed in most debt markets worldwide, which
were due to expectations that central banks of the

17


-----

main advanced economies will adopt a more
accommodative monetary policy and, on the other
hand, to the monetary policy stance adopted by
Banco de México given the environment of
inflationary risks that prevails in Mexico. The above
described occurred in a context in which trading
conditions deteriorated some days during the period
(Chart 13).

**Chart 12**

**Nominal Yield on Government Securities**

Percent, basis points


changes to the target rate for the monetary policy
decision of June. For the end of 2019, both
expectations implied by market rates and the median
of the last survey among economists foresee a
reduction of 25 basis points in the policy rate.

**Chart 14**

**Banxico Overnight Interbank Rate Implied in**

**TIIE IRS Curve**

Percent


8.50

8.25


8.00

7.75


7.50

7.25


7.00

6.75


2017         2018                 2019                      2020


Source: PIP.

**Chart 13**

**Mexican Government Debt Market Trading**

**Conditions and**

**Jun-27 Bond Rate**

Index (10-day moving average), percent


80

70

60

50

40

30

20

10

0


9.5

9.0

8.5

8.0

7.5

7.0

6.5

6.0

5.5

5.0


E F M A J J A S N D E F A M J J A O N D E M A M J A S O N E F M M J

2016 2017 2018 2019

Note: Index calculated with the changes in bonds’ interest rates, volatility of
events, bid-ask spread, the average of the differences in quotes of intra-day
operations, and the daily interbank and customer traded volume.
Considering the aforementioned, percentiles since 2016 and the average of
percentiles for every day are calculated. The vertical line represents the
date of Banco de México’s latest monetary policy decision.
Source: Banco de México with data from Bloomberg, PIP and brokerage
firms.

As to expectations regarding the path of the
monetary policy reference rate implied in the yield
curve, these remained unchanged vis-à-vis the levels
observed in the previous period (Chart 14). In this
regard, both expectations of the consensus of private
sector analysts surveyed by Citibanamex and those
implied by market instruments do not anticipate


Source: Banco de México with Bloomberg data.

**A.2.2. Economic activity in Mexico**

During the first quarter of 2019, Mexico’s GDP
contracted as compared to the previous period
(Chart 15). Available information suggests that in
April 2019 economic activity increased marginally on
a month-to-month basis vis-à-vis the previous month,
in an environment where most components of
aggregate demand remain weak, especially those
related to domestic demand.

Regarding the performance of external demand,
notwithstanding the weakening of world trade and the
escalation of trade tensions, at the beginning of the
second quarter of 2019 manufacturing exports
recovered slightly, as compared to the deceleration
observed in the two previous quarters (Chart 16).
Particularly, automotive exports remained on a
positive trajectory, while the rest of manufactures
rebounded, after the decreases registered in
previous months. By destination of exports, there
was an improvement in both those destined for the
United States and those for the rest of the world.

In relation to the evolution of domestic demand,
according to its monthly indicator, during the first
quarter of 2019 private consumption decelerated
relative to the dynamism observed during most of
2018. In particular, services consumption grew at a
lower rate, in contrast with the dynamism it had been

18


-----

displaying since the end of 2017, while the
consumption of goods continued to show a lack of
vigor. Timely indicators of consumption, albeit of less
coverage, such as earnings of retailers, imports of
consumer goods, and manufacturing sales in the
domestic market –which are highly correlated with
the consumption of nationally produced goods–
exhibited certain recovery in April 2019, as compared
to the lackluster performance observed in previous
months. In contrast, sales of light vehicles continued
on a negative trend. During the first quarter of 2019,
the negative trend that gross fixed investment had
been exhibiting since the beginning of 2018 became
more pronounced, despite the upturn registered in
both machinery and equipment spending and
construction investment in January, as this

responded to transitory factors. Indeed, investment
in machinery and equipment continued to exhibit
weakness, while that in construction trended
downwards.

**Chart 15**

**Gross Domestic Product**

Quarterly percentage change, s. a.

2

1

0

-1


**Chart 16**

**Total Manufacturing Exports**

Indices 2013 = 100, s. a.


160

150

140

130

120

110

100

90

80

J

2013


A J O J

2014


A J O J

2015


A J O J

2016


A J O J

2017


A J O J

2018


A J O J

2019


A


-2


I

2013


II III IV I

2014


II III IV I

2015


II III IV I

2016


II III IV I

2017


II III IV I

2018


Q-I 1/

II III IV I

2019


s. a. Seasonally adjusted figures.
Source: Mexico’s National Accounts System (SCNM, for its acronym in
Spanish), INEGI.


s. a. / Seasonally adjusted series and trend series based on data in nominal
USD. The former is represented by a solid line and the latter by a dotted
line.
Source: Banco de México with data from the Tax Administration Service
(SAT, for its acronym in Spanish), the Ministry of the Economy (SE, for its
acronym in Spanish), Banco de México, the National Institute of Statistics
and Geography (INEGI, for its acronym in Spanish), Mexico’s Merchandise
Trade Balance, and the National System of Statistical and Geographical
Information (SNIEG, for its acronym in Spanish).

On the production side, at the beginning of the
second quarter of 2019 economic activity continued
to show a lack of vigor, reflecting the lackluster
performance of services and primary activities (Chart
17). In particular, the unfavorable behavior of tertiary
activities in April is explained by the decline in trade;
professional, administrative and support services;
and accommodation and food services. Despite the
growth registered by industrial activity in April 2019,
it remains at levels similar to those observed at the
beginning of the year. Within industrial production,
both mining and construction continued trending
downwards (Chart 18). In contrast, manufacturing
exhibited certain recovery with respect to the
weakness it had been displaying since the end of
2018.

19


-----

**Chart 17**

**Global Indicator of Economic Activity**

Indices 2013 = 100, s. a.


120

115

110

105

100

95


140

130

120

110

100

90


**Chart 19**

**Output Gap Estimates [1/]**

**Excluding Oil Industry [4/ ]**

Potential output percentages, s. a.


J

2013


A J O J

2014


A J O J

2015


A J O J

2016


A J O J

2017


A J O J

2018


A J O J

2019


A


s. a. / Seasonally adjusted and trend series. The former is represented by a
solid line and the latter by a dotted line.
Source: Mexico’s National Accounts System (SCNM, for its acronym in
Spanish), INEGI.

**Chart 18**

**Industrial Activity [1/]**

Indices 2013 = 100, s. a.

120

110

100

90 Total

Mining (22.3%)

Manufacturing (49.7%)

80

Construction (23.3%)

Utilities (4.7%)

April

70

J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A

2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019

s. a. / Seasonally adjusted and trend series. The former is represented by a
solid line and the latter by a dotted line.
1/ Figures in paretheses correspond to its share in the total in 2013.
Source: Mexico’s National Accounts System (SCNM, for its acronym in
Spanish), INEGI.

As to the economy’s cyclical position, slack
conditions in the economy have loosened even
further than expected (Chart 19). Regarding labor
market conditions, both the national and urban
employment rates have been at levels above those
reported during most of 2018 (Chart 20). Likewise,
the growth rate of the number of IMSS-insured jobs
has continued to slow down markedly. With
information to the first quarter of 2019, as a result of
the behavior of productivity and real average
earnings, unit labor costs in the economy as a whole
have increased relative to the previous quarter. For
the manufacturing sector, despite the fall in unit labor
costs at the beginning of the second quarter of 2019,
these remain at high levels (Chart 21).


8 Global Economic Activity Indicator (IGAE) 2/

6 Gross Domestic Product 2/

95% Confidence interval 3/

4

2

0

-2

-4

-6

-8

-10

Q-I

April

-12

J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A

2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019


s. a. / Seasonally adjusted figures.
1/ Output gap estimated with a tail-corrected Hodrick-Prescott filter; see
Banco de México (2009), “Inflation Report (April-June 2009)", p.74.
2/ GDP flash figures up to the first quarter of 2019; IGAE figures up to April
2019, consistent with timely figures.
3/ Output gap confidence interval calculated with a method of unobserved
components.
4/ Excludes both oil and gas extraction, support activities for mining, and
petroleum and coal products' manufacturing.
Source: Prepared by Banco de México with INEGI data.

**Chart 20**

**National Unemployment Rate and Urban**

**Unemployment Rate**

Percent, s. a.

8.5

Urban unemployment rate

8.0

7.5 National unemployment rate

7.0

6.5

6.0

5.5

5.0

4.5

4.0

3.5

3.0

May

2.5

J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M

2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019

s. a. / Seasonally adjusted and trend series. The former is represented by a
solid line and the latter by a dotted line.
Source: National Survey of Occupations and Employment (ENOE, for its
acronym in Spanish), INEGI.

20


-----

**Chart 21**

**Global Indicator of Labor Productivity (IGPLE,**

**for its acronym in Spanish) and Unit Labor**

**Costs [1/]**

Indices 2013 = 100, s. a.

120

Productivity

115 Unit labor costs

110

105

100

95

Q-I

90

I II IIIIV I II IIIIV I II IIIIV I II IIIIV I II IIIIV I II IIIIV I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV I

2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019

s. a. / Seasonally adjusted and trend series. The former is represented by a
solid line and the latter by a dotted line. Trend series estimated by Banco
de México.
1/ Productivity based on hours worked.
Source: IGPLE published by INEGI. Unit labor costs prepared by Banco de
México with INEGI data.

In April 2019, domestic financing to the private nonfinancial sector displayed an annual real growth rate
similar to that observed in the first months of this
year. The same behavior was observed in the annual
growth rate of financing to non-financial firms and
lending to households, particularly in housing credit.
Meanwhile, the rate of expansion of consumer credit
continued to slow down. Regarding interest rates,
those related to firm financing did not change
significantly at the margin, although they remain at
high levels. In turn, interest rates of housing credit
have remained stable since the second quarter of
2017, whereas those of consumer credit have
remained practically unchanged during the same
period, with the exception of those of credit cards,
which have increased. With regards to portfolio
quality, firms and mortgage delinquency rates
remained at low levels, while those related to
consumption have followed a downward trend since
August 2018, although they remain at high levels.

**A.2.3. Developments in inflation and inflation**
**outlook**

Between April and the first fortnight of June 2019,
headline inflation fell from 4.41 to 4.00% (Chart 22
and Table 1). This result is explained by the
significant decline of non-core inflation, given that
core inflation remained at the same level.


F M A N F M A N F M A N F M A N F M A N F M A N F M A N F M A N F M A N F M

2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019

Source: Banco de México and INEGI.

In fact, core inflation was 3.87% both in April and in
the first fortnight of June 2019. Within this
component, the annual rates of change of food
merchandise prices continued trending upwards and
displaying high levels, while those of non-food
merchandise prices remained below 3% (Chart 23).
On the other hand, the annual rate of change of
services prices decreased -influenced by the fading
of an upward calendar effect, given that Easter this
year took place in April- although it still remains at
high levels (Chart 24), while the prices of several
food, transportation, and entertainment services
continue exhibiting annual rates of change of above
5% and, in some cases, increasingly higher.
Additionally, the annual growth rate of the housing
prices subindex continued trending upwards, albeit it
remains below 3%.

**Chart 23**

**Merchandise Core Price Subindex**

Annual percentage change

8

Food, beverages and tobacco

Non-food merchandise

7

6

5

4

3

2

1

F1 June

0

F M A N F M A N F M A N F M A N F M A N F M A N F M A N F M A N F M A N F M

2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019

Source: Banco de México and INEGI.

21


**Chart 22**

**Consumer Price Index**

Annual percentage change


13

12

11

10

9

8

7

6

5

4

3

2

1

0


F1 June


-----

**Chart 24**

**Merchandise and Services Core Price Subindex**

Annual percentage change

7

Merchandise

6 Services

5

4

3

2

1

F1 June

0

F M A N F M A N F M A N F M A N F M A N F M A N F M A N F M A N F M A N F M

2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019

Source: Banco de México and INEGI.

Regarding annual non-core inflation, it went from
6.08 to 4.34% between April and the first fortnight of
June, reflecting the lower increases observed in the
prices of fruits and vegetables as well as in energy
products, the latter partly due to the fall in their
international references. The lower increases in both
of these components more than offset the increases
registered in livestock product prices (Chart 25 and
Table 1).

**Chart 25**

**Non-core Price Subindex**
Annual percentage change

20 Non-core

Agriculture
Energy and government-authorized prices

15

10

5

0

F1 June

-5

F M A N F M A N F M A N F M A N F M A N F M A N F M A N F M A N F M A N F M

2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019

Source: Banco de México and INEGI.

Between April and May, the medians for short-term
inflation expectations drawn from Banco de México’s
Survey of Private Sector Forecasters exhibited mixed
adjustments. In particular, it stands out that, the
median of expectations for headline inflation for the
end of 2019 was adjusted upwards from 3.70 to
3.75%, while that for the end of 2020 remained at
3.60%. At the same time, the medians for core
inflation for the end of 2019 and for 2020 went from
3.56 to 3.60% and from 3.50 to 3.40%, respectively.
Thus, implied non-core inflation expectations for the
end of 2019 and 2020 were adjusted from 4.13 to
4.21% and from 3.91 to 4.22%, respectively. The


median of headline inflation expectations for the
medium term (next four years) remained at around
3.55%, while that for the longer terms (next five to
eight years) remained stable at 3.50%. It should be
noted that the median of medium-term core inflation
expectations remained close to 3.50%, while that for
the longer term remained at 3.40%, after being at
3.30% during most of 2018. Thus, between early May
and mid-June, short-, medium- and long-term
expectations for headline and core inflation did not
register significant adjustments, albeit in all cases
they remained above the 3% target. As for
information drawn from market instruments, mediumand long-term breakeven inflation remains at high
levels.

As for inflation risks, some have diminished and
others have gained relevance. To the upside, the
possibility that the peso exchange rate comes under
pressure stemming from external or domestic factors
stands out. Should the economy require adjustments
either to the real exchange rate or to medium- and
long-term interest rates, Banco de México will
contribute to orderly adjustments, in an effort to
prevent second-round effects on the economy’s price
formation process. Additional upward risks are the
threat by the United States to impose tariffs on
Mexican imports and the adoption of compensatory
measures, although this risk has decreased due to
the recent agreement; that energy prices revert their
downward trend or that agricultural and livestock
product prices exhibit increases; that public finances
deteriorate; that core inflation’s persistence

generates greater resistance for medium- and longterm inflation expectations to decline; and, that global
protectionist measures escalate. Also, given the
magnitude of several wage revisions, that costrelated pressures arise, insofar as such revisions
exceed productivity gains. As for risks to the
downside, it stands out that the peso exchange rate
appreciates, possibly associated with a context of
more accommodative monetary policy stances and
lower interest rates worldwide, or in case greater
certainty regarding the trade relation with the United
States is achieved. Another downside risk is that the
prices of certain goods included in the non-core
subindex register lower rates of change, as observed
in the case of energy goods, due to the greater
weakness exhibited by the world economy. In
addition, that slack conditions widen more than
anticipated, as suggested by the latest information on
economic activity, which might influence the behavior
of core inflation. Given the aforementioned, high
uncertainty persists regarding the risks that might
affect inflation.

22


-----

**Table 1**

**Consumer Price Index and Components**

Annual percentage change

**1st fortnight**

**Item** **April 2019** **May 2019**
**June 2019**

**CPI** **4.41** **4.28** **4.00**

**SubyacenteCore** **3.87** **3.77** **3.87**

**Merchandise** **3.74** **3.82** **3.94**

Food, beverages and tobacco 4.75 4.88 5.02

Non-food merchandise 2.77 2.78 2.88

**Services** **3.97** **3.69** **3.76**

Housing 2.78 2.83 2.86

Education (tuitions) 4.84 4.86 4.85

Other services 4.98 4.30 4.40

**No SubyacenteNon-core** **6.08** **5.78** **4.34**

**Agriculture** **4.77** **6.08** **5.82**

Fruits and vegetablesFruits abd vegetables 10.19 11.26 9.45

Meats, poultry, fish and eggs Livestock 1.38 3.29 4.26

**Energy and government-authorized prices Energéticos y Tarifas Aut. por Gobierno** **7.01** **5.50** **3.41**

Energy productsEnergy 8.58 6.51 3.34

Government-authorized pricesTarifas Autorizadas por Gobierno 3.52 3.64 3.74

Source: INEGI.


23


-----

-----

