-----

-----

**FOREWARNING**
This document is provided for the reader’s convenience only.
The translation from the official Spanish version was made
by Banco de México’s staff. Discrepancies may arise
between the original document in Spanish and its English
translation. For this reason, the original Spanish version is
the only official document.


**ERRATUM**
In this version of the Minutes there is a sentence that
has been corrected relative to the Minutes published
originally. The previous version stated in the first
paragraph of section 3, page 10:

"the Governing Board will take the necessary actions, in
_whatever direction is required, so that the reference rate is_
kept at a level consistent with the convergence of headline
inflation to Banco de México’s target within the time frame
in which monetary policy operates."

while the correct phrase is:

"the Governing Board will take the necessary actions so
that the reference rate is kept at a level consistent with the
convergence of headline inflation to Banco de México’s
target within the time frame in which monetary policy
operates."


**1. PLACE, DATE, AND PARTICIPANTS**

**1.1. Place:** Av. Cinco de Mayo Street no.2, 5[th] Floor,
Col. Centro, Mexico City

**1.2. Date of Governing Board meeting: February**
6, 2019

**1.3. Participants:**

Alejandro Díaz de León-Carrillo, Governor

Irene Espinosa-Cantellano, Deputy Governor

Gerardo Esquivel-Hernández, Deputy Governor

Javier Eduardo Guzmán-Calafell, Deputy Governor

Jonathan Ernest Heath-Constable, Deputy Governor

Carlos Manuel Urzúa-Macías, Secretary of Finance
and Public Credit.

Arturo Herrera-Gutiérrez, Undersecretary of Finance
and Public Credit.

Elías Villanueva-Ochoa, Secretary of the Governing
Board

Prior to this meeting, preliminary work by Banco de
México’s staff analyzing the economic and financial
environment, together with the developments in
inflation and the determinants and outlook for
inflation, was conducted and presented to the
Governing Board (see annex).


**2. ANALYSIS AND RATIONALE BEHIND THE**
**GOVERNING BOARD’S VOTING**

All members agreed that towards the end of 2018 the
world economy decelerated, with most advanced
and some emerging economies showing less
dynamism. One member mentioned that, although
the weakening of the global economy has been
persistent, it has occurred at a moderate rate. Some
members argued that such deceleration was sharper
than expected, due partly to the escalation of trade
disputes and to idiosyncratic and geopolitical factors.
Some members noted the negative performance that
coincident and leading indicators are recently
showing. One member pointed out the negative
evolution of industrial production, investment
spending, and global trade flows for advanced and,
more recently, for emerging economies. As for the
outlook for global economic activity, all members
stated that growth expectations for this year have
been revised downwards on an ongoing basis, while
some added that forecasts for 2020 have also been
reduced. One member noted that trade tensions,
mainly those between the U.S. and China, have
contributed to the downward revision of growth
expectations.

As for the balance of risks to global growth, most
members stated that it is significantly biased to the
downside and one pointed out that it has
deteriorated. Most members agreed that, among the
main risks, the following stand out: i) an escalation of
trade disputes; ii) a lower-than-expected economic
growth of the Chinese economy; and, iii) political,
geopolitical, and idiosyncratic factors. In relation to
the first of these risks, most members highlighted the
uncertainty surrounding the trade disputes between
the U.S. and China. In this regard, one member
warned that, although the negotiations within the
ninety-day-period agreed to in December appear to
be progressing satisfactorily, it is not possible to rule
out a scenario of greater trade barriers between both
economies starting in March, which would have
effects on the world economy. As for the second risk,
another member argued that the Chinese economy
registered its lowest growth rate since the beginning
of the 1990s and that a significant decline in ChinaU.S. trade can already be observed. The same
member added that this lower dynamism would lead
to a deceleration of global demand for basic
commodities, with a negative effect on global trade.
In regards to the third risk, some members
mentioned that international financial markets may
react abruptly to developments of either economic,
political or geopolitical nature, with spillover effects
on the real economy. One member pointed out that
vulnerable emerging economies would be

1


-----

particularly affected. Among these events, most
members noted the possibility of a Brexit process
without mutually convenient agreements between
the U.K. and the European Union, as well as
prospects of a resumption of the U.S. government
shutdown. Some members stated that the
uncertainty stemming from such factors has
translated into a warning of a further decline in
economic activity. One member noted that business
confidence has been affected by both the impact of
the aforementioned developments on the real
economy and the uncertainty and volatility that they
have generated in markets.

Most members highlighted the lower dynamism of
economic activity and continued divergence among
the main advanced economies. In this regard, some
members pointed out that the U.S. has decelerated
less than other advanced economies. One member
attributed this difference, among other factors, to the
transitory effects of the procyclical fiscal stance
adopted by this country during the mature phase of
its business cycle. Another member mentioned that
the economic contraction of the Eurozone has
become more visible due to the deceleration of
external demand and the presence of transitory
factors that have affected industrial production in
certain economies, in addition to business
confidence remaining in negative terrain. Regarding
growth expectations of advanced economies, most
members agreed that those for 2019 and 2020 have
been revised downwards on an ongoing basis. The
majority highlighted that in the particular case of the
U.S., the uncertainty about the outlook for its growth
persists and the probability of a recession over the
next 12 months has even increased. In this regard,
some members noted that some financial variables
suggest the possibility of a recession. Nevertheless,
one member acknowledged that the change in the
Federal Reserve’s message regarding future
adjustments to the target range for the federal funds
rate and the possible moderation of the balance
sheet reduction process could mitigate or postpone
the possibility of such recession. Other members
stated that the outlook for deceleration in the U.S. is
associated with the fading fiscal incentives, a
progressively less expansionary monetary policy
stance, the economic costs of the partial government
shutdown, and the decline in investment.

Regarding emerging economies, most members
mentioned that their economic growth has weakened
and that forecasts about their growth rate have been
revised downwards. One member pointed out that
the deceleration of China is a risk factor for other
emerging economies, both directly through a
reduction in trade, and indirectly through lower
commodity prices. Most members highlighted that


the Chinese economy has decelerated more than the
other emerging economies and that the risk of a
lower-than-expected dynamism prevails. One
member noted that economic growth estimates for
China have been declining steadily and in a
sustained manner. In this regard, some members
underlined the willingness of the Chinese authorities
to seek an orderly adjustment in the transition to a
more moderate and balanced growth by considering
the adoption of fiscal, monetary and regulatory
easing measures. One member stated that, to
reverse the negative impact of the trade dispute with
the U.S., the People’s Bank of China relaxed its
reserve requirements, pointing out that it will grant
improved financing conditions to small and medium
enterprises.

Most members noted that due to the lower economic
dynamism and the fall in energy prices, inflationary
pressures have moderated worldwide. As for such
pressures in advanced economies, most members
mentioned that these have decreased, while some of
them added that pressures have decreased in both
headline and core inflation. Some members
emphasized that this has occurred notwithstanding
the tightening of their labor markets and faster wage
growth. As for the U.S., some members pointed out
that headline inflation is near the Fed’s 2% target,
while in the Eurozone and Japan inflation is still
below the targets of their central banks. Continuing
with the U.S., one member stated that there are no
signs of possible inflationary pressures in the
foreseeable future, except for a possible impact
stemming from wage pressures on its labor market.
One member added that the behavior of the prices
of food and of some industrial metals, as well as the
favorable performance of core inflation in some
emerging economies, have also contributed to
diminish inflationary pressures worldwide. As for
inflation in emerging economies, another member
underlined that it decreased due to the fall in crude
oil and food prices, the fading effect of the
depreciation of their currencies on prices, and lower
global dynamism.

All Governing Board members highlighted that the
lower dynamism of global economic activity has
been reflected in expectations of a slower monetary
policy normalization by the major central banks, and
in lower short- and long-term interest rates in the
United States. Most members added that, as
expected, in January, the U.S. Federal Reserve left
the target range for the federal funds rate
unchanged. Such members mentioned that this
central bank stated that it will be patient in making
future adjustments to the target range for the federal
funds rate. Some members indicated that the Fed
sent clear signals that the upward trend of interest

2


-----

rates will stop at least for some time, eliminating from
its statement all references to additional rises. In this
regard, one member highlighted the change in the
Federal Reserve’s policy stance. Another member
noted that, in this environment, market variables no
longer incorporate the possibility of an additional
increase in the reference rate during this year and
are even starting to discount a decrease in interest
rates in 2020. Additionally, most members pointed
out that the Fed stated that it could adjust its balance
sheet normalization program if necessary, one
member adding that the balance sheet normalization
program could end sooner and at a higher level than
expected. Nevertheless, another member warned
that, in a context of an economic downturn but with
forecasts for GDP growth above potential for this
year, there are greater challenges in terms of the
assessment of the economy’s cyclical position as
well as in terms of communication. Therefore, the
same member estimated that surprises in the
monetary normalization process cannot be ruled out.

From a longer-term perspective, another member
argued that, since the years after the 2008 crisis, the
Federal Reserve has used forward guidance to exert
a greater influence on expectations for short-term
interest rates along the entire yield curve and
strengthen its effects on aggregate demand. The
same member considered that this policy was useful
for the cyclical recovery of the U.S. economy, but
that it has faced significant challenges in the current
phase of the cycle. In this regard, he/she highlighted
that, albeit having announced several years ago that
the withdrawal of monetary stimulus was to be
gradual and preannounced, this type of guidance
and commitment faces significant challenges when
the monetary policy stance is close to a possible
inflection point or when it faces an environment of
high uncertainty. He/she pointed out that this has
occurred in recent months, when the cyclical path of
the U.S. economy has become more uncertain.
He/she mentioned that this situation led to a
considerable adjustment in the Fed’s message,
which in September appeared to be operating under
a prescheduled strategy, while by the end of
December and in January, it announced that its
actions would be determined on the basis of
incoming information. Another member underlined
that, on the one hand, the central banks of the
Eurozone and Japan left their reference rates
unchanged, stating that the Bank of Japan pointed
out that it will continue with a highly accommodative
monetary policy for a prolonged period. The same
member mentioned that, on the other hand, the
central banks of most emerging economies left their
monetary policy stances unchanged and several of
them have stated that they will remain vigilant to
developments and incoming data that may


jeopardize the convergence of inflation to their
targets.

Most members mentioned that, recently, financial
markets in both advanced and emerging economies
have exhibited a more favorable performance
associated, to a large extent, with the greater caution
with which the central banks of advanced
economies, particularly the U.S. Federal Reserve,
have stated they will proceed henceforth. Some
members agreed that interest rates in these
economies decreased and one member noted that
this decrease was more significant in the U.S. Some
members highlighted that the yield curve in that
country flattened considerably. Most members
stated that this has been reflected in an appreciation
of most emerging economies currencies against the
U.S. dollar. One member emphasized that the best
performing currencies were those exhibiting greater
interest rates spreads vis-à-vis advanced
economies. Some members underlined that as a
result of this environment, emerging economies
have registered significant capital inflows.

Nevertheless, most members warned about the
persistence of certain risks, whose materialization
may affect financial markets significantly. Some
members pointed out that the global economic
deceleration might sharpen and lead to greater
financial volatility, reversing the apparent increase in
risk appetite. One member added that tight financial
conditions may become even tighter than they
already are. In this regard, some members warned
that financial markets were already affected in 2018,
precisely by a deterioration of growth forecasts due
to the materialization of some risks to the global
economy. One member recalled that the
abovementioned led to a lower risk appetite. The
same member pointed out that the initial adjustment
in financial markets to an environment of increasing
interest rates implied a downward adjustment in
stock markets and high credit risk spreads, thus
tightening financial conditions. He/she stated that,
towards the end of 2018, markets recovered as
expectations of lower interest rates consolidated
gradually. Finally, he/she underlined that now that
lower pressures from external markets are expected,
the performance of emerging economies will be
determined, to a larger extent, by idiosyncratic risk
factors and by the soundness of their
macroeconomic fundamentals.

As for economic activity in Mexico, most members
highlighted that during the fourth quarter of 2018, it
decelerated significantly as compared to the
previous quarter. One member mentioned that this
deceleration is due to transitory factors as well as
others of a more persistent nature and that, thus, the

3


-----

rate of economic growth continued on a downward
trend which has been observed since 2016. Some
members stated that the evolution of the labor
market also suggests a weakening of economic
activity during such period. One member noted that
latest figures for the fourth quarter of 2018 imply that
growth for the entire year was 2% and indicate the
effects of some factors that have affected growth
negatively. On the demand side, most members
agreed that consumption showed signs of
deceleration during the fourth quarter of 2018.
Nevertheless, one member pointed out that, overall,
consumption continued on a positive trend
supported by the recovery of the total wage bill and
the dynamism of revenues from remittances, which,
during 2018, reached historical highs of above 33
billion USD. Most members mentioned that private
investment continued following a downward trend
and one member stated that this is due to the lower
spending in both construction and machinery and
equipment. The majority of members noted that in
the last quarter of 2018 manufacturing exports
maintained a level similar to that of the third quarter.
One member mentioned that in December imports
fell drastically vis-à-vis the previous month. Another
member pointed out that the public sector is
anticipated to have continued being a drag on
aggregate demand at the end of 2018.

One member noted that recent indicators suggest
that the weakening of economic activity during the
fourth quarter of 2018 may extend to the beginning
of 2019. As an example, the same member
highlighted that consumption started showing signs
of deceleration for the first time. Another member
stated that it remains to be known if the economic
slowdown is transitory, resulting from the adjustment
that usually occurs at the beginning of a new
administration, or if it is a phenomenon associated
with a new phase of the economy’s business cycle.
The same member argued that maybe the most
evident sign of this latter phenomenon is what is
reflected in the trend of all the components of the
Coincident Indicator of INEGI’s Cyclical Indicators
System, which have contributed negatively to this
indicator for at least four consecutive months, and
stated that some of these components have been
contributing negatively to such indicator for at least
nine consecutive months. He/she stated that the last
time that such indicator reached a level as low as
that of November 2018 with a negative trend was
between November and December 2008, right at the
beginning of Mexico’s last recession.

One member mentioned that there is not enough
statistical information available to make an accurate
assessment of economic activity for the beginning of
2019. Nevertheless, the same member added that


the economy may weaken further during the first
quarter of 2019, given that no changes have been
observed in the fundamental determinants that have
recently been affecting the economy, highlighting the
complex international environment and the global
slowdown, and a domestic environment of persisting
uncertainty. Such member added that in addition to
the aforementioned, the impact of the transitory
shocks should also be considered, especially the
shortage of fuel in several regions of the country, the
blockage of railroads in Michoacán, the labor
conflicts in Tamaulipas, and the U.S. government
shutdown. In this context, the same member pointed
out that growth forecasts for the next two years have
deteriorated, and that it is foreseen for 2019 that the
economy will expand less than what was observed
in 2018 and then strengthen slightly in 2020. In this
regard, some members warned that such forecasts
are subject to a higher degree of uncertainty. One
member added that a negative growth rate for the
first quarter of 2019 would not be surprising. Another
member considered that the environment for growth
for 2019 will depend on the public policies to be
implemented. Most members highlighted that private
sector specialists have revised downwards their
growth forecasts for 2019. Another member delved
into the dispersion of such forecasts, which
increased between December 2018 and January
2019, reflecting higher uncertainty. Such member
pointed out that the range for such forecasts
decreased during the same period. Another member
mentioned that the most worrying concern is the
deteriorating prospects for growth, as gross fixed
investment has remained stalled for three
consecutive years and consumption and exports
have not exhibited sufficient dynamism to foster
higher growth. The same member added that the
start of every six-year administration is always
complicated and is now accompanied by additional
transitory challenges, such as those associated with
fuel distribution, the blocking of transportation
routes, and the labor conflicts in the state of
Tamaulipas. Such member expressed his/her view
that starting out with a persistent environment of
caution for investment in addition to the direct and
indirect effects originated by the aforementioned
developments, a stronger emotional constraint must
also be considered.

All members said that the balance of risks to growth
is biased to the downside: one member added that
the downward bias is present in both short- and
medium-term horizons and some members noted
that the balance of risks has deteriorated. One of
them argued that there are external and domestic
factors that have substantially increased the
uncertainty about the country’s economic
performance. The majority warned that in the

4


-----

beginning of 2019 transitory factors that could affect
the growth rate during the first quarter of this year
have been observed. One stressed that it is
estimated that the shortage of fuel in some states will
have a negative effect on GDP growth in the first
quarter of 2019, which will depend on its intensity
and duration.

In addition to the global risks described above, the
majority mentioned other downside risks for growth,
such as: i) obstacles in the ratification of the trade
agreements reached between Mexico, the United
States and Canada; ii) factors leading to greater
domestic uncertainty and less confidence in the
outlook for the Mexican economy; and, iii) certain
delays in the execution of public expenditure related
to the beginning of a new administration. In this
regard, one member added that, given the lower
global dynamism, the country will face a certain
deceleration in foreign trade, which has been one of
Mexico’s main growth drivers in recent years.
Another member warned that the substantial
reallocation of public expenditure can translate into
greater delays and inefficiencies in resource
allocation and weaken economic activity to a larger
extent than normally observed at the beginning of a
new administration. One added the uncertainty
about public policies in the next years, which
according to such member is hindering the recovery
of business confidence from its very low levels. In
addition, some warned that a lower-than-expected
growth would reduce tax collection, and would make
it difficult to execute public expenditure in the second
half of this year.

As upside risks for growth, some members pointed
out the important increase in consumer confidence.
One member added that there could be a positive
effect from new social programs, which could boost
the domestic market given their focus on segments
of the population, such as seniors and young people,
which have a high propensity to consume. Another
member added as a risk the possibility that economic
policy and public expenditure begin making a
positive contribution to economic growth, which
could surprise to the upside towards the second half
of the year or towards 2020. In addition, such
member mentioned that, given the deterioration in
growth expectations, the unusual increase in
consumer confidence is striking, which was
especially motivated by the perception of the
country's future economic situation, currently at
historical highs. The same member noted that there
is an exceptional contrast with business confidence,
which has not really changed in the past months.
However, such member specified that the latter
indicator has improved in the past couple of years
and that it maintains a path which is slightly above


the 50-point threshold. The same member noted that
consumer perception about the country’s future
economic situation is better than that of business
owners, while that of the future situation of
households is practically aligned with the future
perception of businesses. In this regard, such
member pointed out that despite the events of recent
months and the deterioration in growth projections,
firms maintain positive expectations, while
consumers have more confidence in government
actions. The same member concluded that it is
possible that these confidence levels favor
consumption and an eventual recovery in private
investment, which could translate into a better
economic performance during the second half of the
year or by 2020.

Most members considered that slack conditions in
the economy relaxed towards the end of 2018 and
the beginning of this year, and one member
highlighted that these slack indicators have
remained at less tight levels than those registered at
the beginning of 2018. In this regard, another
member pointed out that with indicators which
exclude oil production these conditions remained
neutral. As to the labor market, some noted the rise
in the unemployment rate at the end of 2018, and
one noted the deceleration in the creation of IMSSinsured jobs during the last quarter of 2018. This last
member indicated that labor market figures might
have been affected by factors related to the present
juncture, such as the cancelation of the New Mexico
City International Airport’s construction, which would
also have been reflected in economic activity in
general. Some members mentioned that,
notwithstanding the latter, the labor market remains
tight. Some pointed out that slack conditions in the
economy are expected to widen in the coming
quarters and indicated that it is very likely that during
the period of influence of monetary policy the output
gap with and without oil production begins to lie in
the negative region. One of them noted that it is
relevant to consider that the economy is currently in
a situation with an output gap that is not very different
from zero.

The majority pointed out that from November to
January, headline inflation decreased, some
members specifying that it went from 4.72% to
4.37% during such period. Most members
mentioned that this decrease was mainly due to the
reduction of non-core inflation. One of them indicated
that headline inflation continued with the downward
trend shown since September. Another member
warned that although this reading points in the right
direction, it is early to conclude that inflation has
returned to a clear downward path. He/she added
that coincident and prospective indicators

5


-----

associated with prices suggest that despite the
marginal improvement, the inflationary process
continues to show a strong resistance to decline.
Likewise, one member remarked that the decrease
in January was due to one-time adjustments, such
as the reduction of the VAT in the border region.
Another expressed that headline inflation has been
affected by the significant adjustments in the real
exchange rate. However, one member stated that
the latest inflation figures are in line with their
anticipated path of gradual convergence to the target
in the horizon in which monetary policy operates.

As for the components of headline inflation, all
members highlighted that core inflation continues to
show a resistance to decline and some of them
pointed out that it went from 3.63% in November to
3.60% in January. Most members stated that core
inflation has remained around 3.6% in the last 10
months. One member emphasized that it shows a
high persistence which for several months has
prevented it from decreasing at the desired speed.
Some members indicated that, given that core
inflation is a more appropriate indicator of
fundamental pressures on prices and it is the
component that should respond more to monetary
policy actions, its persistence is a matter of concern.
Nevertheless, another member stated that despite
its rigidity, core inflation seems to have started a
downward trend. With regards to the factors that
explain core inflation’s behavior, some members
mentioned the increase in prices of services other
than housing and education, as well as the indirect
effects of increases in energy prices. One member
added to the above the indirect effects of recent
increases in the prices of some fruits and vegetables.
Another member mentioned also the impact of the
exchange rate, the tight economic conditions
observed until recently, and the real wage increases
during 2018. Regarding non-core inflation, some
members stated that it fell from 8.07% to 6.81%
between November and January. Some mentioned
that this reflects lower increases in energy prices and
livestock products, although such effect was partially
offset by greater increases in the prices of some
fruits and vegetables. One member indicated that the
recent trends of core and non-core inflation seem to
be associated with the credibility of Banco de
México’s monetary policy decisions and to the
operation of monetary policy’s real transmission
channels.

The majority mentioned that headline inflation
expectations for 2019 and 2020 showed a clear
deterioration in December and some improvement in
January. They highlighted that those corresponding
to the end of 2019 went from 3.71% in October to
3.89% in December, and then decreased to 3.80%


in January. Some noted that those corresponding to
the end of 2020 were adjusted upwards from 3.5%
to 3.79% and then downwards to 3.71% in the same
comparison periods. Regarding core inflation
expectations for the end of 2019, the majority
emphasized that they went from 3.45% in October to
3.50% in December and January. Most members
rated the behavior of inflation expectations drawn
from surveys as mixed, since those of headline
inflation improved from December to January, while
those of core inflation did not. One member stated
that both headline inflation and core inflation
expectations had a shift in trend, since between May
and December 2018 both had been increasing
steadily and significantly. Some members stressed
that core inflation’s persistence has even
contaminated inflation expectations, one member
adding that, in particular, it has had an influence on
medium-term expectations.
The majority indicated that headline inflation
expectations for the medium and long terms still
stand above the permanent target of 3%, at levels of
around 3.50%. One member pointed out that a
convergence of long-term core inflation expectations
to the levels of headline inflation can be observed.
As for information derived from market-based
instruments, some stressed that medium- and longterm inflation risk premium showed a deterioration by
the end of 2018 and subsequently decreased,
although it continues at high levels. One highlighted
that these levels continue to suggest significant
upward risks for inflation in the medium and long
terms.

Some members noted that inflation forecasts
suggest that inflation is following a downward
trajectory in line with Banco de México’s last
Quarterly Report. One member highlighted that it is
estimated that forecasts for the next 12 months will
have mixed revisions. As for the outlook for headline
inflation, a member mentioned that it has been
affected significantly by non-core inflation, which has
also put pressure on core inflation, albeit its effects
have slightly decreased. Some members highlighted
an upward revision of core inflation during the first
semester of the year because of its resistance to
decline. One member emphasized that this can
affect the convergence of headline inflation to its
target. Another member cautioned that the risk of
inflationary pressures that are not consistent with the
attainment of the target within the expected
timeframe persists, and that a larger number of
favorable observations is necessary to confirm that
risks of possible second round-round effects have
started to dissipate. Nevertheless, one member
indicated that the latest figures suggest that the
paths of headline, core and non-core inflation could

6


-----

be converging even faster than as indicated in the
last Quarterly Report.

Most members considered that the balance of risks
with regards to the expected path of inflation
continues to be biased to the upside, in an
environment of marked uncertainty. One of them
indicated that the upward bias is slight and another
one that inflation faces a more benign scenario than
at the time of the previous monetary policy
statement. As for the main risks to the upside for
inflation, the majority highlighted the possibility that
the peso exchange rate continues to be pressured
by external and domestic factors, one of them adding
that in his/her opinion this is one of the main risks for
inflation in the near future. The majority mentioned
that inflation could also be affected in case that new
pressures on the prices of energy or agricultural
products are observed, or if there is an escalation of
protectionist and compensatory measures
worldwide, or in case public finances deteriorate.
One of them pointed out that this last risk has
intensified. Some members indicated that a further
continuation of the problems in fuel distribution as
well as the blocking of railways and labor conflicts,
are also risks for inflation. Additionally, the majority
agreed that, given the magnitude of the recent
increases in the minimum wage, beyond their
possible direct impact, there is the risk that these
lead to wage revisions that exceed productivity gains
and thus generate cost pressures, affecting formal
employment and prices. One member expressed
that the above would imply a higher resistance or
even additional pressures on core inflation.

One of them alerted to the possibility of secondround effects in the price formation process. Most
members warned about core inflation’s persistence,
which could lead to a higher resistance to decline for
long-term inflation expectations. One of them
highlighted that it is particularly worrisome that core
inflation is expected to remain in coming months
above the level that was forecast only recently.
Additionally, some members insisted that inflation
expectations implied by financial market instruments
continue signaling upward risks to inflation. One of
them pointed out that the above can be observed for
the medium and long terms, and another one argued
that expectations drawn from surveys also signal the
same risk. One of them added that inflation
expectations drawn from surveys show a contrasting
behavior, with those for 2019 and 2020 linked to
headline inflation beginning to decline, while those
focused on core inflation registering a slight upward
trend. He/she pointed out that in the case of longterm inflation expectations, although those
corresponding to headline inflation have remained
stable at around 3.5%, there is a convergence of


those corresponding to core inflation towards the
levels of those of headline inflation. He/she argued
that, if it continues, this trend would represent a
deterioration of long-term inflation expectations,
since it would imply a stronger anchoring of such
expectations at levels above the target. Another one
argued that such upward trend as well as the
decreased dispersion among forecast answers in the
survey, at levels above the target in the last few
months, suggest a risk of contagion of long-term
inflation expectations. Regarding downside risks,
some members mentioned the possibility of smaller
variations in the prices of certain goods included in
the non-core index, or that slack conditions widen
more than expected.

All members highlighted that since the last monetary
policy decision, financial asset prices in Mexico
exhibited a more favorable performance. Most of
them agreed that this was a reflection of more
favorable external conditions and of domestic factors
such as the approval of the economic package for
2019 presented by the Ministry of Finance, which
included fiscal targets that were in line with market
expectations; investors’ consent to the New Mexico
City International Airport bond buyback offer; and,
the implementation of a prudent monetary policy with
interest rate spreads above those of other
economies. All members pointed out that the peso
exchange rate appreciated and reduced its volatility
while one member added that the foreign exchange
market’s operating conditions had improved and that
analysts’ exchange rate expectations had been
revised downwards. The majority pointed out that
risk premia and long- and medium-term interest rates
decreased, and some of them mentioned that
operating conditions in government securities
markets also improved. One member mentioned that
foreign investment inflows have been observed, in
particular, to government securities. Regarding the
stock market, most mentioned that in line with the
appreciation of the peso and the decline in interest
rates, it registered gains during the same period, and
some of them indicated that it has reversed the
losses observed in the last quarter of 2018. Most
members emphasized that, recently, domestic
financial markets resented Fitch’s revision of
Pemex's credit rating from BBB+ to BBB- with a
negative outlook, albeit one member pointing out that
such revision had already been anticipated by
markets. One member stressed that, despite the
latter, sovereign risk premia have not been affected,
although an impact on them cannot be ruled out if
this situation deteriorates. The majority of members
mentioned that although financial asset prices in the
country have exhibited positive results, the peso-US
dollar exchange rate, medium- and long-term
interest rates, and risk premia are at levels higher

7


-----

than those registered at the beginning of October,
before domestic uncertainty escalated as a result of
factors such as the announcement of the
cancellation of the New Mexico City International
Airport, the presentation of some legislative projects
and raising concerns about the business model of
Pemex. In this regard, one member mentioned that
an environment of high uncertainty prevails in
domestic financial markets, especially related with
domestic factors. Another member mentioned that
the balance of macro-financial risks has deteriorated
due to the increasing uncertainty about the country's
economic and financial environment. The same
member added that this could mean lower inflows of
foreign investment (direct and portfolio) to the
country, with its subsequent impact on the exchange
rate. Another member pointed out that future
episodes of volatility in domestic financial assets in
response to external and/or domestic factors cannot
be ruled out.
From a longer-term perspective, one member stated
that in recent years the economy has faced two
major shocks: i) a lower availability of external
resources; and ii) a significant deterioration in the oil
trade balance. The combination of both shocks has
led to a major adjustment of the non-oil trade
balance. Such member acknowledged that the
economy has also been affected by uncertainty
about the trade relationship with North America, the
process of monetary policy normalization in the
United States and other idiosyncratic factors. The
same member argued that this has required a
significant depreciation of the real exchange rate and
that for such an adjustment to take place in an
orderly way and without affecting domestic output,
the nominal exchange rate must be flexible, and
inflation must remain contained and close to its
target. Such member added that this process
requires the combination of a sound fiscal policy and
a responsible monetary policy stance to prevent the
contagion of inflation expectations and the
deterioration of the price formation process. Also,
that the economy still faces a significant tightening of
external financing which is imperative to reverse. In
this regard, another member highlighted that the
greatest risk of not mitigating the country’s economic
and financial uncertainty is the possibility of having
lower inflows of foreign investment (direct and
portfolio), with the subsequent increases in risk
premia that would make credit more expensive, thus
hampering the country’s economic recovery.

Most members considered that the current
environment continues facing medium- and longterm risks that might affect the country’s
macroeconomic conditions. Among such risks, the
majority of the members mentioned: Pemex’s
financial fragility and outlook, and, in particular, an


additional downgrade to its credit rating as it could
have an impact on the federal government’s financial
cost and, in general, on the country’s conditions for
accessing external financing. One member pointed
out that the business strategy to be adopted by
Pemex will play a key role in determining the shortand medium-term outlook for the Mexican economy.
The same member added the latter is due not only
to the size of the oil company and its connection with
many other corporations and domestic financial
institutions, but also to its relevant role in domestic
and international financial markets, stressing the
importance of Pemex’s debt in the portfolio of
different asset management institutions specialized
in emerging markets. Another member pointed out
that the recently announced actions to improve the
financial situation of Pemex represent a positive
element, but that additional efforts to strengthen the
oil company’s production capacity and its financial
outlook and, therefore, credibility on the fiscal targets
for the short and long terms are required. The same
member stated that the intention of the authorities to
announce shortly a set of measures to face these
challenges is highly relevant, given that greater
hardships faced by Pemex would significantly affect
public finances and, in general, the overall economy.
Most members mentioned that a potential financial
support to Pemex by the federal government or a
reduction in its fiscal burden addressing its structural
problems could mitigate the aforementioned risks, as
long as these measures are consistent with the fiscal
targets set by the government.

Most members pointed out that in order to foster
higher growth it is key to consolidate a solid
macroeconomic framework as well as measures that
contribute to raise productivity levels. In this regard,
some stated that it is relevant to ensure an
environment of confidence and certainty for
investment and that public finances are consolidated
sustainably. As a risk for the latter, some members
highlighted, besides the already mentioned financial
fragility of Pemex, the possibility of a lower-thanexpected GDP growth, which might affect tax
collection and put at risk the attainment of the fiscal
targets. One member added that it is important that
the primary surplus target of 1% for 2019 is
achieved. Finally, some members pointed out that
the macroeconomic framework that accompanied
the fiscal package for 2019 presented last December
contributed to increase investors’ confidence and
generated a positive response from markets.

As to measures to boost productivity, some
members considered that public policies must foster
an efficient allocation of resources in the economy.
In this regard, one member emphasized that the
policies affecting price formation, as well as the

8


-----

higher minimum wages and the guaranteed prices
are a cause for concern. Some members pointed out
the need to ensure the Rule of law and tackle the
challenges of public insecurity, corruption and
impunity. In addition to these measures, another
member considered the need for adopting public
policies that support the strengthening of human
capital, the adoption of new technologies, the
narrowing of opportunity gaps, and the generation of
adequate incentives for growth and development.
Another member highlighted the need to carefully
assess the implications of the current strategy for
long-term growth and to introduce corrective
measures when needed, particularly because of the
economy’s low potential growth and the risks to the
economy stemming from the continuous contraction
in investment ratios. Most members acknowledged
that the weakness of investment is a factor that may
affect the country’s productivity and future growth.
One member added that it is desirable that the new
public investment is channeled to projects of proven
economic and social returns.

All members agreed that Mexico’s economic activity
decelerated and that its balance of risks continues to
be biased to the downside. One member considered
that, in principle, the country’s economic
deceleration should favor a faster process of inflation
reduction. Nevertheless, the same member noted
that, under the current juncture, inflationary risks
stemming from Mexico’s complex economic and
financial environment persist. Another member
stated that the current environment features
dilemmas and risk in the short- medium- and longterms, adding that it is clear that the challenges to
the economy and to inflation are not only of a cyclical
nature. In this regard, he/she underlined that it is
important to avoid a situation with a period of weak
economic growth and where also other factors that
affect the price formation process keep inflation
under pressure and above its target.

Most members agreed that the evolution of headline
inflation has remained in line with the forecast
published at the end of November in Banco de
México’s past Quarterly Report and that core
inflation continues to exhibit a resistance to decline.
One member mentioned that this is a cause for
concern since such component should be
responding more clearly to the monetary policy
actions. Another member highlighted that although
core inflation has shown resistance to decline, it is
starting to follow a downward trend.

Most members pointed out that Banco de México
should maintain a prudent approach and signal
clearly its commitment with its price stability
mandate. In this regard, most members considered


that the current monetary policy stance is consistent
with the convergence of headline inflation to the
target within the time frame in which monetary policy
operates. One member added that the outlook that
inflation is facing, in addition to the persistent risk of
a de-anchoring of inflation expectations, suggest that
the monetary policy tightening implemented should
be kept in place for a lengthy period. Another
member argued that the central bank should remain
vigilant to the conditions prevailing in Mexico’s
economy so that a very restrictive monetary policy
stance is not in place for too long, in case the
economy’s slack conditions continue to widen
significantly. One member underlined that the
combination of a weakening economic activity, on
the one hand, and persistent inflationary pressures
with a balance of risks to the upside and short-term
and long-term inflation expectations above Banco de
México’s projections, on the other, intensifies the
challenges for monetary policy. The same member
argued that monetary policy must focus on attaining
the inflation target, but considering the high
uncertainty prevailing as well as the effects of the
evolution of economic activity on prices and the need
of an orderly and efficient convergence of inflation to
the target. He/she pointed out that the latter requires
a prudent approach in which monetary policy
decisions will depend fundamentally on additional
information on inflation, its determinants and outlook,
and which must be aimed at strengthening the
central bank’s credibility. Such member indicated
that given the aforementioned, additional
adjustments to the monetary policy rate cannot be
discarded. One member emphasized that the central
bank message should not reflect an easing of
monetary policy stance given the weakening of
economic activity, but rather convey the persistence
of risks to inflation, thus strengthening monetary
policy’s credibility. The same member added that the
central bank’s communication should reflect the
concern for core inflation’s resistance to decline in
spite of the clearly restrictive monetary policy stance
so far adopted. Some members mentioned that the
rises in the reference rate have increased interest
rate spreads vis-à-vis other countries, thereby
helping to mitigate the volatility that financial markets
have exhibited due to external and domestic factors.
One of the members stated that, given the
expectations of more gradual and smaller increases
in interest rates in advanced economies, Banco de
México would have a slightly wider margin as to its
monetary policy decisions. Most members
highlighted the importance of pointing out that Banco
de México’s Governing Board will remain vigilant to
the evolution of inflation, its determinants and
expectations and, that if necessary, it will take the
actions required to attain the inflation target.

9


-----

**3. MONETARY POLICY DECISION**

To guide its monetary policy actions, Banco de
México’s Governing Board follows closely the
development of inflation vis-à-vis its forecast
trajectory, taking into account the monetary policy
stance adopted and the time frame in which
monetary policy operates, as well as available
information on all inflation determinants and on
medium- and long-term inflation expectations,
including the balance of risks for such factors. In this
context, considering that the recent developments in
inflation and its main determinants have not changed
significantly with respect to their foreseen
trajectories, that the cyclical position of the economy
has loosened somewhat, and that the current
monetary policy stance is consistent with the
convergence of inflation to its target, Banco de
México’s Governing Board has decided unanimously
to leave the target for the overnight interbank interest
rate unchanged at 8.25%. Considering the risks
inflation is subject to, the Governing Board will take
the necessary actions so that the reference rate is
kept at a level consistent with the convergence of
headline inflation to Banco de México’s target within
the time frame in which monetary policy operates.


Banco de México’s Governing Board will maintain a
prudent monetary policy stance and, under the
current environment of uncertainty, will follow closely
the potential pass-through of exchange rate
fluctuations to prices, the monetary policy stance
relative to that of the U.S., under an external
environment that it is still subject to risks, and to the
behavior of the conditions of slack in the Mexican
economy. In the presence and possible persistence
of factors that, by their nature, involve risks to both
inflation and inflation expectations, monetary policy
will be adjusted in a timely and robust manner to
achieve the convergence of inflation to its 3% target
and to strengthen the anchoring of medium- and
long-term inflation expectations so that they attain
such target.

**4. VOTING**

Alejandro Díaz de León-Carrillo, Irene EspinosaCantellano, Gerardo Esquivel-Hernández, Jonathan
Ernest Heath-Constable and Javier Eduardo
Guzmán-Calafell voted in favor of leaving the target
for the overnight interbank rate (target rate)
unchanged at 8.25%.

10


-----

**ANNEX**

The information in this Annex was prepared for this
meeting by the staff of Banco de México’s General
Directorate of Economic Research and General
Directorate of Central Bank Operations and Payment
Systems. It does not necessarily reflect the
considerations of the members of the Governing
Board as to the monetary policy decision.

**A.1. External conditions**

**A.1.1. World economic activity**

During the fourth quarter of 2018, the world economy
decelerated, as evidenced by a lower dynamism in
the main advanced and emerging economies,
particularly the Eurozone, China, and, to a lesser
extent, the United States. This reflects, among other
factors, the effects of trade disputes, declining
business confidence, and transitory shocks. This
environment of lower dynamism of economic activity
led to downward revisions in the outlook for world
growth for 2019 and 2020. Available indicators on
business confidence, manufacturing activity and
international trade support the outlook of lower global
economic growth. This, together with the previous fall
in crude oil prices and in other commodities,
contributed to a moderation of inflationary pressures
in the main economies (Chart 1).

High risks to economic growth persist, such as those
related to the uncertainty associated to the trade
disputes between the U.S. and China, and to the
possibility of a further tightening of international
financial conditions due to a greater risk aversion.
Among the possible triggering factors for further
pessimism among investors are a lower-thanexpected growth of the Chinese economy and a
disorderly Brexit process. Additional factors are
political and geopolitical risks and the possibility of a
further deterioration of growth in emerging countries,
due to both a lower global demand and idiosyncratic
factors.

In this environment of slowing world economy, falling
stock markets during a large part of the fourth quarter
of 2018, and lower inflationary pressures, the main
central banks, particularly the U.S. Federal Reserve,
were more cautious as to their monetary policy
normalization processes vis-à-vis their previous
statements. In this context, in recent weeks, financial
markets in both advanced and emerging economies
exhibited a more favorable performance.


4 Apr-18

Oct-18

Jan-19

3

2

1

0

2019 2020 2019 2020 2019 2020 2019 2020 2019 2020

World United States Eurozone Japan United Kingdom

Source: IMF, World Economic Outlook, October 2018 and January 2019.

In the U.S., the main components of aggregate
demand continued signaling a moderation of
economic activity during the fourth quarter of 2018
(Chart 2). In particular, housing investment further
weakened, due mostly to higher mortgage interest
rates, while investment in equipment kept a
decelerating trend. In contrast, private consumption
continued showing dynamism, supported by a strong
labor market, the fiscal stimuli, the still high
household confidence, and lower fuel prices.
Uncertainty about the outlook for the U.S. economy
persists due to the fading fiscal incentives, the lower
growth of the world economy, and the latent risk of
escalating trade tensions with China.

According to the U.S. Congressional Budget Office
(CBO), the recent partial government shutdown
between December 22, 2018 and January 25, 2019,
could reduce annualized GDP growth of the fourth
quarter of 2018 and the first quarter of 2019 by
around 0.2 and 0.4 percentage points, respectively.
Since the agreement to reopen the government
guarantees sufficient funds only for three weeks, the
risk of another shutdown prevails, which could raise
the total cost on economic activity, especially in a
context where the deadline for renewing the U.S.
debt ceiling is also approaching.

11

|Chart 1 GDP Growth Forecasts for 2019 and 2020 Annual percentage change Apr-18|Col2|Col3|Col4|Col5|
|---|---|---|---|---|
|Apr-18 Oct-18 Jan-19|||||
|2019 2020 World|2019 2020 United States|2019 2020 Eurozone|2019 2020 Japan|2019 2020 United Kingdom|


-----

**Chart 2**

**USA: Real GDP and its Components**

Annualized and seasonally adjusted quarterly
percentage change and contribution in percentage
points, s. a.

6

4

2

0

Public spending

-2 Net exports

Inventories
Non-residential investment

-4 Residential investment

Private consumption
Total
Blue Chip

-6

I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV

2016 2017 2018

s. a. / Seasonally adjusted figures.
Source: BEA and Blue Chip January 2019, and Federal Reserve Bank of
Atlanta.

U.S. industrial production grew at a monthly rate of
0.3% in December, a still-high pace, albeit below the
0.4% rate observed in November. The decrease is
explained by the 6.3% contraction in the supply of
electricity and gas in response to the lower demand
for heating that resulted from warmer-than-usual
temperatures in several regions of the U.S. This
contraction was partially offset by the expansion of
mining and manufacturing. In particular,
manufacturing registered its highest growth since
February 2018, growing at a monthly rate of 1.1%.
Although forward-looking indicators, such as the
Purchasing Managers’ Index (PMI), continued to
exhibit a relative strength at the beginning of the
year, the strengthening of the U.S. dollar during 2018
and the greater trade barriers point to a slight
weakening of manufacturing in the next months.

Finally, the U.S. labor market continued
strengthening. In particular, 304,000 new jobs were
created in January, figure above the one required to
meet the growth of the labor force. The sharp
increase in labor participation rates in the U.S.,
despite negative demographic factors and, to a
lesser extent, the effects of the government
shutdown, led to an increase in the unemployment
rate, from 3.7% in September to 4.0% in January.
Nevertheless, the latter figure is still considerably
below its estimated long-term level. In this context, a
greater increase in wages was observed.

In the Eurozone, economic activity grew at
seasonally adjusted annualized rate (SAAR) of 0.9%
during the fourth quarter of 2018, after having
expanded by only 0.6% during the third quarter. This


weakness was associated with the slowdown of
external demand and the continued presence of
temporary factors, such as tighter regulations on air
pollutant emissions that kept on affecting automobile
production in Germany, and the fall in chemical
industry production due to the low navigation levels
of the Rhine. The Italian economy weakened further
due to deteriorating financial conditions and higher
political risks. Additionally, the downward trend
followed by the Purchasing Managers’ Indices for the
manufacturing sector and by business confidence in
the Eurozone intensified in January. Nevertheless,
the unemployment rate of December remained at
7.9%, its lowest level since October 2008, while
salaries grew at a faster rate.

In Japan, available information for the fourth quarter
of 2018 suggest a rebound of economic activity, after
having contracted 2.5% (SAAR) during the third
quarter due to the effects of certain natural disasters.
In this context, the labor market continued tightening
and the unemployment rate remained near its lowest
level in the last 25 years. Nevertheless, forwardlooking indicators such as the Purchasing Managers’
Indices of the manufacturing sector suggest a slight
deterioration of both external and domestic demand
during the first quarter of 2019.

In emerging economies, growth continued to
moderate during the fourth quarter of 2018, although
a large heterogeneity prevails across these
countries. In the case of China, GDP growth
decelerated further from 6.5% in the third quarter of
2018 to 6.4% in the fourth. As for other countries,
although the financial situation of Turkey and
Argentina improved during the last quarter of 2018
after these countries implemented respective
stabilizing measures, their growth rates were
affected by the tighter monetary and fiscal policies
and the lower availability of external financing.

International commodity prices recovered slightly in
the last weeks. In particular, at the end of December
the strong fall in oil prices observed since October
came to a halt after OPEC members and other oil
producers agreed on oil production cuts. The prices
of industrial metals rose due to the expectations
generated by the U.S. and Chinese governments’
efforts to solve their trade disputes. Finally, grain
prices followed an erratic trend due to abrupt climate
changes in key cultivation areas in Brazil and
Argentina.

12

|points, s. a.|Col2|Col3|
|---|---|---|
|Public spending Net exports Inventories Non-residential investment Residential investment Private consumption Total Blue Chip|||
|I II III IV 2016|I II III IV 2017|I II III IV 2018|


-----

**A.1.2. Monetary policy and international financial**
**markets**

In a context of lesser economic dynamism and falling
oil prices, the further tightening of labor markets in
advanced economies has not been accompanied
with higher inflationary pressures (Chart 3). In the
U.S., CPI inflation fell from 2.2% in November to
1.9% in December, due mainly to the lower energy
prices, while its core component remained at 2.2%.
In the Eurozone and Japan, core inflation remained
at low levels and below their central banks’ targets.
In most emerging economies, inflation decreased
due to the fall in oil and food prices, the lower
dynamism of global demand and, in certain cases,
the fading effect on prices of the previous
depreciation of their currencies.

Similarly, market-implied inflation expectations have
been adjusted downwards in most advanced
economies, suggesting a lower probability that
inflation will consistently exceed the targets of the
main central banks in the short term.

**Chart 3**

**Selected Advanced Economies: Core Inflation**

Annual percentage change

3
USA 1/
Eurozone
Japan 2/
Canada 3/

2 United Kingdom

1


0

-1


January

December
November

2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019


1/ Refers to the Consumer Price Index (CPI).
2/ Excludes fresh foods, energy, and the direct effect of the consumption
tax increase.
3/ Excludes food, energy, and the effect of adjustments on indirect taxes
(CPI-XFET).
Source: Haver Analytics, BEA, Eurostat, and Statistics Bureau.

In this environment of a deteriorating outlook for
global growth and of low inflation, the central banks
of the major advanced economies, particularly the
U.S. Federal Reserve, have been more cautious,
which may lead reference rates to reach lower levels
than those expected some months ago (Chart 4).


**Chart 4**

**Reference Rates and Implied Trajectories in**

**OIS Curves[1/]**

Percent

3.5% **― U.S. Federal Reserve*** Forecasts

**― Bank of England**

3.0% **― Bank of Japan**

**― Bank of Canada**

**― European Central Bank deposit rate**

2.5% **― OIS implicit trajectory 31 Jan 2019**

**--- OIS implicit trajectory 17 Dec 2018**

2.0%

1.5%

1.0%

0.5%

0.0%

-0.5%

-1.0% End of 2018 End of 2019 End of 2020

2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020

1/ OIS: Fixed floating interest rate swap where the fixed interest rate is the
effective overnight reference rate.

- In the case of the U.S. observed reference rate, the average interest rate
of the federal funds target range is used (2.25% - 2.50%).
Source: Bloomberg.

Indeed, in recent weeks, the U.S. Federal Reserve
communication strategy was adjusted significantly to
reflect a more cautious tone. In its January meeting,
this central bank left the target range for the federal
funds target rate unchanged (2.25% - 2.5%). In its
monetary policy statement, the Fed stated that U.S.
growth remained strong, that the labor market
continued to strengthen, and that inflation remained
close to its target. Nevertheless, it eliminated the
statement referring to additional gradual increases of
its reference rate as being consistent with sustained
economic growth, a strong labor market, and an
inflation rate near its 2% symmetric target. It also
reiterated that, in light of the limited inflationary
pressures and the recent developments in the global
economy and in international financial markets, it will
be patient in making future adjustments to the target
range for the federal funds rate. It also stated that it
could adjust the composition and size of its balance
sheet if necessary. Similarly, Jerome Powell, the
Fed’s Chairman, mentioned that information drawn
from surveys and market instruments suggests that
balance sheet normalization could end sooner and at
a higher level than what was expected some months
ago. In this environment, market variables have
completely ruled out the possibility of additional
increases in the reference rate during this year and
are even starting to include a cut in the reference rate
in 2020.

13


-----

In its January meeting, the European Central Bank
(ECB) left its benchmark rate unchanged at 0%, its
key deposit facility rate at -0.4% and its key marginal
lending facility rate at 0.25%, reiterating that these
rates will remain at those levels until the summer of
2019, and, in any case, until necessary to ensure that
inflation converges close to 2% in the medium term.
It also confirmed its plans to re-invest the maturing
bonds of its balance sheet for an extended period of
time, even after having started its process for raising
its reference rates. The ECB also modified its
balance of risks for growth to the downside from
balanced. Such adjustment responded to the
persistent uncertainty regarding geopolitical factors,
the protectionist policies of several countries, the
vulnerabilities of emerging economies, and the
volatility in financial markets. The recent statements
from ECB members have been more cautious, even
suggesting the possibility of not raising the
benchmark rate throughout 2019, as was expected
some months ago.

In its January meeting, the Bank of Japan left its
short-term reference rate unchanged at -0.1% and its
long-term reference rate associated to its 10-year
bond at 0%, reiterating that it will continue with a
highly accommodative monetary policy, keeping
interest rates at low levels for as long as needed to
reach its price stability target. The Bank of Japan’s
decision takes into consideration the uncertainty
about economic growth and inflation, including the
effects of the increase in that country´s consumption
tax scheduled for the end of 2019. In addition, this
central bank revised downwards its inflation
expectations for 2019 and 2020 due mainly to the fall
in oil prices.

In its February meeting, the Bank of England left its
reference rate unchanged at 0.75%. In its statement,
the Monetary Policy Committee pointed out that
economic activity has been decelerating since the
end of 2018, due to the deterioration of the world
economy and the increasing uncertainty on Brexit.
Thus, this central bank revised downwards its growth
and inflation projections for 2019 and 2020. It also
emphasized that it could adjust its monetary policy as
required depending on the effects of the Brexit
process on demand and supply and on the pound
sterling exchange rate. Although the Bank of England
reiterated that it foresees a gradual and limited
adjustment of interest rates, the path for the
reference rate implied in market-based instruments
suggests a slower process than anticipated in
November.


As expected, the Bank of Canada left its reference
rate unchanged at 1.75% in its January meeting,
while adjusting downwards its growth forecast for
2019 and estimating that inflation will remain below
the target during most of this year. This central bank
reiterated that the trade disputes between the U.S.
and China have had a significant impact on global
demand, highlighting that consumer spending and
household investment rates have performed weaker
than expected. The Bank of Canada also mentioned
that the continuing weakness is expected to prevail
given the lower growth of oil producing regions.
Finally, it pointed out that, although interest rates
should continue increasing towards their neutral level
to attain the inflation target, future raises will depend
on incoming data and other factors, such as the
evolution of the crude oil market, the real estate
sector, and global trade policies.

In this environment of lower inflationary risks, most
central banks of emerging economies left their
monetary policy rates unchanged. Several of these
countries have emphasized in their statements that
they will remain vigilant to developments and
incoming data that may jeopardize the convergence
of inflation to their targets. In China, its central bank
adopted measures to ease financial conditions by
reducing the reserve requirements of banks and
providing liquidity through open market operations.

Expectations that the central banks of the major
advanced economies will be more cautious and
patient and that this would lead to lower interest rates
than expected some months ago had a favorable
impact on financial markets since the beginning of
2019, as reflected by the favorable performance of
riskier assets. Stock market indices in advanced
economies partly reversed the losses registered at
the end of 2018. In this regard, U.S. stock markets
have advanced around 9% so far this year. Similarly,
the yield spreads between corporate and
government bonds were adjusted downwards, while
most currencies appreciated against the U.S. dollar.
Finally, interest rates of government bonds of the
major advanced economies decreased moderately
along the yield curve, in line with the central banks’
messages of greater caution (Chart 5).

As for emerging economies, the relative easing of
international financial conditions vis-à-vis those
observed in mid-December 2018, was beneficial for
most of their assets, as reflected in the appreciation
of their currencies against the U.S. dollar and in the
recovery of their stock markets (Chart 6).
Additionally, risk premia decreased slightly vis-à-vis
the levels observed in mid-December 2018, although

14


-----

they still remain high due to the risks that these
economies are facing.

**Chart 5**

**Change in Selected Financial Indicators**

**(December 17, 2018 – February 1, 2019)**

Percent, basis points


15% **<-- Stock market** **<-- Currencies**

10%


30

20


5%


10

0


0%

-5%


-10%

-15%


-10

-20


-30

|<-- Stock market EM 1/ S&P 500 (U.S.) FTSE MIB (Italy) CAC 40 (France) DAX (Germany) FTSE-100 (UK) Eurostoxx (Europe) IBEX (Spain) Shanghai (China) Nikkei (Japan)|<-- Currencies EM Currencies 3/ GBP JPY CAD CNY NZD AUD EUR CHF DXY 2/|2-year government bond yields--> United Kingdom Germany Japan France Spain Canada Italy United States|10-year government bond yields--> United Kingdom Japan Canada Germany United States France Spain Italy|
|---|---|---|---|


1/ MSCI Emerging Markets Index (includes 24 countries).
2/ DXY: Weighted average of the nominal exchange rate of the six main
world-traded currencies (calculated by Intercontinental Exchange, ICE) with
the following weights: EUR (57.6%), JPY (13.6%), GBP (11.9%), CAD
(9.1%), SEK (4.2%), and CHF (3.6%).
3/ J.P. Morgan Index constructed from a weighted average of the nominal
exchange rate of emerging economies’ currencies with the following
weights: TRY (8.3%), RUB (8.3%), HUF (8.3%), ZAR (8.3%), BRL (11.1%),
MXN (11.1%), CLP (11.1%), CNH (11.1%), INR (11.1%), and SGD (11.1%).
Source: Bloomberg and ICE.

**Chart 6**

**Emerging Economies: Financial Assets**
**Performance**

**(December 17, 2018 - February 1, 2019)**

Percent, basis points


**Region** **Country** **Currencies** **marketsEquity**


**Interest rates**
**2Y**


**Interest rates 10Y** **CDS**


**Mexico** **4.79%** **9.27%** **-43** **-50** **-5**
**Brazil** **6.19%** **12.72%** **-40** **-96** **-33**

**Latin America** **Chile** **5.01%** **6.57%** **-7** **-11** **-9**

**Colombia** **2.80%** **4.21%** **-4** **-16** **-8**
**Argentina** **2.82%** **23.07%** **-78** **-160** **-147**
**Russia** **1.97%** **6.89%** **-43** **-20** **-10**
**Poland** **0.75%** **4.25%** **-8** **-23** **-3**

**Emerging Europe** **Turkey** **3.02%** **14.42%** **-255** **-306** **-71**

**Czech Republic** **1.18%** **1.99%** **-25** **-49** **-1**
**Hungary** **2.75%** **3.27%** **-19** **-53** **-2**
**South Korea** **1.10%** **6.39%** **9** **3** **-8**
**Malaysia** **2.01%** **2.55%** **-6** **-12** **-23**

**Asia** **India** **0.42%** **0.55%** **5** **-3** **-8**

**Philippines** **1.42%** **8.29%** **-19** **-35** **-12**
**Thailand** **4.56%** **3.12%** **-1** **-10** **-2**
**Indonesia** **4.36%** **7.38%** **-22** **-14** **-22**
**Africa** **South Africa** **7.41%** **4.60%** **-36** **-48** **-47**

Note: Interest rates correspond to interest rate swaps for 2-year/10-year
maturities. In the case of Argentina, considering low liquidity and in order to
reflect the performance of the fixed income market adequately, rates in US
dollars are used.
Source: Bloomberg.

Despite the good performance of markets in the last
month, risk factors persist that could lead to greater
volatility in financial markets. These risks include: a


slower growth of the world economy; the possibility
of a further deterioration of household and business
confidence stemming from uncertainty regarding
trade negotiations between the U.S. and China; the
approaching deadline for the Brexit and the
possibility of it being a disorderly process; the high
corporate leverage in some advanced countries;
other political and geopolitical risks; and, the
possibility of a sharper-than-expected deceleration of
the Chinese economy.

**A.2. Current situation of the Mexican economy**

**A.2.1. Mexican markets**

Since the last monetary policy decision, the prices of
financial assets in Mexico have exhibited a more
favorable performance, in line with the trend
observed for the financial assets of other emerging
economies. Several factors contributed to such
results. First, the expectation that the Federal
Reserve will continue its monetary policy
normalization at a more gradual pace than previously
anticipated led to an environment of greater search
for yield and, therefore, to a positive performance of
emerging markets overall. In addition, the approval
of the 2019 Economic Package and the New Mexico
City International Airport (NAICM, for its acronym in
Spanish) bond buy-back contributed favorably to
compress the risk and uncertainty premia that had
gone up after the announcement of the cancellation
of the NAICM. Nevertheless, toward the end of the
period Fitch Ratings’ downgrade of Pemex’s
investment grade from BBB+ to BBB- with a negative
outlook increased the volatility of Mexican financial
assets.

As for domestic currency developments, the Mexican
peso appreciated 4.79%, thus being one of the
currencies that appreciated the most during the
period. Operating conditions in the foreign exchange
market (FX market) remained robust, with trade
volumes, bid/ask spreads and depth levels not seen
since September 2018 (Chart 7 and Chart 8).
Similarly, forward-looking conditions implied by
exchange rate options, measured through volatility
and depreciation bias in the short term, improved,
reflecting the lower risk premia. Finally, forecasters
from several financial institutions adjusted their
exchange rate expectations downwards, from 20.63
to 20.33 pesos per U.S. dollar for the close of 2019,
and to 20.00 pesos per U.S. dollar for the close of
2020 (Chart 9).

15


-----

**Chart 7**

**Mexican Peso Exchange Rate and Trading**
**Volume**

Pesos per US dollar; million USD

February


22.5

22.0

21.5

21.0

20.5

20.0

19.5

19.0

18.5

18.0

17.5


22.5

22.0

21.5

21.0

20.5

20.0

19.5

19.0

18.5

18.0

17.5

17.0

J

2017

|Col1|Col2|
|---|---|
|||
|||
|||
|||
|||
|||
||Februa|
|||
|||
|||


F M A M J J A S O N D J

2018


F M A M J J A S O N D J

2019


F


**Chart 9**

**Analysts’ Mexican Peso Exchange Rate**
**Expectations for Each End of Quarter**

Pesos per US dollar

**19.60**

D M J S D M J S D

Bloomberg interquartile range Bloomberg expectation range Mexican peso

2019 year-end forecast Citibanamex Bloomberg median


Note: Volume exchanged in the spot market classified in percentiles
according to historical series from January 2017 to date (0-20%, 21%- 40%,
41%-60%, 61%- 80% and 81%-100%). The black vertical line represents
Banco de México’s latest monetary policy decision.
Source: Prepared by Banco de México with data from Bloomberg/Banco de
México.

**Chart 8**

**Mexican Foreign Exchange Market Operating**
**Conditions and Peso-dollar Exchange Rate**

Index (5-day moving average), pesos per US dollar

90 22.0

← Index

Mexican peso → 21.5

80

21.0

70 20.5

20.0

60

19.5

50

19.0

40 18.5

18.0

30

17.5

December

20 17.0

J F M A M J J A S O N D J F M A M J J A S O N D J F M A M J J A S O N D

2016 2017 2018

Note: Index calculated using the mean, volatility, skewness, kurtosis, bidask spread and mean of simple differentials all of them related to quotes of
intraday operations, and the total traded volume. After obtaining this data,
the percentiles since 2011 are calculated and the average of the 7
percentiles for each day is considered. The black vertical line represents
Banco de México’s latest monetary policy decision.
Source: Prepared by Banco de México with Reuters data.


Note: The black vertical line represents Banco de México’s latest monetary
policy decision.
Source: Bloomberg and Citibanamex survey.

Mexico’s stock exchange recovered by 9.0% in the
last weeks, completely reversing the losses observed
in November 2018 (Chart 10).

**Chart 10**

**BMV Mexican Stock Exchange Index**

Percent

52,000 2,900

50,000 2,700

48,000 2,500

46,000 2,300

44,000 2,100

42,000 1,900

← Index in Mexican pesos

40,000 1,700

Index in US dollars →

February

38,0002016J F A M2017 J A S 2018O D J 1,500

Source: Bloomberg.2016 2017 2018

Source: Banco de México with Bloomberg data. The black vertical line
represents Banco de México’s latest monetary policy decision.

Interest rates on government securities exhibited
generalized reductions of between 20 and up to 53
basis points along the entire yield curve (Chart 11).
Such reductions took place in a context where
operating conditions improved vis-à-vis those
observed in November and during the first half of
December of 2018 (Chart 12).

16


-----

**Chart 11**

**Nominal Yield on Government Securities**

Percent, basis points

9.25 15

9.00 0

8.75 -15

8.50 -30

8.25 -45

8.00 -60

0 5 10 15 20 25 30

Term in years

←Dec 17, 18 ←Feb 1, 19 Change (Dec 17, 18 to Feb 1, 19)→

Source: PIP.

**Chart 12**

**Index of Mexican Government Debt Market**
**Operating Conditions and June 2027 Bond Rate**

Index (10-day moving average), percent

80 9.5

Index June-27

70 9.0

8.5

60

8.0

50

7.5

40

7.0

30

6.5

20

6.0

10 5.5

February

0 5.0

J F M M J J S O N J F M M J J S O N J F A M J J S O N J

2016 2017 2018

Note: Index calculated with the changes in bonds’ interest rates, volatility of
events, bid-ask spread, the average of the differences in quotes of intra-day
operations, and the daily interbank and customer traded volume.
Considering the aforementioned, percentiles since 2016 and the average of
percentiles for every day is calculated. The vertical line represents the date
of Banco de México’s latest monetary policy decision.
Source: Calculated by Banco de México with data from Bloomberg, PIP and
brokerage firms.

Similarly, the spreads between the yield of Mexican
debt denominated in foreign currency and U.S.
Treasury bonds decreased marginally (Chart 13),
while the spreads between Pemex bonds and federal
government bonds in US dollars widened, due to the
credit rating downgrade of Mexico’s state-owned oil
company (Chart 14).


**Chart 13**

**Spread between Nominal Interest Rates in**
**Mexico and the United States**
**in Foreign Currency**

Basis points

300

3 years 5 years 10 years 30 years

250

200

150

100

50

0

J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J

2015 2016 2017 2018 2019

Source: Banco de México with Bloomberg data.

**Chart 14**

**Spread between Pemex and UMS Bonds**

**in US dollars (Different Terms)**

Basis points

350

3-year 5-year 10-year 30-year

300

250

200

150

100

50

February

0

M2016 M A M 2017J J A S 2018O N D J

Source: Bloomberg.2016 2017 2018

Note: The black vertical line represents Banco de México’s latest monetary
policy decision.
Source: Banco de México with Bloomberg data.

Finally, expectations regarding the level of the
monetary policy target rate implied in the yield curve
structure remained stable vis-à-vis the levels of the
previous period (Chart 15). Thus, markets are not
anticipating adjustments to the monetary policy
target rate in the monetary policy decision of
February, in line with the forecasters surveyed by
Citibanamex. As for expectations for the monetary
policy target rate for the end of 2019, markets
anticipate that it will end the year at 8.00%, while the
median forecast by analysts is that it will end at
8.25%.

17


-----

**Chart 15**

**Banxico Overnight Interbank Rate Implied in**

**28-day TIIE IRS Curve**

Percent

8.75

Banxico overnight interbank rate (reference rate)

8.50 17-Dec-18

Rest of the period

8.25

1-Feb-19

8.00

7.75

7.50

7.25

7.00

6.75

jun. 17J nov. 17N           M           J           D           A           S   mar. 18 jul. 18 dic. 18 abr. 19 ago. 19

2017                  2018                              2019

Source: Calculated by Banco de México with PIP data.

**A.2.2. Economic activity in Mexico**

According to INEGI’s GDP flash estimate, economic
activity decelerated significantly during the fourth
quarter of 2018, as compared to the previous quarter
(Chart 16). In particular, manufacturing exports
slightly stagnated, private consumption exhibited
some deceleration, and investment remained on a
negative path. This loss of dynamism could continue
in the first months of 2019 as a result of the slowdown
of the world economy, some weakness in domestic
demand, and other transitory factors, such as those
associated with fuel distribution and the blocking of
transportation routes.

**Chart 16**

**Gross Domestic Product**

Quarterly percentage change, s. a.

2

1

0

-1


-2


Q-IV 1/

II III IV


I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV

2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018

1/ Figures for the fourth quarter of 2018 correspond to INEGI’s GDP
quarterly flash estimate.
Source: Mexico’s National Accounts System (SCNM, for its acronym in
Spanish), INEGI.

As for external demand, during the last quarter of
2018 manufacturing exports remained at a level
similar to that of the previous quarter, in a context
where global trade has slowed. By destination,


exports to the U.S. grew at a lower rate than in the
previous quarters, while those to the rest of the world
contracted again (Chart 17). Similarly, automotive
exports decreased and non-automotive exports
decelerated.

**Chart 17**

**Manufacturing Exports**
Indices 2013 = 100, s. a.

140

Total

130 Rest

United States

120

110

100

90

80

December

70

J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O D

2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018

s. a. / Seasonally adjusted series and trend series based on data in nominal
USD. The former is represented by a solid line and the latter by a dotted
line.
Source: Prepared by Banco de México with data from the Tax
Administration Service (SAT, for its acronym in Spanish), the Ministry of the
Economy (SE, for its acronym in Spanish), Banco de México, the National
Institute of Statistics and Geography (INEGI, for its acronym in Spanish),
Mexico’s Merchandise Trade Balance, and National System of Statistical
and Geographical Information (SNIEG, for its acronym in Spanish).

As for domestic demand, according to its monthly
indicator, private consumption exhibited a large
contraction in October 2018. Although this indicator
is expected to recover in November, a slight loss of
dynamism is observed in private consumption,
relative to previous months. This lower dynamism
reflects the weakness in the consumption of overall
goods, given that the consumption of services has
continued on a positive trend. Latest indicators of
consumption, although of less coverage continued
posting weak results. In particular, retail stores
revenues decelerated vis-à-vis the growth observed
in the first half of 2018, while sales of light vehicles
contracted significantly at the end of the year.

The negative trend followed by gross fixed
investment continued, due partly to weak
construction spending, which can be associated, to
some extent, to the slowing down and suspension of
most NAICM construction works and, to a lesser
extent, to the completion of some public
infrastructure works. In addition, the negative trend
followed by investment in machinery and equipment
continued.

As for production, the downturn in economic activity
during the fourth quarter of 2018 reflected the
weakness of secondary activities, given that tertiary

18


-----

activities kept exhibiting dynamism and primary
activities exhibited an even better performance than
in the previous quarter (Chart 18). As for industrial
production, both construction and mining, activities
followed a downward trend, while manufacturing
continued to show lack of vigor, after an incipient
recovery observed in the first half of 2018 (Chart 19).
As for services, the subsectors of finance and
insurance; real estate and rental and leasing;
transportation and warehousing, information;
educational services; and health care and social
assistance contributed to a large degree to the
dynamism exhibited by this sector.

**Chart 18**

**Global Index of Economic Activity**

Indices 2013 = 100, s. a.

120 140

Total

Secondary activities

Tertiary activities

115 130

Primary activities

110 120

105 110

100 100

Diciembre

2/
December 1/

95 90

J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O D

2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018

s. a. / Seasonally adjusted and trend series. The former is represented by a
solid line and the latter by a dotted line.
1/ Figures up to December 2018 correspond to the implicit estimate based
on INEGI’s GDP flash estimate for the fourth quarter of 2018.
Source: Mexico’s National Accounts System (SCNM, for its acronym in
Spanish), INEGI.

**Chart 19**

**Industrial Activity**

Indices 2013 = 100, s. a.

120

110

100

90 Total

Mining (22.3%)

Manufacturing (49.7%)

80


As for the economy’s cyclical position, slack
conditions are deemed to have eased in the fourth
quarter of 2018, relative to the third quarter (Chart
20). Regarding the labor market, both national and
urban unemployment rates increased significantly in
December 2018, reaching their highest levels since
the end of 2016 (Chart 21). Similarly, by the end of
2018, IMSS-insured jobs exhibited a significant
reduction in its growth rate, mostly associated with
the negative performance of certain sectors, such as
construction and some services. Despite the
decrease observed in November 2018, unit labor
costs in the manufacturing industry maintained an
upward trend.

**Chart 20**

**Output Gap Estimates [1/]**

**Excluding Oil Industry [4/ ]**

Potential output percentages, s. a.

8

Global Economic Activity Indicator 2/

6 Gross Domestic Product 2/

95% Confidence Interval 3/

4

2

0

-2

-4

-6

-8

-10 Q-IV

December

-12

J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J OD

2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018

s. a. / Seasonally adjusted figures.
1/ Output gap estimated with a tail-corrected Hodrick-Prescott filter; see
Banco de México (2009), “Inflation Report (April-June 2009)", p.74.
2/ GDP flash figures up to the fourth quarter of 2018; IGAE figures up to
December 2018, consistent with INEGI’s flash estimate.
3/ Output gap confidence interval calculated with a method of unobserved
components.
4/ Excludes both oil and gas extraction, support activities for mining, and
petroleum and coal products' manufacturing.
Source: Prepared by Banco de México with INEGI data.

19


70


J

2012


A J O J

2013


A J O J

2014


A J O J

2015


A J O J

2016


A J O J

2017


A J O J

2018


November

A J O N


s. a. / Seasonally adjusted series and trend series. The former is
represented by a solid line and the latter by a dotted line.
Source: Mexico’s National Accounts System (SCNM, for its acronym in
Spanish), INEGI.


-----

**Chart 21**

**National Unemployment Rate and Urban**
**Unemployment Rate**

Percent, s. a.


13

12

11

10

9

8

7

6

5

4

3

2

1


**Chart 22**

**Consumer Price Index**

Annual percentage change

CPI
Core
Non-core


8.5

8.0

7.5

7.0

6.5

6.0

5.5

5.0

4.5

4.0

3.5

3.0

2.5


December 0


J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O D

2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018

s. a. / Seasonally adjusted and trend series. The former is represented by a
solid line and the latter by a dotted line.
Source: National Survey of Occupations and Employment (ENOE, for its
acronym in Spanish), INEGI.

In December 2018, domestic financing to the private
sector continued following the decelerating trend that
began to be observed at the start of the third quarter
of that year. The aforementioned reflected the
reduction in the growth rate of financing to
companies that has been observed since the second
half of 2018, while lending to households continued
growing at low rates. The latter occurred in a context
where the cost of financing to companies remained
on an upward trend and where interest rates of credit
to households did not change significantly, except for
those associated with credit cards. Business and
mortgage delinquency rates remained at low levels,
while those related to consumption credit have
followed a downward trend since August 2018,
although they still remain at high levels. In addition to
the decline in financing to the non-financial private
sector, there was a contraction of available external
resources, while the lack of vigor of domestic sources
of financing observed since October 2018 increased
further.

**A.2.3. Developments in inflation and outlook for**
**inflation**

Annual headline inflation fell from 4.72% in
November 2018 to 4.37% in January 2019, mainly
due to a reduction in non-core inflation, as core
inflation continued to exhibit resistance to decline
(Chart 22 and Table 1).


J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J

2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019

Source: Banco de México and INEGI.

Indeed, annual core inflation remained at similar
levels from November 2018 to January 2019,
registering rates of 3.63% and 3.60%, respectively.
The annual rates of change of both food and nonfood merchandise goods prices decreased (Chart
23). Nevertheless, the annual rate of change of
services prices increased (Chart 24) due to the
higher price increases of services other than housing
and education, especially those observed in the
prices of tourist services.

**Chart 23**

**Merchandise Core Price Subindex**

Annual percentage change

8

Food, beverages and tobacco

7 Non-food merchandise

6

5

4

3

2

1

January

0

J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J

2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019

Source: Banco de México and INEGI.

20


-----

**Chart 24**

**Merchandise and Services Core Price Subindex**

Annual percentage change

7

Merchandise

6 Services

5

4

3

2

1

January

0

J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J

2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019

Source: Banco de México and INEGI.

Annual non-core inflation fell from 8.07 to 6.81%
between November 2018 and January 2019. The
reduction is associated with the lower increases in
energy and in meats, poultry, fish and eggs prices.
These results were partially offset by increases in
fruit and vegetable prices (Chart 25 and Table 1)

**Chart 25**

**Non-core Price Subindex**
Annual percentage change


20

15

10

5

0

-5


Non-core
Agriculture
Energy and government-authorized prices


J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J

2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019

Source: Banco de México and INEGI.

The medians for short-term inflation expectations
drawn from surveys decreased. In particular, the
medians for headline inflation expectations from
Banco de México’s Survey of Private Sector
Forecasters for the end of 2019 and 2020 were
adjusted downwards, from 3.89 to 3.80% and from
3.79 to 3.71%, respectively. This decrease is
explained by the reduction in implied non-core
inflation expectations (from 5.10 to 4.73% and from
5.09 to 4.51%, respectively), given that the median
for the core component for 2019 remained
unchanged at 3.50% and that for 2020 was adjusted


upwards from 3.37 to 3.45%. The medians for
headline inflation expectations for the following 12
months, relative to the month in which data is
collected and to the subsequent month, were
adjusted from 3.89 to 3.98% and from 3.87 to 3.98%,
respectively. The median for headline inflation
expectations for the medium term (next four years)
fell by 2 basis points to 3.53% in January’s survey. In
contrast, the median for longer terms (next 5 to 8
years) remained stable at around 3.50%. In recent
surveys, the medians for core inflation increased to
levels near 3.4%, above the 3% headline inflation
target. Finally, although inflation expectations implied
in quoted market prices of long-term money market
instruments (drawn from 10-year government bonds)
increased gradually and remained at levels close to
3.5% during the reported period, the inflation risk
premium decreased. Nevertheless, the latter
remains at relatively high levels not seen since March
2017.

The forecasts for annual headline inflation continue
to anticipate that it will reach a level around Banco de
México’s inflation target during the first half of 2020.
Annual core inflation is expected to be near 3% from
year-end 2019. The abovementioned forecasts are
subject to risks. Among upward risks are: that the
peso exchange rate comes under pressure
stemming from external and domestic factors; that
new pressures on energy prices or on agricultural
product prices arise; that an escalation of
protectionist and compensatory measures worldwide
materializes; that public finances deteriorate; and,
considering the magnitude of the recent minimum
wage increases, besides their possible direct impact,
that these bring about wage revisions that exceed
productivity gains and give rise to cost pressures,
thus affecting formal employment and prices. In order
to raise the purchasing power of wages sustainably,
the role of other public policies must be considered,
in particular, fostering competition in those sectors of
goods and services with a high share in the
consumption basket of the segments of the low
income population. An additional upward risk is that
the persistence shown by core inflation could also
give rise to a greater resistance of long-term inflation
expectations to decline. Among downside risks,
those that stand out are possible lower price
variations in some of the goods included in the noncore subindex or greater-than-foreseen slack
conditions. Considering all of the above, the balance
of risks for the forecast path of inflation remains
biased to the upside, in an environment of high
uncertainty.

21


-----

**Table 1**

**Consumer Price Index and Components**

Annual percentage change

**November 2018** **December 2018** **January 2019**

**CPI** **4.72** **4.83** **4.37**

**Core** **3.63** **3.68** **3.60**

**Merchandise** **3.90** **3.92** **3.66**
Food, beverages and tobacco 4.79 4.73 4.30
Non-food merchandise 3.13 3.18 3.03

**Services** **3.37** **3.47** **3.51**
Housing 2.60 2.62 2.59
Education (tuitions) 4.69 4.69 4.68
Other services 3.98 4.09 4.28

**Non-core** **8.07** **8.40** **6.81**

**Agriculture** **4.78** **7.06** **7.41**

Fruits and vegetables 6.02 10.20 13.23

Meats, poultry, fish and eggs 3.15 3.35 1.95

**Energy and government-authorized prices** **10.30** **9.10** **6.26**

Energy products 13.26 11.62 7.36

Government-authorized prices **3.39** **3.15** 3.45

Source: INEGI.


22


-----

-----

-----

