**BANK OF ISRAEL**
Office of the Spokesperson and Economic Information

October 10, 2011

**Report to the public on the Bank of Israel’s discussions prior to setting the**
**interest rate for October 2011**

**The discussions took place on September 21 and 25, 2011**

**General**

Before the Governor makes the monthly interest rate decision,[1] discussions are held at
two levels––the first in a broad forum, and the second in a narrower one.

In the broad-forum discussion, the relevant background economic conditions are
presented, including real, monetary and financial developments in Israel’s economy,
and developments in the global economy. Participants in this discussion include the
Governor, the Deputy Governor, the directors of the Research and Market Operations
Departments of the Bank and economists from various departments who prepare and
present the material for discussion. The data, estimates and assessments in this report
are those that were available at the time of the discussions.

In the narrow forum, the directors of the Research and Market Operations
Departments and three other participating members of management (the Deputy
Governor, Senior Advisor to the Governor on Monetary Policy Issues and the Head of
the Monetary and Finance Division of the Research Department) present their
recommendations regarding the interest rate and, following a discussion, the Governor
makes his decision.

A. THE BROAD-FORUM DISCUSSION—THE STATE OF THE ECONOMY

**1. Developments on the real side**

_General assessment_

Domestic economic activity continues to expand, but at a slower rate than in 2010 and
the first quarter of 2011. The data that became available since the previous monetary

1 When the Monetary Committee is appointed, in accordance with the new Bank of Israel Law, interest
rate decisions will be made by the Committee.


-----

policy discussions show that activity in the high-tech industries and exports leveled
off, due to the moderation in activity abroad. The second National Accounts estimate
of the growth of GDP in the second quarter, a 3.5 percent annual rate, was slightly
higher than the original estimate, the result of an upward revision of the figures of
exports, private consumption, and investment. The moderate rate of activity was also
reflected in the composite state-of-the-economy index, which rose by 0.3 percent in
August, with upward revisions of the indices for the previous two months. The
increase in the index reflects a moderation, which began in March, in its rate of
increase. Tax revenues increased, in real terms, but were still below the seasonal path,
for the fifth month in succession. The Central Bureau of Statistics August survey of
trends indicates declines in growth in all industries. Nevertheless, expectations in all
industries apart from the hotel industry and high-tech industries are for increased
activity in the next three months. The Globes and Bank Hapoalim consumer
confidence indices point to reductions in the public's purchasing plans, although they
both suggest that the public is still optimistic about the economic situation in the
future.

The S&P credit rating agency raised Israel's credit rating to A+ from its previous A,
with a "stable" outlook; this was attributed to the government's policy of reducing of
the debt/GDP ratio, the potential deriving from the discoveries of natural gas, and the
stability of the banking system.

_The National Accounts_

The second National Accounts estimate for the second quarter of 2011 shows a slight
improvement compared with the first estimate. The figure of GDP growth in the
second quarter was increased to 3.5 percent, (compared with the previous estimate of
3.3 percent) (all National Accounts data quoted herein are seasonally adjusted, in
annual terms). The increase in private consumption was revised upwards to 3.2
percent, from the original estimate of 2.2 percent. Exports excluding diamonds
increased by 5.2 percent (compared with the original estimated increase of 0.5
percent), and civilian imports excluding ships, aircraft and diamonds increased by 8.3
percent (up from the original estimate of 5.6 percent). The Bank of Israel assessment
is that the economy is near full employment.

_The composite state-of-the-economy index and monthly indices of the economic_
_situation_

The composite index rose by 0.3 percent in August, a similar increase to those
recorded in the previous two months (after their upward revisions), which points to
continued economic growth, albeit at a slower rate than that in the first two months of
the year. The rise reflects increases in the indices of manufacturing production,
imports of production inputs, and services exports, that were partly offset by declines
in the indices of goods exports and trade and services revenue.


-----

In the months May–July, the revenue of industries increased by 3.2 percent
(seasonally adjusted, in annual terms), following the 3 percent increase in the previous
three months.

Consumer confidence indices and the Purchasing Managers Index do not present a
consistent picture this month but what emerges is a generally downward trend:
whereas the Central Bureau of Statistics (CBS) and the Bank Hapoalim consumer
confidence indices showed declines, the Globes index rose by 2.7 points, but it has
shown a general downward trend since the beginning of 2010. The index of domestic
demand, calculated by the Bank of Israel Research Department based on a Google
search index, continued to drop, but was still above the 50 percent level, thus
indicating a continuation of the growth of private consumption.

_The labor market_

Labor market data for the second quarter indicate a continued improvement in
employment. The unemployment rate continued to decline, and reached the low level
of 5.5 percent, while the rate of participation in the labor market remained steady and
the rate of employment increased. The number of employee posts, seasonally
adjusted, increased by 0.4 percent in the three months April–June compared with the
previous three months. The ratio of the number of unemployed to the number of
vacancies in the business sector was a low 2.5 (i.e., there were 2.5 unemployed people
for every vacancy). The nominal wage increased in April–June by 1.1 percent (threemonthly rate, seasonally adjusted) compared with the level in the previous three
months, while the real wage increased by 0.4 percent. Health tax receipts, which
provide an indication of wage payments, were 7.5 percent higher in August (initial
estimate), in nominal terms, than in August 2010 (excluding the effect of legislative
changes).

_Foreign trade_

Goods exports excluding ships, airplanes and diamonds dropped by 5.7 percent in
August, after falling 2.8 percent in July. Services exports increased by 1.4 percent in
August.

The estimate of world trade (the G3 Trade Index)[2] shows a continuation of the
downward trend in July, with a decline of 0.2 percent. The Tech Pulse Index in the
US remained essentially unchanged in August, with a slight dip of 0.1 percent.

2 The G3 Trade Index is a weighted measure of the total foreign trade of the US, Germany and Japan.
The index serves as an early indicator of global trade.


-----

**2. Budget data**

Government domestic revenues in August were 9 percent lower than the forecast
seasonal path, due to a continued slowdown in indirect tax revenues. Tax revenues for
the year to date, through August (net of legislative changes and one time revenues),
were 5.3 percent higher, in real terms, than in the corresponding period of the year
before, but 1.6 percent below the seasonal path of the budget forecast. The
government's domestic activity in the first eight months of this year (excluding net
credit) resulted in a cumulative deficit of 0.7 percent of GDP, compared with a deficit
of 1.6 percent of GDP in the corresponding period of 2010. Developments in
government activity so far indicate that the budget deficit for the full year of 2011 will
be slightly below the deficit ceiling set by law (3 percent of GDP).

**3. Developments on the nominal side**

_Inflation_

The Consumer Price Index (CPI) increased 0.5 percent in August, at the upper limit of
forecasts and above the seasonal path consistent with achieving the inflation target.
Inflation over the past 12 months, as measured by the change in the CPI, was 3.4
percent, above the upper limit of the target inflation range (of 1–3 percent a year).
Nonetheless, the rate of inflation over the past six months, seasonally adjusted, is near
the lower limit of the inflation target.

_Expectations and forecasts of inflation and of the Bank of Israel interest rate_

Inflation expectations for the next twelve months as calculated from the capital
markets were steady over the past month and remained at 2 percent on average.
Forecasters' inflation predictions for the next twelve months continued to fall, and
declined to 2.3 percent. The background to the consolidation of inflation expectations
around the midpoint of the target range, despite the depreciation in the past several
weeks, was continued expectations of a slowdown in growth in Israel and worldwide,
as well as internalization of the process of lowering prices by retail chains and various
service providers, as part of the impact of social protests against the high cost of
living. At the same time, forecasts of the Bank of Israel interest rate continued to fall.
Based on the Telbor (Tel Aviv Inter-Bank Offered Rate) market, the Bank of Israel
interest rate one year from now is expected to be 3 percent, down from the
expectation of 3.1 percent a month ago, and the average of forecasters' predictions is
that it will be 3.15 percent (down from 3.6 percent a month ago). Most forecasters
expected the Bank of Israel to leave the interest rate for October unchanged.

_The makam and bond markets_

In the government bond market, the yield curve of unindexed bonds steepened, with
drops of 14 basis points in maturities of up to 1 year and rises of up to 8 basis points


-----

in other maturities. Yields on CPI-indexed government bonds rose by up to 8 basis
points for most maturities. Makam yields fell by up to 20 basis points across the yield
curve, as the yield for one year fell during the period from 3.08 percent to 2.98
percent.

The main feature of the corporate bond market, especially in holding companies, was
the continued rise in yields on bonds of several companies. The Tel-Bond indices
dropped sharply at the beginning of the month, with the Tel-Bond 20 falling by 3
percent and the Tel-Bond 40 by 3.7 percent. In the last week, however, the indices
made up all the declines against the background of interest rate declines around the
world. The yield spreads between the Tel-Bond 20 and Tel-Bond 40 and government
bonds widened.

_The yield gap and interest rate differential between Israel and abroad_

The yield gap between Israeli unindexed 10-year government bonds and 10-year US
Treasury bonds continued to widen during the period surveyed, and at the end of the
period stood at 292 b.p. (up from 262 b.p. at the beginning of the period).

Prior to the current interest rate decision, the Bank of Israel interest rate was 3
percentage points higher than the Fed rate, and 1.75 percentage points higher than the
European Central Bank (ECB) rate.

_The expected real interest rate_

The current Bank of Israel interest rate deflated by the twelve-months-forward
inflation expectations derived from the capital markets averaged 1.06 percent in
September (to the date of the current discussions).

_The monetary aggregates_

In the twelve months up to and including August, the M1 monetary aggregate (cash
held by the public and demand deposits) increased by 3.6 percent, and the M2
aggregate (M1 plus unindexed deposits of up to one year) increased by 12.6 percent.

_The credit market_

The balance of outstanding credit to the business sector increased in July by 0.9
percent, to NIS 757 billion. Outstanding credit to households increased by 0.3 percent
in July, to NIS 357 billion. Of the credit to households, outstanding housing credit
rose 11.6 percent in the twelve months ending in July, to NIS 253 billion, compared
with an 11.9 percent increase in the twelve months to June. The volume of housing
credit granted in the 12 months ending in August was 1.4 percent lower than in the 12
months ending in July. The share of mortgages at floating interest rates (for all
periods) in total new mortgages continued to decline in August, and reached 76
percent, compared with 79 percent in the month before. The interest rates on CPI

-----

indexed and unindexed floating rate mortgages continued to increase in July, while
the interest rates on variable rate unindexed mortgages declined.

_The housing market_

Activity in the construction industry continues to be strong. The number of starts in
the twelve months to June reached 42,757 and the number of completions was 33,613,
figures which were very similar to the levels of the previous month. The number of
new homes sold fell, and in May–July was 9.6 percent lower than in February–April.
The stock of new homes available for sale continued to increase, and in May–July
was on average 6.4 percent higher than the three preceding months. Home prices,
which are presented in the Central Bureau of Statistics survey of home prices but are
not included in the CPI, increased at a monthly rate of 0.4 percent in June–July, after
rising 0.2 percent in May–June (an estimate that was revised down this month). The
annual rate of increase in home prices is maintaining stability: in the twelve months
ended in June–July home prices increased by 12.3 percent; compared with a 12.1
percent increase in the May–June figure. The slowdown in the rate of increase in
home prices was affected by increases in the interest rate, measures introduced by the
Bank of Israel affecting mortgages, and steps taken by the Ministry of Finance in real
estate taxation, together with the continued increase in the number of building starts.
In contrast, the housing price index, which is based mainly on renewed rental
contracts and which is included in the CPI, continued to increase, rising by 1.3
percent in July, bringing the increase in the last twelve months to 5.2 percent.

_The Research Department assessment (staff forecast)_

The Research Department staff forecast was updated this month. The current
assessment is that inflation in the four quarters ending in the third quarter of 2012 will
be 2.3 percent, and the average interest rate in the third quarter will be 3 percent. The
Research Department forecasts that the inflation rate for the whole of 2011 will be at
the upper limit of the target range, and that the average interest rate in the fourth
quarter will be 3.25 percent. The forecasts of GDP growth in 2011 and 2012 were
revised downwards: the current forecast is for 4.7 percent growth in 2011 (down from
4.8 percent in the previous forecast) and 3.2 percent in 2012 (down from 3.9 percent
in the previous forecast). The assessment was based on, among other things, the
downward revision by the IMF of its forecasts, which now include a decline in global
growth and in the rate of expansion of world trade. The Research Department
emphasized the primary risks faced by Israel's economy, specifically, the risk of
another global recession and geopolitical risks that could have economic
consequences.


-----

**4. The foreign currency and share markets**

_The foreign currency market_

From the previous monetary policy discussion held on August 28, through September
23, the shekel depreciated by about 2.7 percent against the dollar, a far more moderate
depreciation than that of other currencies against the dollar. In contrast, the shekel
appreciated 4.6 percent against the euro, while the major currencies showed mixed
trends vis-à-vis the euro. The shekel strengthened by about 2.2 percent in terms of the
nominal effective exchange rate.

_The share market_

Between the monetary policy discussions of August 28 and September 23, the Tel
Aviv 25 Index fell by 5 percent, similar to the trend in most stock markets abroad.

**5. Israel’s financial risk, the sovereign risk premium**

Israel's sovereign risk premium as measured by the five-year CDS spread continued to
rise, against the background of geopolitical events and the deteriorating situation in
European economies, and widened from 166 basis points to 218 basis points.

**6. Global economic developments (see Appendix for further details)**

This month, most macroeconomic figures published in the US and the eurozone were
weak. The debt crisis continued to worsen this month as well: in Greece, CDS spreads
indicated a growing probability of default in the near future; in the past week S&P cut
its credit rating for Italy, with a negative outlook; there was growing concern of the
European debt crisis spreading to the banking system, and amid that, credit ratings on
large banks in the US, France, and Italy were cut. Against the background of
increasing risk and negative macroeconomic data, investment banks and the IMF
lowered their growth forecasts for major economies and for the global economy. The
IMF revised its 2012 forecasts of global growth from 4.5 percent to 4 percent, and of
world trade growth figures from 6.7 percent to 5.8 percent. The IMF also cut its
forecast for US economic growth in 2012 from 2.7 percent to 1.8 percent, and cut its
forecast for economic growth in Europe in 2012 from 1.7 percent to 1.1 percent

B. THE NARROW-FORUM DISCUSSION––THE INTEREST RATE DECISION
FOR OCTOBER 2011

In the monthly narrow-forum monetary policy discussion, five members of
management make recommendations to the Governor regarding the appropriate rate
of interest for the economy. Following the current discussions on the interest rate for
October, three members recommended that the Governor leave the interest rate


-----

unchanged at 3.25 percent, and two recommended that he reduce the rate by 0.25
percentage points to 3.0 percent.

Participants in the discussion dealt with several issues: the inflation environment, real
economic activity in Israel, the housing market, and the risks deriving from the global
environment.

The marked moderation in Israel's inflation environment was noted: inflation in the
previous twelve months was 3.4 percent, still above the upper limit of the inflation
target, but over the last six months the rate of inflation, seasonally adjusted, has been
close to the lower limit of the inflation target range. It was stated that the factors
contributing to inflation included the housing market (in the last year), and food and
energy prices. Together with the slowdown in actual inflation, expected inflation as
reflected in the markets also declined: one-year forward inflation expectations
calculated from the capital market (break-even inflation) continued to fall this month
too, and are currently at the center of the target range.

In the discussion the point was made that the economic indicators published this
month continue to show that domestic economic activity is still growing, but at a
slower pace than in 2010 and in the first quarter of 2011. The slowdown was mainly
the result of the easing of world demand and its effect on exports. Recently there has
been increasing concern over a negative turnaround in activity in the US and the
eurozone and over the geopolitical risks.

House prices were also discussed: these had risen another 0.4 percent this month,
bringing the increase over the last twelve months to 12.3 percent. Although the rate of
increase is somewhat slower than in the last few months, it is still high. The increase
in rents is also continuing at a quick pace. That said, it is assessed that the increase in
housing starts, along with steps by the Bank of Israel in the mortgage market and
measures taken by the Ministry of Finance in real estate taxation, will help moderate
the rate of price increases.

The risks arising from the global environment include primarily the intensification of
the debt crisis of peripheral eurozone countries, reflected in widening CDS spreads
for Greece and a credit rating cut for Italy; the concern of the crisis spreading to the
banking system, seen in lowered credit ratings of large banks in the US, France, and
Italy; and the lowered growth and world trade forecasts. These risks are liable to lead
to a negative impact on economic activity in Israel, primarily on the exporting sector.

In light of the background situation described in the discussion, three members of
management recommended leaving the interest rate unchanged, while two
recommended reducing the rate.

The main argument in favor of cutting the interest rate by 0.25 percentage points was
based on the combination of risks from the global arena. The impact of these risks, if


-----

realized, were expected to be mainly on exports, so that lowering the interest rate
would reduce the effect on GDP both via the exchange rate and via domestic demand.

The main considerations favoring leaving the interest rate unchanged in the meantime
were concern of a continued increase in housing prices (rents) and home prices as
well as the high level of economic activity. In this framework, the concern was raised
that despite the increase in inventory of houses and the steps taken by the Bank of
Israel and the Ministry of Finance, lowering the interest rate is liable to lead to
acceleration in the rate of increase of home prices. In addition, the economy is at a
high level of activity, apparently around full employment.

Taking all the above into consideration, the Governor decided to cut the interest rate
for October by 0.25 of a percentage point, to 3.0 percent.

In announcing the decision, the Bank of Israel emphasized the following points that
led to the decision to reduce the interest rate:

- Assessments have firmed recently that the slowdown in global growth will be
steeper than previously expected. The IMF reduced its forecast of US growth in
2012 from 2.7 percent to 1.8 percent, and growth in the eurozone from 1.7 percent
to 1.1 percent and it is assessed that the balance of risks is negative.

- The weakness of the US and European economies led policymakers in those
countries to adopt more expansionary measures (Operation Twist in the US, and
other steps in the eurozone to increase liquidity). There are now market
expectations of a cut in the ECB interest rate. In addition, volatility has increased
in capital markets around the world, and the downward trend in prices of financial
assets continues.

- The more severe global slowdown is reflected in slower growth of real activity in
Israel, and in particular in the weakness of goods exports. The Bank of Israel has
lowered its growth forecast for 2012 from 3.9 percent to 3.2 percent, and in the
Israeli economy too the balance of risks is to the downside.

- Inflation expectations for the next twelve months as calculated from the capital
market have remained stable this month around the midpoint of the 1–3 percent
target range, and those of the forecasters continued to decline towards the
midpoint of the inflation target range, and are currently 2.3 percent. The
cumulative change in the last six monthly CPI readings, seasonally adjusted, is
consistent with the lower bound of the target inflation range. Nevertheless,
inflation over the previous twelve months, 3.4 percent, is still above the target
range. The Bank of Israel's staff forecast and professional forecasters' expectations
of the inflation rate at the end of 2011 or the beginning of 2012, measured over
the previous twelve months, are within the target range.


-----

- The rate of increase in house prices in the last twelve months continues to be high,
but in the last few months some moderation has been evident, and in the twelve
months to June–July the rate was 12.3 percent (compared with 12.1 percent to
May–June). The effects of the measures taken by the Bank of Israel with regard to
mortgages, changes in real estate taxation introduced by the Ministry of Finance,
and the sustained increase in building starts are expected to continue to contribute
to this moderation in the coming year.

The Bank of Israel will continue to monitor developments in the Israeli economy and
the global economy and in financial markets. The Bank will use the instruments
available to it to achieve its objectives of price stability, the encouragement of
employment and growth, and support for the stability of the financial system,
including keeping a close watch on developments in assets markets, including the
housing market.

The decision was reached and announced on September 26, 2011.

**Participants in the narrow-forum discussion:**
Prof. Stanley Fischer, Governor of the Bank of Israel
Dr. Karnit Flug, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Israel
Mr. Barry Topf, Senior Advisor to the Governor on Monetary Policy Issues
Mr. Andrew Abir, Director of the Market Operations Department
Dr. Michel Strawczynski, Head of Macroeconomic and Policy Division and Acting
Director of the Research Department
Dr. Edward Offenbacher, Member of Management and Head of the Monetary and
Finance Division, Research Department
Mr. Eddy Azoulay, Chief of Staff to the Governor
Dr. Yossi Saadon, Advisor to the Governor and Bank of Israel Spokesperson
Ms. Esti Schwartz, Monetary Committee Secretary
Ms. Ziv Naor, Economist, Research Department


-----

**Appendix: Major Global Economic Developments**

_The US_

Despite several economic figures for July that indicated a positive trend, including an
increase in personal income and private consumption, the continued expansion of
consumer credit and a decline in the trade deficit due to export growth, most of the
data for August indicate a slowdown in growth. The number of claims for
unemployment benefits increased, in the New York and Philadelphia areas production
activity contracted more severely, the purchasing managers index (PMI) in the
manufacturing sector declined and settled close to the level indicating a freeze, and
consumer confidence indices dropped steeply. According to the Summary of
Commentary on Current Economic Conditions published by the Federal Reserve
Board (the "Beige Book"), economic growth slowed in several parts of the US: seven
of the twelve Federal Reserve regions reported slower growth than in their previous
reports. In contrast, manufacturing output increased, as did the Institute of Supply
Management (ISM) Non-Manufacturing Composite and New Orders Indexes (i.e.,
service industries), with most components of the index showing an expansionary trend
(above 50 percent); however, the business activity and employment components
declined.

The number of jobs did not increase in the US, and the unemployment rate stayed
unchanged at 9.1 percent, with those unemployed for half a year or longer accounting
for 43 percent of the total number of unemployed. The number of "involuntary" parttime workers (i.e., those who would prefer full-time employment) also increased, and
the average number of hours worked weekly dropped. Labor productivity in the nonagricultural business sector declined in the second quarter by 0.7 percent, annual rate,
while in manufacturing the drop was greater, 1.5 percent. According to Moody's
assessment, the US president's $447 billion employment encouragement plan, that
includes expenditure on improving infrastructures, direct aid to states and
municipalities, cuts in tax on labor, benefits to businesses that recruit new workers,
tax benefits for small businesses, extending the period of entitlement to
unemployment benefits, and increasing the number of retraining courses, will all
together add about 2 percent to GDP and create 1.9 million jobs.

The continued rise in the level of inflation to the 2008 level, and inflation excluding
food and energy to 2 percent, the highest level since 2008, reduces the chances of an
announcement of QE3 (a third quantitative easing program).

_Europe_

The debt crisis in Europe continued to worsen this month in light of the concern that
Greece was likely to reach the stage of defaulting on its payments in the near future,
the lowering of Italy's credit rating by S&P to A, with a negative outlook, and concern
over the spread of the European debt crisis into the banking system in Europe.

Second quarter growth in the eurozone was a low 0.8 percent, annual rate; the German
economy grew by less than half a percent, France recorded zero growth, and growth
in Italy was 1.2 percent. Against the background of a high level of uncertainty
regarding the spread of the debt crisis, there are increasing risks of a slowdown in EU


-----

member countries. Those risks resulted in the ECB leaving the interest rate at 1.5
percent, and revising its 2011 growth forecast for the eurozone downwards from 1.5–
2.3 percent in June to 1.2–1.4 percent. It also reduced the growth forecast for 2012.
The markets in the eurozone are factoring in a reduction in the interest rate as early as
the next ECB meeting.

Current indicators point to a continued slowdown in the rate of activity: the eurozone
PMI (purchasing managers index) dropped to 49 points; new orders in manufacturing
were 0.7 percent lower in June than in May; the unemployment rate was unchanged at
10 percent in July, with the rate in countries with the most serious economic
problems, such as Spain, Ireland, Portugal and Greece, even higher. Retail trade
increased at a rate of 0.2 percent in July, but most of the growth was due to relatively
rapid rises in the small Eastern Europe economies, and it is expected that the steps
that many governments will have to take to reduce their debts will have a negative
impact on private consumption and growth. The generally pessimistic view of the
future was reflected in the eurozone Sentix Investor Confidence Index, which fell
sharply in August to its lowest level since August 2009, and even reversed its trend
from positive to negative. According to the IMF, if European banks have to write off
their holdings of government bonds of Ireland, Greece, Portugal, Italy, Spain and
Belgium, the losses would amount to some €200 billion. The European banks have
recently been experiencing a severe liquidity shortage, expressed mainly in the form
of a shortage of dollar balances. This led to a cooperation agreement between the
ECB, the Fed, the Bank of England, the Bank of Japan and the Swiss National Bank
to supply emergency dollar loans to the banks in the eurozone and to inject additional
credit into the markets.

The announcement by the Greek Minister of Finance that Greece had finance for only
another few weeks led to a surge in yields on Greek bonds maturing in a year to 140
percent, and the CDS spreads leaped from 2,250 basis points to 5,700 b.p., effectively
signifying default. Despite Greece's announcement that its economy would contract
by 5 percent in 2011 (and not by 3.8 percent as per the IMF and EU assessments in
June), it was obliged to impose a property tax for the next two years in order to make
up the €2 billion it is lacking to meet its deficit target.

_The emerging markets_

The emerging market economies continued to show much stronger macroeconomic
data this month than those of the advanced economies, but some of the former
recorded a certain slowdown.

In China, the data published this month show that it is not suffering yet from the
global slowdown. Manufacturing production grew at an annual rate of 13.5 percent,
retail sales expanded at a 17 percent rate, and imports, 30 percent, an indication that
domestic demand remains strong. The PMI rose for the first time since March, and
reached 50.9, although this points to only a moderate increase. Inflation declined from
6.5 percent in July to 6.2 percent in August.

In India, the rate of growth was 7.7 percent in the second quarter, a high rate, although
it represents a continued gradual decline since the first quarter of 2010, when the
growth rate was 9.4 percent. India's trade also continues to expand at astonishing


-----

rates, with exports surging by 81.8 percent in July, and imports by 51.8 percent,
annual rates.

In Brazil the central bank cut the interest rate by 50 b.p. to 12 percent (after five
consecutive increases). The reasons given focused on the global economic slowdown
against the background of the anaemic growth in the US and the EU.

_The capital markets_
Share indices in the US rose by 2.75 percent in the past month (the period reviewed),
while Europe recorded a decline of 0.7 percent, with no change in Germany. The
MSCI world index and its emerging markets index also showed no significant change
over the period. The announcement of the injection of dollars into the European banks
resulted in a rise in bond prices in the last few days.

Yields on government bonds fell, with the yield on 10-year US government notes
declining during the month from 2.19 percent to 2.09 percent, after it had already
dropped as low as 1.92 percent. The yield on 10-year German government bonds
declined in the period reviewed from 2.15 percent to 1.9 percent, after reaching as low
as 1.74 percent.

In the commodities markets, the price of Brent crude oil remained unchanged in the
period as a whole, at $111.5 a barrel. The price of gold started the period at $1,828 an
ounce, and increased to $1,900 at the beginning of September, but fell back to its
same level as at the start of the period. The commodities price index excluding energy
fell by 5 percent, and the agricultural commodities index dropped by 9 percent.


-----

