**BANK OF ISRAEL**
Office of the Spokesperson and Economic Information

PRESS RELEASE
August 8, 2011

**Report to the public on the Bank of Israel’s discussions prior to setting the**
**interest rate for August 2011**

**The discussions took place on July 24 and 25, 2011**

**General**

Before the Governor makes the monthly interest rate decision,[1] discussions are held at
two levels––the first in a broad forum, and the second in a narrower one.

In the broad-forum discussion, the relevant background economic conditions are
presented, including real, monetary and financial developments in Israel’s economy,
and developments in the global economy. Participants in this discussion include the
Governor, the Deputy Governor, the directors of the Research and Market Operations
Departments of the Bank and economists from various departments who prepare and
present the material for discussion. The data, estimates and assessments in this report
are those that were available at the time of the discussions.

In the narrow forum, the directors of the Research and Market Operations
Departments and two other participating members of management (the Deputy
Governor and the Head of the Monetary and Finance Division of the Research
Department) present their recommendations regarding the interest rate and, following
a discussion, the Governor makes his decision.

A. THE BROAD-FORUM DISCUSSION—THE STATE OF THE ECONOMY

**1. Developments on the real side**

_General assessment_

Most economic indicators published between the previous interest rate decision on
June 27 and the current discussion on July 25 provide a firm basis for the assessment
that economic activity is continuing to expand in the second quarter, but at a slower
rate than in the first quarter. The main reason for the slower rate of growth was the

1 When the Monetary Committee is appointed, in accordance with the new Bank of Israel Law, interest
rate decisions will be made by the Committee.

POB 780 Jerusalem 91007 Israel


-----

reduction in goods exports, following their steep rise in the first quarter. The drop in
exports combined with a moderate increase in imports resulted in a further increase in
the trade deficit in the second quarter. Against the background of the continued
narrowing of the output gap, the employment situation improved further, albeit
moderately, and the nominal wage increased.

_The national accounts_

The third estimate of the national accounts data for the first quarter of 2011 points to
continued growth in economic activity (with a downward revision of the previous
estimate): GDP grew by 4.6 percent, business sector product by 5.2 percent, private
consumption excluding consumer durables by 4.9 percent, fixed investment by 26.1
percent, exports (excluding diamonds) by 12.8 percent, and imports (excluding
diamonds) by 11.2 percent, imports (excluding diamonds) by 18 percent, and
domestic public consumption increased by 2.9 percent, all at annual rates.

_Indicators of real economic activity_

Economic indicators that became available this month show that economic activity
continued to expand in the second quarter, albeit more slowly than in the first quarter.
The composite state-of-the-economy index for June increased by 0.2 percent, a
continuation of the relatively modest increases in the last few months. In the second
quarter the index rose by 0.7 percent, compared with an increase of 1.4 percent in the
first quarter. The industry by industry picture shows that the slowdown in the rate of
expansion derived mainly from the moderation of activity in the export industries. The
Bank of Israel Companies Survey for the second quarter and the Central Bureau of
Statistics trends survey for June reflect positive expectations of activity in the next
few months, despite the decline in export sales. Although consumer confidence
indices are maintaining their relatively high levels, it seems that global economic
developments and geopolitical developments in Israel are having a negative effect on
some of the components of expectations in these indices.

_The labor market_

Labor market data indicate a continued improvement in employment. According to
trend data for May, the percentage of unemployed continued to fall, and reached 5.7
percent of the civilian workforce. The number of employee posts, seasonally adjusted,
increased by 0.3 percent in the three months February–April compared with the
previous three months. The number of vacancies increased by 8 percent in the second
quarter compared with the number in the first quarter. The nominal wage increased in
February–April by 1.1 percent (three-monthly rate, seasonally adjusted) compared
with the level in the previous three months, while the real wage remained unchanged.
Health tax receipts in June, which provide an indication of wage payments in that
month, were 7.6 percent higher, in nominal terms, than in June 2010 (excluding the


-----

effect of legislative changes). The minimum monthly wage increased from NIS 3,900
to NIS 4,100 at the beginning of July.

_Foreign trade_

Goods exports excluding diamonds fell by 2.4 percent in the second quarter (quarterly
rate of change), following two quarters of increases. Goods imports increased by 10.3
percent in the second quarter (import and export data are shown excluding diamonds,
ships and aircraft, and are seasonally adjusted). Goods exports, and in particular
manufactured goods exports, remained essentially unchanged in June (the first
declining by 0.1 percent and the second increasing by 0.1 percent), following their
decreases in April and May. Services exports (excluding start-ups) stabilized in April–
May, after rising in the previous quarter. The upward trend in goods imports evident
in the first quarter continued in the second, albeit at a more moderate pace. The slower
increase was the result of a slowdown in the rate of increase in imports of capital
goods, raw materials, and consumer durables.

**2. Budget data**

Tax revenues in January–June 2011 were 7.1 percent higher in real terms than in
January–June 2010, and 0.3 percent above the seasonal path of the budget forecast.
Government domestic activity in the first six months of the year (excluding credit)
yielded a cumulative surplus of 0.3 percent of GDP, compared with a deficit of 1.1
percent of GDP in the same months last year.

**3. Developments on the nominal side**

_Inflation_

The inflation rate over the last 12 months was 4.2 percent, above the upper limit of the
target inflation range (of 1–3 percent a year). The Consumer Price Index (CPI) rose by
0.4 percent in June, in line with the forecasts and at the upper limit of the seasonal
path consistent with achieving the inflation target. As was the case with the May
index, housing and food prices contributed significantly again this month to the
increase in the index. It was also noted that the seasonally adjusted rise in the index
was slower in the last four months than in previous months.

_Expectations and forecasts of inflation and of the Bank of Israel interest rate_

Forecasters inflation expectations for the next twelve months were at the same level as
in the previous month, 2.9 percent, slightly below the upper limit of the target
inflation range. Inflation expectations as calculated from the capital market also held
steady, at an average of 3 percent. Alongside these expectations, the Bank of Israel


-----

interest rate one year from now based on the Telbor (Tel Aviv Inter-Bank Offered
Rate) market is expected to be 4 percent, and the average of forecasters' predictions is
that it will be 4.3 percent. Most forecasters expect the Bank of Israel to leave the
interest rate for August unchanged.

_The monetary aggregates_

In the twelve months up to and including June, the M1 monetary aggregate (cash held
by the public and demand deposits) increased by 8.4 percent, and the M2 aggregate
(M1 plus unindexed deposits of up to one year) increased by 9.5 percent.

_The credit market_

In May there was a 0.4 percent increase in the balance of credit to the business sector,
to a level of NIS 750 billion. The balance of credit to households rose by 1.5 percent
in April and reached NIS 351 billion. Of this, outstanding housing credit increased in
the twelve months to end-May by 14.4 percent, to NIS 246 billion; the increase in the
twelve months to end-April stood at 14.1 percent. There was a decline in new
mortgages granted in June, and as a result, for the first time since July 2009, total
mortgages extended in the previous twelve months declined, by 1.4 percent. This
contrasts with the usual trend of an increase in mortgages in the summer months. The
share in total mortgages of mortgages at floating interest rates declined in June to 82
percent, compared with 88 percent in May. One of the reasons for the decline was the
Bank of Israel directive which went into effect on May 5[th], which limits the share of
floating interest rate housing credit. The effect of the directive is expected to be
evident in the future too. The interest rates on all CPI-indexed and unindexed floating
interest rate mortgage increased in June, while the rates on indexed mortgages at
constant interest rates remained stable.

_The housing market_

The supply of houses continues to increase, and in the twelve months to April
residential building starts totaled 41,583, an 11 percent increase compared to the
number in the twelve months to April 2010. Completions in the twelve months to
April totaled 33,941, a 7.9 percent increase compared with the number in the twelve
months to April 2010. Since the beginning of the year there has been a marked
decrease in the sale of new houses, and the number of houses for sale has increased.
House prices––which are presented in the Central Bureau of Statistics survey of house
prices but are not included in the CPI––increased in April–May at a rate of 0.7 percent
a month, following their increase of 1.5 percent a month in March–April. The annual
rate of increase in house prices declined slightly, but continues to be high, and in the
twelve months ended in May, house prices increased by 13.7 percent; compared with
a 14.5 percent increase in the previous month's figure. The housing index, which is
based mainly on renewed rental contracts and which is included in the CPI, continued
to increase, rising by 0.5 percent in June, bringing the increase in the last twelve


-----

months to 6.2 percent. The effect of the increase in the interest rate, measures
introduced by the Bank of Israel affecting mortgages, and steps taken by the Ministry
of Finance in real estate taxation, together with the continued increase in the number
of building starts, are expected to be reflected in house prices in the course of the
coming year.

_The Research Department assessment (staff forecast)_

The Bank of Israel Research Department staff forecast is that inflation in the next
twelve months will be 2.9 percent, with the interest rate increasing to an average of
3.4 percent in the third quarter of 2011 and to about 4 percent in a year's time. This is
against the background of a 0.2 percentage point reduction in the forecast rise in the
interest rate in the G4 countries,[2] both one quarter hence and one year hence, and a
reduction of 0.3 percentage points in the GDP growth forecast of those countries one
quarter ahead, and by 0.1 percentage points one year ahead. The Research Department
emphasized the main risks facing Israel's economy: the realization of the pessimistic
assessments regarding the global economic recovery and the its expected impact on
demand for Israel's exports; and negative geopolitical developments.

**4. The capital markets**

_The foreign currency market_

From the previous monetary policy discussion held on June 26, through July 22, the
shekel appreciated by 1.6 percent against the dollar, lower than the appreciation of the
main currencies against the dollar., Against the euro the shekel strengthened by about
0.3 percent. In terms of the nominal effective exchange rate the shekel strengthened
by about 0.6 percent.

_The share market and the corporate bond market_

Between the monetary policy discussions of June 26 and July 22, most Tel Aviv
Stock Exchange share price indices rose, in line with the general trend in stock
markets abroad, but with lower volatility. The Tel Aviv 100 Index rose by 5.3 percent.
New corporate bond issues totaled a gross NIS 5.5 billion in June, bringing the year to
date total to about NIS 25 billion, similar to the amount in the corresponding period in
2010. The yield spread between the Tel-Bond 40 and government bonds widened by
14 basis points (b.p.) to 2 percent.

_The makam and bond markets_

During the period surveyed, yields on non-CPI-indexed government bonds decreased
by 4-20 b.p., primarily in the medium range. Along the CPI-indexed government

2 The eurozone, Japan, the UK and the US.


-----

bonds curve the decline was more pronounced, between 20 and 35 b.p., with the curve
becoming steeper. Yields on _makam decreased slightly, by 2–5 b.p., with the curve_
steepening a little.

_The interest rate differential and the yield gap between Israel and abroad_

As a result of the increase in the interest rate in the eurozone last month, and prior to
the Bank of Israel decision on the interest rate for August, the differential between the
Bank of Israel interest rate and the ECB rate narrowed to 1.75 percentage points, and
the differential between the Bank of Israel interest rate and the US federal funds rate
remained unchanged at 3–3.25 percentage points. The yield gap between Israeli and
US unindexed 10-year government notes narrowed in the last month, and at the end of
the period was 218 b.p. (compared with 235 b.p. at the beginning of the period).

**5. Israel’s financial risk, the sovereign risk premium**

Israel's sovereign risk premium as measured by the five-year CDS declined over the
month as a whole, to 138 b.p.

**6. Global economic developments (see Appendix for further details)**

The debt crisis in Europe spread to large eurozone countries, especially Italy. The
credit rating companies lowered the ratings of Greece, Ireland and Portugal severely,
and lowered the rating outlook of Italy and Spain. However, in the last few days,
agreement was reached on a European aid program for Greece (which can also help
other countries), a program that was better than expected, and thus calmed the markets
somewhat. In the US too the debt continues to be headline news as a result of the
inability to reach an agreement about increasing the debt ceiling and its attendant cuts.
This has led to threats by the rating companies to lower the US credit rating in the
near future. Most macroeconomic data published this month indicate weakness, as a
result of which many investment houses reduced their annual growth forecasts, with
expectations of some recovery in the second half of the year. Inflation remained high
world wide, driven by the steep increase in commodity and energy prices in the last
few months. This led to increases in interest rates in the rapidly growing emerging
market economies, and even in Europe. The Fed, however, which focuses on the core
index, assessed that this was a temporary development, and that inflation would
decline again and would not be reflected in the core index. At the same time, in light
of the complex reality of inflation on one side and concern over growth on the other,
the general assessment is that increases in the interest rate will be more moderate than
had been expected in the last few months.


-----

B. THE NARROW-FORUM DISCUSSION––THE INTEREST RATE DECISION
FOR AUGUST 2011

In the monthly narrow-forum monetary policy discussion, four members of
management make recommendations to the Governor regarding the appropriate rate
of interest for the economy. In the current discussions on the interest rate for August,
one of them recommended that the Governor increase the interest rate by 0.25
percentage points, and the other three members recommended that he leave the
interest rate unchanged.

As stated in previous reports of interest rate decisions, the Bank of Israel is
implementing a policy consistent with the process of gradually restoring a more
normal interest rate environment—a process aimed at stabilizing inflation within the
target range, and supporting further growth of economic activity while maintaining
financial stability. The pace of interest rate increases is not fixed, but depends on the
inflation environment, growth in Israel and globally, the monetary policies of the
major central banks, and the exchange rates of the shekel. Leaving the rate of interest
for August unchanged at 3.25 percent is consistent with that process, and at that level,
monetary policy continues to be expansionary.

Several issues were discussed, the main ones being the inflation environment and
inflation expectations, house prices, expectations for real economic activity, and the
effect of global economic developments on Israel's economy and on the exchange rate
of the shekel.

With regard to the level of inflation and inflation expectations, the point was made
that despite the fact that the inflation environment in the last few months indicates
some moderation relative to the level in the previous months, it is still close to the
upper limit of the target inflation range. Inflation expectations and the average of
forecasters' predictions of inflation in the next twelve months are stable at the upper
end of the target range and are not in the middle of the range. These facts and the low
level of the real interest rate argue in favor of an increase in the interest rate.

On house prices, it was stated that viewed over the previous twelve months there was
a slight slowdown in the rate of increase, but it is still high. Nevertheless, the
assessment is that the increase in building starts over the last twelve months and the
various policy measures introduced by the Bank of Israel and the Ministry of Finance
to moderate the rate of price increases will start to take effect in the next few months,
which will lead to a decline in the rate of increase of house prices.

With regard to the environment of real economic activity, the discussion focused
mainly on developments in exports and wages, against the background of assessments
of slower growth in the second quarter than in the first. The slowdown in export
growth in the second quarter was mainly due to the decline in manufactured goods
exports in the last few months, which occurred as a result of the fall in demand from


-----

abroad. That said, manufacturing production has not yet been affected, and (till May)
has shown growth. Services exports (till May), however, were stable at the same level
as in the first quarter. The increase in the nominal wage in the twelve months to April
may mark the start of an upward wage trend. This is due to the continued decline in
the rate of unemployment to its lowest level since 1987, which may exert upward
pressure on wages. However, it is still too early to state that rising wages are causing
inflationary pressures.

Developments in the global economy and their impact on Israel's economy constituted
one of the main issues discussed. The lowering of growth forecasts in the major world
economies is expected to reduce demand from abroad and to lead to a decline in
exports. At the same time interest rates in the main economies are not predicted to
increase in the near future, and in the eurozone the expected path of the ECB interest
rate was actually lowered following the latest increase in the interest rate. Concern
that the global economy may be on the brink of a downturn (a double dip) is based
also on actual developments, not just forecasts: world trade indices were stable in
April–May; Israel's goods exports moderated; in the US there has already been a
slowdown, and negative labor market data have been published; and the debt crisis in
Europe has already resulted in reduced credit ratings for Greece, Portugal and Ireland,
with the possibility of the possible downgrading of Italy and Spain as well. These
developments raise the level of uncertainty at this time, and justify a cautious
monetary policy.

The exchange rate was discussed in the context of the differentials between the
interest rate in Israel and those in the major economies. Despite the increase in the
European Central Bank (ECB) interest rate last month, the postponement of the
expected timing of the next increase in the interest rate in Europe and especially in the
US as derived from the financial markets and from forecasters' predictions could lead
to growing pressures for appreciation of the shekel as a result of the expected interest
rate differentials. The issue of the exchange rate also arose in the discussion of the
effect of the possible implications of lack of agreement regarding the increase of the
debt ceiling in the US, and also in the context of geopolitical developments in the
Middle East.

Taking into consideration the high degree of uncertainty regarding the debt crises in
the US and in Europe; the slowdown in the global economy and its expected negative
effect of Israel's growth already in the second quarter; the interest rate differentials
between Israel and the major economies; the moderation of actual inflation, the stable
inflation expectations and inflation forecasts; the assessment that the interest rate
increases and the measures introduced in the real estate sector will soon start to have
an effect, three members of the narrow forum recommended leaving the interest rate
unchanged for August. That would be consistent with the gradual return to a normal
interest rate environment in light of the cumulative increases since the beginning of
the year, and is also consistent with the efforts to gradually attain the inflation target,
taking into account the other considerations described above.


-----

One member of management recommended that the Governor increase the interest
rate by 0.25 percentage points because the rate was not changed in the previous month
and there is agreement that it should be increased further in the future. This, in light of
the fact that inflation expectations are at the upper limit of the target range. That
member of management argued that some slowdown currently in the real rate of
growth is consistent with a sustainable growth rate. Furthermore, in his opinion the
current rate of interest is lower than that appropriate to equilibrium in the domestic
asset markets in light of the persistent increase in house prices and the continued
increase in outstanding mortgages. This, even taking into account the interest rate
differentials between Israel and the major economies.

Taking all the above points into consideration, the Governor decided to leave the
interest rate for August unchanged at 3.25 percent.

In its announcement of the decision, the Bank of Israel emphasized the following
points:

- Inflation over the previous twelve months, 4.2 percent, continues to be high.
However, the seasonally adjusted CPI inflation rates in the last four months are in
line with the target inflation range. Forecasters’ inflation expectations for the next
twelve months remained steady at slightly below the upper limit of the target
range. Forecasters' inflation expectations and those derived from the capital
market go together with the assessment that the Bank of Israel will continue to
increase the interest rate, but at a slower pace than in the first half of the year.

- Most economic indicators published this month support the assessment that the
rate of growth in economic activity in Israel moderated in the second quarter
primarily as a result of the slower expansion of goods exports. In addition,
developments in debt crises, the weakness of the US economy, and geopolitical
risks, increase uncertainty about the pace of economic growth.

- The annual rate of increase in house prices continues to be high––in the twelve
months to May house prices increased by 13.7 percent, slightly below the rate in
the twelve months to April. With that, the effect of interest rate increases, steps by
the Bank of Israel in the mortgage market, and steps by the Ministry of Finance
regarding real estate taxation, together with the continued increase in building
starts, are expected to affect housing prices during the coming year, although it is
too early at this stage to see clear evidence of their effect on house prices in the
data currently available. .

- Central bank interest rates in the major advanced economies are still low, and are
expected to remain so for a long time. Concern of a slowdown in US growth and
the worsening of the debt crises in Europe led to expectations of a slowdown in
the pace of interest rate increases in the US and Europe.


-----

In its announcement the Bank of Israel stated that in the first half of the year it had
raised the interest rate markedly. At the same time, steps were taken by the Bank and
the Ministry of Finance in the housing market. In addition, the shekel appreciated in
the last few months and there was a decline in commodity prices. The impact on
inflation of these developments is expected to continue to be felt in the future. In light
of these issues, and the marked increase of risks in the global economy, it was decided
to leave the interest rate at its current level.

The Bank of Israel stated that it will continue to monitor developments in the Israeli
economy and the global economy and in the financial markets. The Bank will use the
instruments available to it to achieve its objectives of price stability, the
encouragement of employment and growth, and support for the stability of the
financial system, including keeping a close watch on developments in the assets
market, and especially in the housing market.

The decision was announced on July 25, 2011.

**Participants in the narrow-forum discussion:**
Prof. Stanley Fischer, Governor of the Bank of Israel
Mr. Barry Topf, Senior Advisor to the Governor on Monetary Policy Issues
Mr. Andrew Abir, Director of the Market Operations Department
Dr. Michel Strawczynski, Head of Macroeconomic and Policy Division and Acting
Director of the Research Department
Dr. Edward Offenbacher, Member of Management and Head of the Monetary and
Finance Division, Research Department
Mr. Eddy Azoulay, Chief of Staff to the Governor
Dr. Yossi Saadon, Advisor to the Governor and Bank of Israel Spokesperson
Mr. Inon Gamrasni, Economist, Research Department


-----

**Appendix: Major Global Economic Developments**

_Global_

Most macroeconomic data published during the month reflected weak economic
performance, purchasing managers indices (PMIs) in all countries showed a
downward trend, and in some (including Italy) they declined to a level that reflects
contraction. In China too the PMI is approaching 50,[1] which may suggest that the
positive figures published there might relate to a temporary situation. In the US too
the Institute for Supply Management (ISM) manufacturing indices were relatively
buoyant, but they were strongly affected by the inventories component which is
recovering, following the earthquake in Japan, whereas the forward-looking
(particularly exports and export orders) and the ISM services indices were weaker and
disappointing.

Inflation around the world is still higher than it should be, reflecting the effect of the
commodity and energy prices that have increased steeply this year. Commodity
prices, which continued upwards this month, add to concern over inflation mainly in
the emerging market economies. The 12 percent increase in oil prices and the 6
percent increase in the price of gold––used for hedging––were particularly notable.

Expectations of increases in interest rates in the advanced economies calculated from
the markets dropped considerably this month following the publication of the weak
economic data. Thus, no increases in interest rates in the US and Europe are expected
before the end of 2012, and Australia is even expected to make a cut in its rate in the
near future.

_The US_

The US debt is the focus of a difficult problem, with a long political dispute raging
about raising the debt ceiling and about significant fiscal cuts (this dispute must be
settled in the next few days to avoid the technical default of the government at the
beginning of August). The credit rating agencies Moody's and S&P actually put the
US on negative review and warned explicitly about downgrading the US rating
already from next month. In its announcement, S&P warned of a downgrade even if
an agreement is reached, if it contains a non-credible downward path for the debt and
the deficit in the foreseeable future.[2] Although the probability of a downgrade is still
low, it is certainly a possibility, and adds to the great uncertainty in the markets.

Other data published, relating to the labor market, showed an increase of only 18,000
jobs (compared with the forecast of 105,000). Unemployment increased to 9.2 percent
(above the 9.1 percent forecast); the participation rate dropped to 64.1 percent (its

1 The equivalent index published by HSBC fell below 50.
2 The downgrades referred to by the rating agencies relate to the US, Portugal, Ireland and Greece are
known as SDs (selective defaults), which means that a country fails to meet part of its liabilities.


-----

lowest level for decades); The number of hours worked per week dropped; and hourly
income also fell––all these, together with the standstill in the real estate market,
emphasize the extent of the problem. Nevertheless, the forecasters and the Fed
continue with their assessment that at least part of the recent slowdown is due to
temporary factors, including the severe winter weather that adversely impacted on the
construction industry, the damage to the supply chain caused by the earthquake in
Japan, and the increase in commodity (in particular fuel) prices to levels that affect
consumption and growth, and they therefore hope that the US market will improve in
the second half of the year. In addition, in light of the increase of only 1.2 percent in
the core personal consumption expenditure (PCE) index for May (which although
higher than had been expected, is still not high), the Chairman of the Fed claims that
the price increases (and their severe adverse effects on the purchasing power of US
consumers) are temporary, and he therefore continues to feel more concerned over
deflation.

_Europe_

The interest rate in the eurozone was increased to 1.5 percent because inflation had
reached 2.7 percent, in excess of the ECB inflation target. This hike in the interest rate
imposes an even greater burden on the "peripheral" European countries, which are
already finding it difficult to grow, in light of the significant fiscal cuts and lack of
competitiveness and in light of the spreading European debt crisis. This month
attention was focused on Italy and its large fiscal debt (119 percent of GDP), a high
fiscal deficit, low level of competitiveness, (growth was only 1 percent in 2010), a 3
percent deficit in the current account, and political difficulties that raise doubts about
the government's determination (and ability) to the necessary steps. Even though
Italy's economy is in a considerably better condition than those of Portugal, Ireland
and Greece, whose ratings were cut sharply this month,[3] the size of Italy's economy
(accounting for about 17 percent of the GDP of the EU), together with its huge debts
that raise doubts as to the ability of the ECB or the IMF to help it if necessary, means
that it represents a threat to the stability of the whole eurozone.

At the end of the period reviewed, an agreement was reached in Europe about an aid
program for Greece (with the possibility of helping Portugal and Ireland too) which
was better than the markets had expected. The main points of the program are: a
significant postponement of the repayment period of Greece's debt, a marked
reduction in the interest Greece will pay, private sector participation in the costs of the
program (which was approved by the Institute of International Finance[4]), and
enabling the European Financial Stability Facility (EFSF) to buy bonds of countries in
difficulty on the secondary market. However, many significant details are still missing
from the program, and this, combined with the persistent objection of the rating
companies to the voluntary participation of private investors in the cost of the Greece
rescue,[5] is likely to make the rescue of countries in difficulty more problematic and to
lead to the spread of the crisis to core European countries. Such a spread could occur
due to, among other things, the heavy exposure of French banks to Greece's and Italy's
bonds (according to 2010 BIS data).

3 Greece's rating was reduced to only one above the level that signifies insolvency.
4 An organization of most of the large international banks.
5 This led to Moody's reducing Greece's rating further, to Ca.


-----

_The emerging markets_

Inflation in the emerging markets, led by China where inflation reached 6.4 percent, a
three-year high, led to increases in interest rates. China's premier, Wen Jiabau,
stressed that price restraint was a top policy priority. Nonetheless, China continued to
publish very buoyant economic data, most of which exceeded expectations: growth at
an annual rate of 9.5 percent in the first quarter of 2011 (compared with the forecast
of 9.3 percent), an improved surplus in the trade balance, an increase in retail sales, an
increase in housing loans, an increase in manufacturing production, and rises in house
prices––all these increases were greater than the forecasts. However, in China too
there is a debt problem, focused mainly on domestic government debts in excess of
previous assessments, a large proportion of which are problem debts, which led
Moody's to state that constituted a threat to the stability of banks and their ratings.

_The capital markets_

Concerns in the financial markets over debt crises and loss of momentum in the
advanced economies persisted and even intensified this month. However, at the end of
the period, following the publication of the European aid program, the markets
calmed somewhat. Taking the period as a whole, share prices in the advanced
economies increased by 5.7 percent, and in the emerging market economies by 3.2
percent,[6] and the Vix index (implied volatility of options) declined. However, the
major feature of the period was the high volatility and the soaring level of uncertainty,
as reflected by the figure published by the AAII (the American Association of
Individual Investors) showing that the public's holding of shares plunged by 59.5
percent, its first decline in nine months (falling below the long-term average), but the
holding of government bonds also dropped, with a switch to cash.[7] Portugal, Ireland
and Greece stood out with steep drops in share prices, with yields on government
bonds and CDS spreads (again) reaching peak levels.[8] The ending of the QE2
(quantitative easing) program at the beginning of the period and the threat of no
increase in the US debt ceiling are not reflected as yet in the bond markets, and yields
in the US (and also in Germany) continue to be at a low level of less than 3 percent.

6 In the peripheral European countries and those at high risk of contagion share prices fell.
7 This month the Treasury International Capital (TIC) flows also fell, for the first time in a year, which
probably indicates a change in preferences regarding the US.
8 Even after the adjustment that followed the approval of the European program, the yields and CDS
spread continue to be very high.


-----

