Not to be released until 8:50 a.m.
Japan Standard Time on Friday,
April 11, 2014.

April 11, 2014

Bank of Japan

# Minutes of the
 Monetary Policy Meeting

## on March 10 and 11, 2014

(English translation prepared by the Bank's staff based on the Japanese original)


-----

Please contact the Bank of Japan at the address below in advance to request permission

when reproducing or copying the content of this document for commercial purposes.

Secretariat of the Policy Board, Bank of Japan

P.O. Box 30, Nihonbashi, Tokyo 103-8660, Japan

Please credit the source when quoting, reproducing, or copying the content of this

document.


-----

A Monetary Policy Meeting of the Bank of Japan Policy Board was held in the

Head Office of the Bank of Japan in Tokyo on Monday, March 10, 2014, from 2:00 p.m. to

4:21 p.m., and on Tuesday, March 11, from 9:00 a.m. to 11:55 a.m.[1]

**Policy Board Members Present**

**Mr. H. Kuroda, Chairman, Governor of the Bank of Japan**

**Mr. K. Iwata, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Japan**

**Mr. H. Nakaso, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Japan**

**Mr. R. Miyao**

**Mr. Y. Morimoto**

**Ms. S. Shirai**

**Mr. K. Ishida**

**Mr. T. Sato**

**Mr. T. Kiuchi**

Government Representatives Present

Mr. Y. Furukawa, Senior Vice Minister of Finance, Ministry of Finance[2]

Mr. M. Asakawa, Deputy Vice Minister for Policy Planning and Coordination, Ministry

of Finance[3]

Mr. Y. Nishimura, Senior Vice Minister, Cabinet Office[2]

Mr. K. Umetani, Vice Minister for Policy Coordination, Cabinet Office[3]

Reporting Staff

Mr. M. Amamiya, Executive Director

Mr. N. Kinoshita, Executive Director

Mr. K. Momma, Executive Director (Assistant Governor)

Mr. S. Uchida, Director-General, Monetary Affairs Department

1 The minutes of this meeting were approved by the Policy Board at the Monetary Policy Meeting
held on April 7 and 8, 2014 as "a document describing an outline of the discussion at the meeting"
stipulated in Article 20, paragraph 1 of the Bank of Japan Act of 1997. Those present are referred
to by their titles at the time of the meeting.
2 Messrs. Y. Furukawa and Y. Nishimura were present on March 11.
3 Messrs. M. Asakawa and K. Umetani were present on March 10.

1


-----

Mr. M. Nomura, Deputy Director-General, Monetary Affairs Department[4]

Mr. K. Masaki, Head of Policy Planning Division, Monetary Affairs Department

Mr. H. Yamaoka, Director-General, Financial Markets Department

Mr. E. Maeda, Director-General, Research and Statistics Department

Mr. S. Kameda, Head of Economic Research Division, Research and Statistics

Department

Mr. H. Toyama, Director-General, International Department

Secretariat of the Monetary Policy Meeting

Mr. N. Yoshioka, Director-General, Secretariat of the Policy Board

Mr. N. Fukunaga, Director, Deputy Head of Planning and Coordination Division,

Secretariat of the Policy Board

Mr. H. Kamiguchi, Head of Policy Infrastructure Division, Monetary Affairs

Department[4]

Mr. R. Hattori, Senior Economist, Monetary Affairs Department

Mr. M. Higashi, Senior Economist, Monetary Affairs Department

4 Messrs. M. Nomura and H. Kamiguchi were present on March 11 from 9:00 a.m. to 9:18 a.m.

2


-----

**I. Summary of Staff Reports on Economic and Financial Developments[5]**

**A. Money Market Operations in the Intermeeting Period**

The Bank, in accordance with the guideline decided at the previous meeting on

February 17 and 18, 2014, had been providing funds through purchases of Japanese

government bonds (JGBs) and other measures.[6] In this situation, the amount outstanding

of the monetary base had been in the range of 200-205 trillion yen.

**B. Recent Developments in Financial Markets**

Money market rates, including longer-term ones, had been at low levels. The

uncollateralized overnight call rate had been at a level below 0.1 percent. General

collateral (GC) repo rates had temporarily risen somewhat, but had recently declined

marginally. As for interest rates on term instruments, yields on treasury discount bills

(T-Bills) had declined slightly for all maturities. Rates on longer-term interbank

instruments had fallen, albeit marginally.

Yields on 10-year JGBs had been more or less flat, partly since U.S. long-term

interest rates had been generally unchanged. The Nikkei 225 Stock Average had risen

mainly as a positive response to the decision made at the previous meeting to extend and

enhance the fund-provisioning measure to stimulate bank lending (hereafter the Stimulating

Bank Lending Facility) and other measures, but had fluctuated thereafter, mainly due to the

effects of the situation in Ukraine. However, it had recently risen to a level higher than

that at the time of the previous meeting. Yield spreads between corporate bonds and JGBs

had been narrowing on the whole, albeit very moderately, reflecting solid demand from

investors, although some corporate bond spreads had been wide. In the foreign exchange

market, the yen had appreciated slightly against the U.S. dollar, reflecting concern over the

situation in Ukraine, but had moved within a narrow range against the dollar throughout the

intermeeting period. The U.S. dollar/yen rate had recently been at almost the same level

as at the time of the previous meeting.

5 Reports were made based on information available at the time of the meeting.
6 The guideline was as follows:

The Bank of Japan will conduct money market operations so that the monetary base will
increase at an annual pace of about 60-70 trillion yen.

3


-----

**C. Overseas Economic and Financial Developments**

Overseas economies -- mainly advanced economies -- were starting to recover,

although a lackluster performance was still seen in part.

The U.S. economy remained on a moderate recovery despite the continued effects

of a winter snowstorm, and the recovery had gradually become widespread. Housing

investment continued to generally pick up, although the pace had become moderate.

Private consumption had been firm, reflecting not only wealth effects but also the continued

improving trend in the employment situation. Exports also remained on an increasing

trend. Reflecting these developments in demand, business sentiment and production had

been on an improving trend, and business fixed investment was picking up, albeit

moderately. As for prices, the year-on-year rate of increase in the consumer price index

(CPI) for all items less food and energy, or the core CPI, had been more or less flat. In this

situation, the year-on-year rate of increase in the CPI for all items had climbed somewhat,

mainly because the year-on-year rate of increase in energy prices had accelerated.

The European economy had been picking up. Private consumption had been

picking up moderately, with consumer sentiment continuing to improve, although the

employment and income situation remained severe. Business fixed investment had

bottomed out. In addition, there were movements toward a pick-up in exports.

Reflecting these developments in demand, production was starting to pick up. As for

prices, slack in supply and demand conditions in the goods and labor markets continued to

exert downward pressure on prices, and the year-on-year rates of increase in both the

Harmonized Index of Consumer Prices (HICP) excluding energy and unprocessed food and

the HICP for all items had been on a moderate declining trend. Meanwhile, economic

activity in the United Kingdom continued to recover, particularly in domestic demand.

With regard to Asia, the Chinese economy continued to see stable growth on the

back of firm domestic demand. Stable growth in private consumption continued against

the background of a favorable employment and income situation, although effects of the

government's frugality campaign continued to be observed in some areas. Fixed asset

investment also remained firm. Moreover, exports had been picking up, particularly those

to Europe and the United States. With these developments in demand, production had

continued to mark relatively high growth, particularly in the machinery industry, including

motor vehicles. Regarding the NIEs and the ASEAN countries, while economic

4


-----

developments in the NIEs were picking up somewhat on the back of recovery in external

demand, growth momentum in the ASEAN countries remained weak, particularly in

domestic demand. In India, the economy remained in a state of deceleration, particularly

in domestic demand. As for prices, there were differences by country and region.

Specifically, the year-on-year rate of increase in the CPI had been somewhat low as a trend

in China and the NIEs, while that in Indonesia and India continued to be relatively high,

mainly reflecting the rise in administered prices.

As for global financial markets, in emerging economies, the Ukrainian and

Russian markets had become unstable, reflecting the situation in Ukraine. Markets in

some emerging economies that faced structural problems such as current account deficits

remained nervous as their currencies had depreciated and stock prices had declined. On

the other hand, markets in other emerging economies that were making progress in

addressing structural problems seemed to be regaining their calmness. Markets in

advanced economies had temporarily showed some nervousness due to the effects of the

situation in Ukraine, but stabilized thereafter. International commodity prices had been

weak from a relatively longer-term perspective in a situation where emerging economies

lacked growth momentum. However, these prices had recently bounced back, reflecting a

winter snowstorm in the United States, the drought in South America, and geopolitical risks.

**D. Economic and Financial Developments in Japan**

1. Economic developments

Exports had recently leveled off more or less. On a quarter-on-quarter basis, real

exports had fallen in the July-September quarter of 2013 but risen again in the

October-December quarter. They then decreased somewhat significantly in January 2014

from the October-December quarter, due in part to temporary factors such as the effects of a

winter snowstorm in the United States and of the Lunar New Year holidays in East Asia, as

well as supply constraints driven by the front-loaded increase in demand prior to the

consumption tax hike. Thus, the lack of momentum in real exports had been somewhat

prolonged. Exports were expected to increase moderately, mainly against the background

of the recovery in overseas economies. Meanwhile, imports continued to increase

moderately against the backdrop of firm domestic demand, and the effects of the

5


-----

front-loaded increase in demand prior to the consumption tax hike had recently been

observed.

Public investment continued to increase. It was expected to trend upward for the

time being and then become more or less flat at a high level.

The pick-up in business fixed investment had become increasingly evident as

corporate profits had improved. According to the _Financial Statements Statistics of_

_Corporations by Industry, Quarterly, business fixed investment in nominal terms on a basis_

excluding software fell marginally in the July-September and October-December quarters of

2013 on a quarter-on-quarter basis, while that on a basis including software rose in the

October-December quarter. Business fixed investment on a GDP basis continued to

increase for three quarters in a row through the October-December quarter. The aggregate

supply of capital goods (excluding transport equipment), a coincident indicator of

machinery investment, exhibited high growth in January 2014 relative to the

October-December quarter of 2013. In addition, machinery orders (private sector,

excluding orders for ships and those from electric power companies) -- a leading indicator

of machinery investment -- and construction starts (floor area, private, nondwelling use) -- a

leading indicator of construction investment -- continued to increase as a trend, albeit with

monthly fluctuations.

As for the employment and income situation, supply and demand conditions in the

labor market continued to improve steadily, as evidenced by the continued rise in the job

openings-to-applicants ratios and the declining trend in the unemployment rate. Regarding

wages, although the year-on-year rate of change in scheduled cash earnings had still been

slightly negative, the year-on-year rate of change in non-scheduled cash earnings had

clearly been in positive territory, and winter bonuses (special cash earnings in the

November 2013-January 2014 period) continued to increase markedly following summer

bonuses. In this situation, employee income had picked up moderately, as it had recently

continued to register year-on-year increases.

Private consumption remained resilient, with improvement in the employment and

income situation, and a front-loaded increase in demand prior to the consumption tax hike

had also been observed. Regarding consumption of durable goods, the number of new

passenger-car registrations had turned upward since around summer 2013, and had marked

a further increase in the past few months, albeit with fluctuations. In addition, sales of

6


-----

household electrical appliances had been steady, albeit with fluctuations. Private

consumption was expected to remain resilient as a trend, supported mainly by improvement

in the employment and income situation, albeit with some fluctuations caused by the

front-loaded increase and subsequent decline in demand.

Housing investment continued to increase, and the effects of the front-loaded

increase in demand prior to the consumption tax hike had been clear. It was expected to

remain resilient as a trend, albeit with some fluctuations.

Industrial production had been increasing at a somewhat accelerated pace, due in

part to the effects of the front-loaded increase in demand prior to the consumption tax hike.

Inventories had declined, reflecting the front-loaded increase in demand. Industrial

production was expected to follow a moderate increasing trend, mainly reflecting

developments in demand at home and abroad, albeit with some fluctuations.

As for prices, domestic corporate goods prices were rising moderately relative to

three months earlier, mainly against the backdrop of movements in international commodity

prices and foreign exchange rates. The year-on-year rate of increase in the CPI (all items

less fresh food) was around 1¼ percent. With regard to the outlook, excluding the direct

effects of the consumption tax hike, domestic corporate goods prices were expected to

continue rising moderately for the time being, and the year-on-year rate of increase in the

CPI (all items less fresh food) was likely to be around 1¼ percent for some time.

Meanwhile, inflation expectations appeared to be rising on the whole.

2. Financial environment

Financial conditions were accommodative.

The monetary base had increased significantly as asset purchases by the Bank had

progressed, and the year-on-year rate of growth had been at around 55 percent.

Firms' funding costs had been hovering at low levels. With regard to credit

supply, firms continued to see financial institutions' lending attitudes as being on an

improving trend. Issuing conditions for CP and corporate bonds continued to be favorable.

Firms' credit demand had been increasing moderately, mainly for working capital and funds

related to mergers and acquisitions. Against this backdrop, the year-on-year rate of

increase in the amount outstanding of bank lending had been at around 2.5 percent. The

year-on-year rate of change in the amount outstanding of CP and corporate bonds had been

7


-----

positive. Firms retained their recovered financial positions. Meanwhile, the year-on-year

rate of growth in the money stock had been at around 4 percent, mainly due to the increase

in bank lending.

3. The fund-provisioning measure to support strengthening the foundations for economic

growth

On March 7, 2014, the Bank carried out a new loan disbursement, amounting to

186.6 billion yen, under the main rules for the fund-provisioning measure to support

strengthening the foundations for economic growth (hereafter the Growth-Supporting

Funding Facility). The outstanding balance of loans disbursed by the Bank under these

rules amounted to 3,141.9 billion yen after the new loan disbursement, and thus exceeded 3

trillion yen, as in the previous loan disbursement. The outstanding balance of loans

disbursed by the Bank under the special rules for equity investments and asset-based

lending (ABL) came to 80.8 billion yen, and that under the special rules for small-lot

investments and loans amounted to 8.063 billion yen. As for the special rules for the U.S.

dollar lending arrangement, the outstanding balance of loans came to 8.777 billion dollars.

**II.** **Enhancement of the Framework for the Stimulating Bank Lending Facility and**

**the Growth-Supporting Funding Facility**

**A. Staff Reports**

Based on the Outline of the Enhanced Framework for the Stimulating Bank

Lending Facility and the Growth-Supporting Funding Facility, which was decided at the

Monetary Policy Meeting held on February 17 and 18, 2014, the staff proposed that the

Bank take necessary steps such as amending the Principal Terms and Conditions for the

Loan Support Program.

Under the Growth-Supporting Funding Facility, investments and loans used

mainly for overseas subsidiaries of Japanese firms to support strengthening the foundations

for Japan's economic growth had been eligible for funding by the Bank via the facility only

if they were denominated in foreign currencies. The staff proposed revising the facility so

that yen-denominated investments and loans to support strengthening such foundations

would also become eligible.

8


-----

**B. Vote**

"Amendment to 'Principal Terms and Conditions for the Loan Support Program,'"

which represented the aforementioned amendments, was put to a vote. Members voted

unanimously to approve the amendment. They concurred that the staff should accordingly

make this public after the meeting.

**III. Summary of Discussions by the Policy Board on Economic and Financial**

**Developments**

**A. Economic Developments**

Members shared the recognition that global financial markets had recently been in

a lull, although markets in some emerging economies that faced structural problems such as

current account deficits remained nervous as their currencies had depreciated and stock

prices had declined. Some members added that markets in these economies that had taken

policy actions such as the raising of interest rates were starting to regain their calmness.

Nevertheless, members agreed that it was necessary to continue to closely monitor market

developments, including geopolitical risks associated with the situation in Ukraine.

Members concurred that overseas economies -- mainly advanced economies -
were starting to recover, although a lackluster performance was still seen in part of the

emerging economies. As for the outlook, they shared the recognition that overseas

economies -- mainly advanced economies -- would recover moderately.

With regard to developments in overseas economies by region, members agreed

that the U.S. economy remained on a moderate recovery, although some economic

indicators showed that the economy had been affected by a winter snowstorm, and that the

recovery had gradually become widespread. As for the outlook, they shared the view that

the pace of economic recovery would gradually rise, as the fiscal drag was projected to fade.

Some members added that the progress in adjustments in excessive household debt would

also underpin the recovery. Some members pointed out that the effects of a winter

snowstorm had been confirmed in production activity, private consumption, and housing

investment, but consumer sentiment and indicators related to orders had maintained their

improving trend and the pace of economic recovery would gradually rise after the effects of

a winter snowstorm disappeared.

9


-----

Members shared the recognition that economic activity in the euro area had been

picking up. As for the outlook, they concurred that the economy was likely to continue

picking up as domestic demand was expected to continue improving, and as exports would

likely recover moderately.

Members agreed that the Chinese economy continued to see stable growth on the

back of firm domestic demand. As for the outlook, most members expressed the view that

the economy would maintain stable growth at around the current pace, mainly reflecting the

fact that (1) the Chinese authorities' stance that they would continue to pay consideration to

economic activity while progressing with structural reforms was reaffirmed particularly by

the fact that the government set the GDP growth target for 2014 at around 7.5 percent, the

same level as the previous year, and (2) external demand was expected to continue

improving moderately. Some of these members, however, added that it had been difficult

to accurately grasp the underlying trend in Chinese economic indicators for the

January-February period of 2014, due to the effects of the Lunar New Year holidays, and

therefore further developments in relevant indicators should be examined without making

any prejudgment. Some members pointed out that careful attention should also continue

to be paid to financial developments, including the shadow banking problem, and to

developments in the real estate market.

Regarding the NIEs and the ASEAN countries, members concurred that, while

economic activities in the NIEs were picking up, growth momentum in the ASEAN

countries remained weak. As for the outlook, they shared the recognition that, for the time

being, an adjustment phase would continue -- especially in the ASEAN countries -- and the

pace of economic growth in the NIEs and the ASEAN countries would likely remain

relatively slow. However, they continued that the pace would rise again thereafter as

growth in advanced economies was expected to gain momentum over time. Some

members added that the depreciation of currencies of emerging economies against those of

major economies was likely to have a positive aspect of underpinning future exports.

Based on the above deliberations on economic and financial conditions abroad,

members discussed the state of Japan's economy.

With regard to economic activity, members shared the view that, as a virtuous

cycle among production, income, and spending continued to operate, the economy

continued to recover moderately, and a front-loaded increase in demand prior to the

10


-----

consumption tax hike had recently been observed. Some members added that, although

the second preliminary estimate of the real GDP growth rate for the October-December

quarter of 2013 -- 0.7 percent on an annualized quarter-on-quarter basis -- was somewhat

lower than that for the first half of the year, reflecting developments in external demand,

domestic demand remained resilient and the economy continued to recover as a trend at a

pace above its potential growth rate. As for the outlook for the economy, members shared

the view that it was likely to continue its moderate recovery as a trend, while it would be

affected by the front-loaded increase and subsequent decline in demand prior to and after

the consumption tax hike. Some members noted that, while the front-loaded increase in

demand had materialized in housing investment and consumption of durable goods,

consumption of nondurable goods was also likely to be affected through the end of March

2014. These members continued that it was therefore necessary to continue to closely

monitor the scale of the front-loaded increase in demand and its subsequent decline.

Members shared the recognition that, in a situation where weakness remained in

exports to some emerging countries including the ASEAN countries, Japan's exports had

leveled off more or less, due in part to temporary factors such as the effects of a winter

snowstorm in the United States and of the Lunar New Year holidays in East Asia, as well as

firms' moves to place priority on domestic shipments in response to the front-loaded

increase in demand prior to the consumption tax hike. As for the outlook, they agreed that

exports were likely to increase moderately, mainly against the background of the waning of

temporary downward pressure and the recovery in overseas economies. Some members,

however, said that the lack of momentum in exports was largely attributable not only to

cyclical factors in overseas demand and temporary factors but also to structural factors,

including the shift of Japanese manufacturers' production sites to overseas accompanying

increased local procurement, and therefore weakness in exports might remain. Meanwhile,

one member expressed the view that, if exports increased from April 2014 as temporary

downward pressure waned, this would mitigate the effects of a decline in domestic demand

following the front-loaded increase prior to the consumption tax hike.

Some members pointed out that imports had recently continued to mark relatively

high growth, reflecting firm domestic demand including the effects, for example, of a

front-loaded increase in demand prior to the consumption tax hike and of replacement

demand for personal computers.

11


-----

Members concurred that the pick-up in business fixed investment had become

increasingly evident as corporate profits had improved, and was projected to follow a

moderate increasing trend. Many members pointed to the fact that business fixed

investment on a GDP basis had been increasing for three quarters in a row and that the

aggregate supply of capital goods -- a coincident indicator of machinery investment -- had

recently risen noticeably. Some of these members added that machinery orders and

construction starts in terms of floor area -- both of which were leading indicators of

business fixed investment -- continued to increase as a trend, albeit with monthly

fluctuations. On the other hand, a few members said that the outlook for business fixed

investment warranted close attention since its strength could not be confirmed in some

economic indicators, such as the Financial Statements Statistics of Corporations by Industry,

_Quarterly._

As for the employment and income situation, members shared the recognition that

supply and demand conditions in the labor market continued to improve steadily, and that

employee income had also picked up moderately. With respect to the outlook regarding

employee income, they agreed that a pick-up was likely to become more evident, in line

with the recovery in economic activity and business performance. As for the outlook for

wages, many members pointed out that, in the spring wage negotiations, movements toward

wage increases -- including in base pay -- were spreading to a wider range of firms. A few

members said that, although increases in base pay primarily meant increases in regular

employees' scheduled cash earnings, past trends indicated that there was a strong correlation

between increases in base pay and in hourly cash earnings of overall employees, including

non-regular employees. These members continued that, therefore, increases in base pay

were likely to lead to increases in overall wages. One of these members added that, given

that non-scheduled hours worked and the number of months on which bonus payments were

based rose during economic recovery phases, increases in scheduled cash earnings -- which

were the basis of non-scheduled cash earnings and bonuses -- would have significant effects

on overall wages. Some members said that people's expectations for permanent income

played an important role in forming the underlying consumption trend and their

expectations for prices, and that it was important to continue to examine whether

movements toward wage increases were sustainable. One member added that it was

highly likely that the current favorable employment situation was heightening people's

12


-----

expectations for permanent income. Meanwhile, a different member expressed the view

that there was a possibility that the rate of wage increases might turn out to be lower than

the inflation rate excluding the effects of the consumption tax hike, even after the spring

wage negotiations.

Members shared the recognition that private consumption remained resilient, with

improvement in the employment and income situation, and a front-loaded increase in

demand prior to the consumption tax hike had also been observed. They agreed that the

movements in consumption of durable goods such as motor vehicles and household

electrical appliances had been reflecting to some extent the front-loaded increase in demand

prior to the consumption tax hike, in addition to the improvement in the employment and

income situation evidenced by the increase in winter bonus payments. One member added

that consumption of durable goods had been exhibiting high growth since over a year ago,

and strength in its uptrend had been observed. Members concurred that private

consumption was likely to remain resilient as a trend, supported mainly by improvement in

the employment and income situation, albeit with some fluctuations caused by the

front-loaded increase and subsequent decline in demand prior to and after the consumption

tax hike.

Members agreed that industrial production had been increasing at a somewhat

accelerated pace, reflecting these developments in demand both at home and abroad, and

that it was likely to follow a moderate increasing trend.

Regarding prices, members shared the view that the year-on-year rate of increase

in the CPI (all items less fresh food) was around 1¼ percent and the rate of increase,

excluding the direct effects of the consumption tax hike, was likely to be around 1¼ percent

for some time. Many members said that price rises had been observed not only in

energy-related goods but also across a wide range of items, as evidenced by the fact that the

year-on-year rate of increase in the CPI (all items less food and energy) for January 2014

had marked 0.7 percent. One member noted that, while Japan's economic growth rate for

the second half of 2013 had declined from that for the first half of the year, the inflation rate

had been somewhat higher than anticipated. This member pointed out that this

development might be attributable to the following factors: (1) labor market conditions

were likely to tighten further because economic recovery had been led mainly by

nonmanufacturing; and (2) firms' price-setting behavior had been changing. Meanwhile, a

13


-----

different member expressed the view that it was possible that the effects of the depreciation

of the yen on prices had increased. In assessing the underlying trend of prices from April

onward, members confirmed that it was appropriate to exclude the direct effects of the

consumption tax hike. They continued that, in terms of the underlying trend of the CPI,

assessments should be made based on the year-on-year rate of change after deducting about

2.0 percentage points -- that is, the expected direct effects -- assuming that the tax increase

would be fully passed on for all taxable items. However, they shared the recognition that

only the year-on-year rate of change in the CPI for April should be assessed after deducting

about 1.7 percentage points, due to factors that emanated from the compilation of statistics

on the CPI, and that it was necessary for the Bank to thoroughly explain this to the public.

Members shared the recognition that inflation expectations appeared to be rising on the

whole, considering market indicators, the results of various surveys, and other information.

**B. Financial Developments**

Members concurred that financial conditions in Japan were accommodative.

They shared the view that the monetary base had increased significantly, reflecting the

progress in asset purchases by the Bank, and that firms' funding costs had been hovering at

low levels. Members agreed that firms continued to see financial institutions' lending

attitudes as being on an improving trend. They also concurred that the year-on-year rate of

growth in the money stock had been at a relatively high level of around 4 percent in a

situation where the amount outstanding of bank lending, including that to small firms, had

been increasing moderately.

**IV. Summary of Discussions on Monetary Policy for the Immediate Future**

Based on the above assessment of economic and financial developments, members

discussed monetary policy for the immediate future.

Regarding the guideline for money market operations for the intermeeting period

ahead, members agreed that it was appropriate to maintain the current guideline that the

Bank would conduct money market operations so that the monetary base would increase at

an annual pace of about 60-70 trillion yen.

With regard to the asset purchases, members concurred that it was appropriate for

the Bank to continue with the guidelines decided when it introduced quantitative and

14


-----

qualitative monetary easing at the meeting on April 3 and 4, 2013. Specifically, they

confirmed the following. First, the Bank would purchase JGBs so that their amount

outstanding would increase at an annual pace of about 50 trillion yen, and the average

remaining maturity of the Bank's JGB purchases would be about seven years. Second, it

would purchase exchange-traded funds (ETFs) and Japan real estate investment trusts

(J-REITs) so that their amounts outstanding would increase at an annual pace of about 1

trillion yen and about 30 billion yen, respectively. And third, for CP and corporate bonds,

the Bank would maintain their amounts outstanding at about 2.2 trillion yen and about 3.2

trillion yen, respectively.

With respect to the Bank's thinking behind its conduct of monetary policy, most

members shared the recognition that the Bank would continue with quantitative and

qualitative monetary easing, aiming to achieve the price stability target of 2 percent, as long

as it was necessary for maintaining this target in a stable manner. These members

continued that, in doing so, it would examine both upside and downside risks to economic

activity and prices, and make adjustments as appropriate. Members expressed the view

that it was appropriate for the Bank to continue to steadily pursue quantitative and

qualitative monetary easing in accordance with the current guidelines, as Japan's economic

and price developments had been broadly in line with the forecasts presented in October

2013.

On the other hand, one member said that, if a rise were to occur in markets'

anticipation that quantitative and qualitative monetary easing would continue for a

protracted period or extreme additional measures would be implemented in a situation

where it was unlikely that the price stability target would be achieved in about two years,

this could lead to economic instability in the medium to long term, such as through a

buildup of financial imbalances. On this basis, the member said that it was appropriate to

change the expression representing the Bank's commitment by stating that the time frame

for continuing quantitative and qualitative monetary easing should be restricted to about

two years, and that thereafter the Bank would review the monetary easing measures in a

flexible manner.

With regard to the effects of quantitative and qualitative monetary easing,

members shared the recognition that these continued to firmly take hold, and financial

conditions were easing steadily to underpin firms' and households' spending. Regarding

15


-----

how much of an effect could be exerted on longer-term interest rates, they agreed that

long-term interest rates in Japan had been stable at low levels under the Bank's massive

JGB purchases. Members shared the recognition that, in a situation where nominal interest

rates had been stable, real interest rates were declining on the back of a rise in inflation

expectations.

Regarding the Stimulating Bank Lending Facility and other measures, some

members expressed the recognition that a favorable response to the extension and

enhancement of these measures decided at the previous meeting had been observed; for

example, some financial institutions had decided to increase the size of their loan funds that

utilized these measures as a funding source. One of these members said that attention

should also continue to be paid to possible effects on financial institutions' future financial

soundness, including the possibility of intensifying their lending competition.

**V. Remarks by Government Representatives**

The representative from the Ministry of Finance made the following remarks.

(1) The Japanese economy was recovering at a moderate pace, as evidenced by the fact that

the second preliminary estimate of the real GDP growth rate for the October-December

quarter of 2013 was 0.7 percent on an annualized quarter-on-quarter basis, registering

positive growth for the fifth consecutive quarter. Prices were also rising moderately.

The government expected the Bank to continue to steadily pursue quantitative and

qualitative monetary easing and achieve the price stability target of 2 percent at the

earliest possible time. In this regard, the government welcomed the extension and

enhancement of the Stimulating Bank Lending Facility as well as the

Growth-Supporting Funding Facility -- decided at the previous meeting -- as an

appropriate step that would reinforce the transmission mechanism of quantitative and

qualitative monetary easing.

(2) The government deemed it extremely important to avoid a greater-than-expected

slowdown in the Japanese economy after the consumption tax hike in April 2014 and

swiftly get the economy back on a growth path. Therefore, it would step up its efforts

to swiftly implement the supplementary budget for fiscal 2013 by setting a specific goal

-- that is, to implement about 70 percent of the supplementary budget by the end of June

2014 and about 90 percent by the end of September -- so that the supplementary budget

16


-----

would produce appropriate effects within the first half of fiscal 2014. In addition, the

government would continue to work to promptly obtain the Diet's approval of the

budget for fiscal 2014, together with the fiscal 2014 tax reform. By seeking to

implement steadily the budget following its approval, the government would do its

utmost to address downside risks to the Japanese economy during the first half of fiscal

2014.

(3) With a view to achieving sustainable economic growth led by private demand, the

government was working to promptly implement the growth strategy and proceed with

further structural reforms, based on the Industrial Competitiveness Enhancement Action

Plan and the Agenda for the Evolution of the Growth Strategy. At the Group of

Twenty (G-20) Finance Ministers and Central Bank Governors Meeting held on

February 22 and 23, it had been agreed to aim to lift the collective GDP of the G-20

countries by more than 2 percent over the coming five years. With a view to

contributing to global economic growth, the government deemed it important to aim for

higher growth in the Japanese economy through the growth strategy. The economy

was now entering a crucial stage of overcoming deflation and revitalizing the economy,

and the government would do its utmost to realize a positive cycle of the economy

through a series of measures.

The representative from the Cabinet Office made the following remarks.

(1) The Japanese economy was recovering at a moderate pace. The second preliminary

estimate of the real GDP growth rate for the October-December quarter of 2013 had

registered positive growth for the fifth consecutive quarter. In addition, the

front-loaded increase in demand prior to the consumption tax hike had recently been

observed in certain areas -- for example, private consumption. As for the outlook, the

economy was expected to stay on a recovery trend. The government would also

closely monitor developments in global financial markets and their effects, as well as

the subsequent decline in demand following the front-loaded increase prior to the

consumption tax hike.

(2) The specifics of the enhancement of the framework for the Stimulating Bank Lending

Facility and the Growth-Supporting Funding Facility were decided at this meeting.

The government would aim to implement swiftly the supplementary budget for fiscal

17


-----

2013 and to promptly obtain the Diet's approval of the budget for fiscal 2014, thereby

creating demand. Furthermore, it would aim to further accelerate the implementation

of the growth strategy, thereby creating investment opportunities. The government

expected that, together with these efforts, the Bank's enhancement of the framework

would further promote financial institutions' actions as well as stimulate firms' and

households' demand for credit.

(3) The Government Pension Investment Fund (GPIF) was proceeding with reforms, such

as making revisions to its portfolio. Regarding foreign direct investment in Japan, the

government set forth its aim to double the cumulative amount by the end of 2020, and

would deliberate further on tax and regulatory reforms as well as on measures to attract

and support foreign firms at the Expert Group Meeting. It would then incorporate the

results of the deliberations in formulating the Basic Policies for Economic and Fiscal

Management and Reform as well as in revising the Japan Revitalization Strategy. As

for corporate tax reform, the government would deliberate further with the discussion

groups at the meeting of the Government Tax Commission and at the Council on

Economic and Fiscal Policy. With regard to the Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP)

Agreement, much progress had been made at the ministerial meeting held from

February 22 through 25. The government would cooperate fully with each country

participating in the TPP with the aim of reaching an agreement that would yield a

comprehensive and balanced outcome.

(4) At the intensive discussion within the Council on Economic and Fiscal Policy held on

February 20, the government had reviewed the progress toward overcoming deflation

and promoting economic revitalization. The CPI was rising moderately but, as for the

outlook, while improvement in the output gap was expected to contribute to a price rise,

the positive effects from a rise in import prices could diminish depending on future

developments in foreign exchange rates. Therefore, the government would closely

monitor these developments. The government expected the Bank to continue its

efforts to achieve the price stability target of 2 percent.

18


-----

**VI. Votes**

Based on the above discussions, members shared the view that it was appropriate

to maintain the current guideline for money market operations, so that the monetary base

would increase at an annual pace of about 60-70 trillion yen.

To reflect this view, the chairman formulated the following proposal and put it to a

vote.

**The Chairman's Policy Proposal on the Guideline for Money Market Operations:**

1. The guideline for money market operations for the intermeeting period ahead will be as

follows.

The Bank of Japan will conduct money market operations so that the

monetary base will increase at an annual pace of about 60-70 trillion yen.

2. A public statement will be decided separately.

Votes for the proposal: Mr. H. Kuroda, Mr. K. Iwata, Mr. H. Nakaso, Mr. R. Miyao,

Mr. Y. Morimoto, Ms. S. Shirai, Mr. K. Ishida, Mr. T. Sato, and Mr. T. Kiuchi.

Votes against the proposal: None.

**VII. Discussion on the Statement on Monetary Policy**

On the basis of the above discussions, members discussed the Statement on

Monetary Policy, and formed a majority view. Mr. T. Kiuchi, however, formulated a

proposal, and thus two proposals were submitted.

Meanwhile, Ms. S. Shirai expressed dissent from the description regarding risks to

the outlook presented in the draft of the statement that formed a majority view, suggesting

that the pace of improvement in the employment and income situation in Japan should be

added. As the reason for this, she stated that, for domestic demand to maintain its firmness

in the future, it was important for the employment and income situation to continue

improving; therefore, considering, for example, the existence of recent indicators that

showed a deterioration in households' income outlook, this issue should be included as one

of the risks for the time being.

19


-----

**A. Mr. T. Kiuchi's Policy Proposal**

With regard to the draft of the statement that formed a majority view, Mr. T.

Kiuchi proposed changing the current expression of the Bank's future monetary policy

stance that "the Bank will continue with quantitative and qualitative monetary easing,

aiming to achieve the price stability target of 2 percent, as long as it is necessary for

maintaining that target in a stable manner. It will examine both upside and downside risks

to economic activity and prices, and make adjustments as appropriate" to a new expression

that "the Bank will aim to achieve the price stability target of 2 percent in the medium to

long term. On this basis, it will designate quantitative and qualitative monetary easing as

an intensive measure with a time frame of about two years, and thereafter will review the

monetary easing measures in a flexible manner." The proposal was then put to a vote.

The proposal was defeated by a majority vote.

Votes for the proposal: Mr. T. Kiuchi.

Votes against the proposal: Mr. H. Kuroda, Mr. K. Iwata, Mr. H. Nakaso, Mr. R.

Miyao, Mr. Y. Morimoto, Ms. S. Shirai, Mr. K. Ishida, and Mr. T. Sato.

**B. The Chairman's Policy Proposal**

The chairman formulated the Statement on Monetary Policy, and put it to a vote.

The Policy Board decided the text by a unanimous vote. It was confirmed that the

statement would be released immediately after the meeting (see Attachment).

**VIII. Approval of the Minutes of the Monetary Policy Meeting**

The Policy Board approved unanimously the minutes of the Monetary Policy

Meeting of February 17 and 18, 2014 for release on March 14, 2014.

20


-----

Attachment

March 11, 2014

Bank of Japan

**Statement on Monetary Policy**

1. At the Monetary Policy Meeting held today, the Policy Board of the Bank of Japan decided,

by a unanimous vote, to set the following guideline for money market operations for the

intermeeting period:

The Bank of Japan will conduct money market operations so that the monetary base will

increase at an annual pace of about 60-70 trillion yen.

2. With regard to the asset purchases, the Bank will continue with the following guidelines:

a) The Bank will purchase Japanese government bonds (JGBs) so that their amount

outstanding will increase at an annual pace of about 50 trillion yen, and the average

remaining maturity of the Bank's JGB purchases will be about seven years.

b) The Bank will purchase exchange-traded funds (ETFs) and Japan real estate investment

trusts (J-REITs) so that their amounts outstanding will increase at an annual pace of about

1 trillion yen and about 30 billion yen respectively.

c) As for CP and corporate bonds, the Bank will maintain their amounts outstanding at about

2.2 trillion yen and about 3.2 trillion yen respectively.

3. Japan's economy has continued to recover moderately, and a front-loaded increase in demand

prior to the consumption tax hike has recently been observed. Overseas economies -
mainly advanced economies -- are starting to recover, although a lackluster performance is

still seen in part. Exports have recently leveled off more or less. The pick-up in business

fixed investment has become increasingly evident as corporate profits have improved.

Public investment has continued to increase. With improvement in the employment and

income situation, housing investment has continued to increase and private consumption has

remained resilient; in these segments of the economy, the front-loaded increase in demand

prior to the consumption tax hike has also been observed. Reflecting these developments in

demand both at home and abroad, industrial production has been increasing at a somewhat

accelerated pace. Meanwhile, financial conditions are accommodative. On the price front,

21


-----

the year-on-year rate of increase in the consumer price index (CPI, all items less fresh food)

is around 1¼ percent. Inflation expectations appear to be rising on the whole.

4. With regard to the outlook, Japan's economy is expected to continue a moderate recovery as a

trend, while it will be affected by the front-loaded increase and subsequent decline in demand

prior to and after the consumption tax hike. The year-on-year rate of increase in the CPI,

excluding the direct effects of the consumption tax hike, is likely to be around 1¼ percent for

some time.

5. Risks to the outlook include developments in the emerging and commodity-exporting

economies, the prospects for the European debt problem, and the pace of recovery in the U.S.

economy.[[Note 1]]

6. The Bank will continue with quantitative and qualitative monetary easing, aiming to achieve

the price stability target of 2 percent, as long as it is necessary for maintaining that target in a

stable manner. It will examine both upside and downside risks to economic activity and

prices, and make adjustments as appropriate.[[Note 2]]

Such conduct of monetary policy will support the positive movements in economic activity

and financial markets, contribute to a rise in inflation expectations, and lead Japan's economy

to overcome the deflation that has lasted for nearly 15 years.

[Note 1] Ms. S. Shirai dissented from the description in paragraph 5, suggesting that the pace of improvement
in the employment and income situation in Japan should be added.

[Note 2] Mr. T. Kiuchi proposed that the Bank will aim to achieve the price stability target of 2 percent in the
medium to long term and designate quantitative and qualitative monetary easing as an intensive
measure with a time frame of about two years. The proposal was defeated by an 8-1 majority vote.
Voting for the proposal: Mr. T. Kiuchi. Voting against the proposal: Mr. H. Kuroda, Mr. K. Iwata,
Mr. H. Nakaso, Mr. R. Miyao, Mr. Y. Morimoto, Ms. S. Shirai, Mr. K. Ishida, and Mr. T. Sato.

22


-----

