Not to be released until 8:50 a.m.
Japan Standard Time on Friday,
March 14, 2014.

March 14, 2014

Bank of Japan

# Minutes of the
 Monetary Policy Meeting

## on February 17 and 18, 2014

(English translation prepared by the Bank's staff based on the Japanese original)


-----

Please contact the Bank of Japan at the address below in advance to request permission

when reproducing or copying the content of this document for commercial purposes.

Secretariat of the Policy Board, Bank of Japan

P.O. Box 30, Nihonbashi, Tokyo 103-8660, Japan

Please credit the source when quoting, reproducing, or copying the content of this

document.


-----

A Monetary Policy Meeting of the Bank of Japan Policy Board was held in the

Head Office of the Bank of Japan in Tokyo on Monday, February 17, 2014, from 2:00 p.m.

to 4:11 p.m., and on Tuesday, February 18, from 9:00 a.m. to 12:23 p.m.[1]

**Policy Board Members Present**

**Mr. H. Kuroda, Chairman, Governor of the Bank of Japan**

**Mr. K. Iwata, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Japan**

**Mr. H. Nakaso, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Japan**

**Mr. R. Miyao**

**Mr. Y. Morimoto**

**Ms. S. Shirai**

**Mr. K. Ishida**

**Mr. T. Sato**

**Mr. T. Kiuchi**

Government Representatives Present

Mr. Y. Furukawa, Senior Vice Minister of Finance, Ministry of Finance[2]

Mr. M. Asakawa, Deputy Vice Minister for Policy Planning and Coordination, Ministry

of Finance[3]

Mr. Y. Nishimura, Senior Vice Minister, Cabinet Office[2]

Mr. K. Umetani, Vice Minister for Policy Coordination, Cabinet Office[3]

Reporting Staff

Mr. M. Amamiya, Executive Director

Mr. N. Kinoshita, Executive Director

Mr. K. Momma, Executive Director (Assistant Governor)

Mr. S. Uchida, Director-General, Monetary Affairs Department

1 The minutes of this meeting were approved by the Policy Board at the Monetary Policy Meeting
held on March 10 and 11, 2014 as "a document describing an outline of the discussion at the
meeting" stipulated in Article 20, paragraph 1 of the Bank of Japan Act of 1997. Those present are
referred to by their titles at the time of the meeting.
2 Messrs. Y. Furukawa and Y. Nishimura were present on February 18.
3 Messrs. M. Asakawa and K. Umetani were present on February 17.

1


-----

Mr. M. Nomura, Deputy Director-General, Monetary Affairs Department[4]

Mr. K. Masaki, Head of Policy Planning Division, Monetary Affairs Department

Mr. H. Yamaoka, Director-General, Financial Markets Department

Mr. E. Maeda, Director-General, Research and Statistics Department

Mr. S. Kameda, Head of Economic Research Division, Research and Statistics

Department

Mr. H. Toyama, Director-General, International Department

Secretariat of the Monetary Policy Meeting

Mr. N. Yoshioka, Director-General, Secretariat of the Policy Board

Mr. N. Fukunaga, Director, Deputy Head of Planning and Coordination Division,

Secretariat of the Policy Board

Mr. H. Kamiguchi, Head of Policy Infrastructure Division, Monetary Affairs

Department[4]

Mr. Y. Komaki, Senior Economist, Monetary Affairs Department

Mr. T. Kawamoto, Senior Economist, Monetary Affairs Department

4 Messrs. M. Nomura and H. Kamiguchi were present on February 18.

2


-----

**I. Summary of Staff Reports on Economic and Financial Developments[5]**

**A. Money Market Operations in the Intermeeting Period**

The Bank, in accordance with the guideline decided at the previous meeting on

January 21 and 22, 2014, had been providing funds through purchases of Japanese

government bonds (JGBs) and other measures.[6] In this situation, the amount outstanding

of the monetary base had been in the range of 196-206 trillion yen.

**B. Recent Developments in Financial Markets**

Money market rates, including longer-term ones, had been at low levels. The

uncollateralized overnight call rate had been at a level below 0.1 percent. General

collateral (GC) repo rates had recently declined marginally. As for interest rates on term

instruments, yields on treasury discount bills (T-Bills) had been somewhat weak for all

maturities. Rates on longer-term interbank instruments had been flat.

Yields on 10-year JGBs had dropped somewhat, partly reflecting declines in U.S.

long-term interest rates and Japanese stock prices, and had recently been at around 0.6

percent. While U.S. and European stock prices had declined due to the heightening of

investors' risk aversion that reflected nervousness in emerging markets, the Nikkei 225

Stock Average had temporarily fallen by a substantial degree, with the appreciation of the

yen, but recovered somewhat thereafter and had recently been in the range of 14,000-14,500

yen. Yield spreads between corporate bonds and JGBs had been narrowing on the whole,

albeit very moderately, reflecting solid demand from investors, although some corporate

bond spreads had been wide. In the foreign exchange market, the yen had appreciated

against the U.S. dollar, coupled with the decline in Japanese stock prices in a situation

where investors' risk aversion heightened. The U.S. dollar/yen rate had recently been at

around 102 yen.

**C. Overseas Economic and Financial Developments**

Overseas economies -- mainly advanced economies -- were starting to recover,

although a lackluster performance was still seen in part.

5 Reports were made based on information available at the time of the meeting.
6 The guideline was as follows:

The Bank of Japan will conduct money market operations so that the monetary base will
increase at an annual pace of about 60-70 trillion yen.

3


-----

The U.S. economy continued to recover moderately despite the effects of a winter

snowstorm, and the recovery had gradually become widespread. Housing investment

continued to generally pick up, although the pace had become moderate. Private

consumption had been firm, reflecting not only wealth effects but also the continued

improving trend in the employment situation. Exports also remained on an increasing

trend. Reflecting these developments in demand, business sentiment had been on an

improving trend, and production had risen. Moreover, business fixed investment was

picking up, albeit moderately. As for prices, the year-on-year rate of increase in the

consumer price index (CPI) for all items less food and energy, or the core CPI, had been

more or less flat. In this situation, the year-on-year rate of increase in the CPI for all items

had climbed somewhat, mainly because the year-on-year rate of change in energy prices had

turned positive.

The European economy had been picking up. Private consumption had been

picking up moderately, with consumer sentiment continuing to improve, although the

employment and income situation remained severe. Business fixed investment had

bottomed out. In addition, there were movements toward a pick-up in exports.

Reflecting these developments in demand, production was starting to pick up. As for

prices, slack in supply and demand conditions in the goods and labor markets continued to

exert downward pressure on prices, and the year-on-year rates of increase in both the

Harmonized Index of Consumer Prices (HICP) excluding energy and unprocessed food and

the HICP for all items had been on a moderate declining trend. Meanwhile, economic

activity in the United Kingdom continued to recover, particularly in domestic demand.

With regard to Asia, the Chinese economy continued to see stable growth on the

back of firm domestic demand. Stable growth in private consumption continued against

the background of a favorable employment and income situation, although effects of the

government's frugality campaign continued to be observed in some areas. Fixed asset

investment also remained firm. Moreover, exports had been picking up, particularly those

to Europe and the United States. With these developments in demand, production had

continued to mark relatively high growth, particularly in the machinery industry, including

motor vehicles. Regarding the NIEs and the ASEAN countries, while economic

developments in the NIEs were picking up somewhat, growth momentum in the ASEAN

countries remained weak. In India, the economy remained in a state of deceleration,

4


-----

particularly in domestic demand. As for prices, there were differences by country and

region. Specifically, the year-on-year rate of increase in the CPI had been somewhat low

as a trend in China and the NIEs, while that in Indonesia and India continued to be

relatively high, mainly reflecting the rise in administered prices.

Global financial markets had been nervous as currencies had depreciated and stock

prices had declined, mainly in emerging economies facing structural problems such as

current account deficits. U.S. and European stock prices had fallen substantially as

investors' risk aversion had spread globally, but had recently risen again. International

commodity prices continued to be weak from a relatively longer-term perspective in a

situation where emerging economies lacked growth momentum. However, those prices -
crude oil prices in particular -- had been somewhat strong since the previous meeting, partly

due to the effects of a winter snowstorm in the United States.

**D. Economic and Financial Developments in Japan**

1. Economic developments

Exports had generally been picking up. On a quarter-on-quarter basis, real

exports had turned upward in the January-March quarter of 2013 and grown at an

accelerated rate in the April-June quarter. They had fallen in the July-September quarter

but risen again in the October-December quarter. Meanwhile, imports continued to

increase, mainly due to the effects of the front-loaded increase in demand prior to the

consumption tax hike. Exports were expected to increase moderately, mainly against the

background of the recovery in overseas economies.

Public investment continued to increase. It was expected to trend upward for the

time being and then become more or less flat at a high level.

Business fixed investment had been picking up as corporate profits had improved.

Business fixed investment on a GDP basis for the October-December quarter of 2013 rose

noticeably compared with the previous quarter. Machinery orders (private sector,

excluding orders for ships and those from electric power companies) -- a leading indicator

of machinery investment -- continued to increase in both the July-September and

October-December quarters of 2013, albeit with monthly fluctuations. Business fixed

investment was projected to follow a moderate increasing trend as corporate profits

continued to improve.

5


-----

As for the employment and income situation, supply and demand conditions in the

labor market continued to improve steadily, as evidenced by the continued rise in the job

openings-to-applicants ratios and the decline in the unemployment rate. Regarding wages,

although the year-on-year rate of change in scheduled cash earnings had still been slightly

negative, the year-on-year rate of increase in non-scheduled cash earnings had tended to

climb, and preliminary figures for special cash earnings in the November-December period

of 2013 -- which mostly comprised winter bonuses -- increased markedly. In this situation,

employee income had picked up moderately, as it had recently continued to register

year-on-year increases.

Private consumption remained resilient, with improvement in the employment and

income situation, and a front-loaded increase in demand prior to the consumption tax hike

had also been observed. Regarding consumption of durable goods, the number of new

passenger-car registrations had turned upward since around summer 2013, and had recently

marked a further increase. In addition, sales of household electrical appliances had been

steady, albeit with fluctuations. It was likely that such movements in durable consumer

goods had been reflecting to some extent the front-loaded increase in demand prior to the

consumption tax hike. Private consumption was expected to remain resilient as a trend,

supported mainly by improvement in the employment and income situation, albeit with

some fluctuations caused by the front-loaded increase and subsequent decline in demand.

Housing investment continued to increase, and the effects of the front-loaded

increase in demand prior to the consumption tax hike had been clear. It was expected to

remain resilient as a trend, albeit with some fluctuations caused by the hike.

Reflecting these developments in demand both at home and abroad, industrial

production had been increasing moderately. Inventories had declined, notably in transport

equipment, in view of the front-loaded increase in demand prior to the consumption tax hike.

Industrial production was expected to follow a moderate increasing trend, mainly reflecting

developments in demand at home and abroad, albeit with some fluctuations caused by the

effects of the consumption tax hike.

As for prices, domestic corporate goods prices were rising moderately relative to

three months earlier, mainly against the backdrop of movements in international commodity

prices and foreign exchange rates. The year-on-year rate of increase in the CPI (all items

less fresh food) was around 1¼ percent. With regard to the outlook, excluding the direct

6


-----

effects of the consumption tax hike, domestic corporate goods prices were expected to

continue rising moderately for the time being, and the year-on-year rate of increase in the

CPI was likely to be around 1¼ percent for some time. Meanwhile, inflation expectations

appeared to be rising on the whole.

2. Financial environment

Financial conditions were accommodative.

The monetary base had increased significantly as asset purchases by the Bank had

progressed, and the year-on-year rate of growth had been at around 50 percent.

Firms' funding costs had been hovering at low levels. With regard to credit

supply, firms continued to see financial institutions' lending attitudes as being on an

improving trend. Issuing conditions for CP continued to be favorable. Those for

corporate bonds also remained favorable on the whole. Firms' credit demand had been

increasing moderately, mainly for working capital and funds related to mergers and

acquisitions. Against this backdrop, the year-on-year rate of increase in the amount

outstanding of bank lending had been at around 2.5 percent. The year-on-year rate of

change in the amount outstanding of CP and corporate bonds had been positive. Firms

retained their recovered financial positions. Meanwhile, the year-on-year rate of growth in

the money stock had been at around 4.5 percent, mainly due to the increase in bank lending.

**II. Amendment to Principal Terms and Conditions for Funds-Supplying Operations**

**against Pooled Collateral in View of the Amendment to the Deposit Insurance Act**

**A. Staff Reports**

Under the amended Deposit Insurance Act, should there be a risk of a severe

financial market disruption triggered by events such as a failure of a financial institution,

specified bridge financial institutions would be established as subsidiary companies of the

Deposit Insurance Corporation of Japan, when considered necessary. The function of

specified bridge financial institutions was to take over and fulfill major market transactions

-- which had been conducted by the failed financial institutions -- as per their original

contract. The necessary liquidity for specified bridge financial institutions was to be

provided by the Deposit Insurance Corporation of Japan. Taking this into account, the

staff considered it appropriate for the Bank to amend the Principal Terms and Conditions for

7


-----

Funds-Supplying Operations against Pooled Collateral to exclude specified bridge financial

institutions from eligible counterparties for the Bank's various market operations.

Meanwhile, following the transfer of the publisher of LIBOR from the British

Bankers' Association to ICE Benchmark Administration Limited completed on February 1,

2014, the staff considered it appropriate for the Bank to amend the rule on loan rates of

6-month U.S. dollar LIBOR under the Special Rules for the U.S. Dollar Lending

Arrangement to Enhance the Fund-Provisioning Measure to Support Strengthening the

Foundations for Economic Growth.

**B. Vote**

"Amendment to 'Principal Terms and Conditions for Funds-Supplying Operations

against Pooled Collateral,'" which represented the aforementioned amendments, was put to

a vote. Members voted unanimously to approve the amendment. They concurred that

the staff should accordingly make this public after the meeting.

**III. Summary of Discussions by the Policy Board on Economic and Financial**

**Developments**

**A. Economic Developments**

Members shared the recognition that global financial markets had been nervous as

stock prices had declined and currencies had depreciated, mainly in emerging economies

facing structural problems such as current account deficits, and that the effects of such

developments had been spreading even to advanced countries. A few members pointed

out that recent adjustments in stock prices worldwide had been affected by position

adjustments made by investors, and that they could be considered largely as a reversal of a

surge in stock prices seen toward the end of 2013. One member said that, in emerging

markets, stocks and currencies of countries facing issues such as current account deficits

had been sold in a selective manner. Members agreed that, although emerging markets had

most recently gradually started to regain their calmness, mainly in Asian economies with

favorable economic fundamentals, it was necessary to continue to closely monitor market

developments, including the effects of the Federal Reserve's reduction in the pace of its

asset purchases.

8


-----

Members concurred that overseas economies -- mainly advanced economies -
were starting to recover, although a lackluster performance was still seen in part of the

emerging economies. As for the outlook, they shared the recognition that overseas

economies -- mainly advanced economies -- would recover moderately. Many members

added that they maintained their view that, compared to before, downside risks to overseas

economies as a whole remained diminished, although developments in emerging and

commodity-exporting economies in particular continued to warrant attention.

With regard to developments in overseas economies by region, members agreed

that the U.S. economy continued to recover moderately, although some economic indicators

showed that the economy had been affected by a winter snowstorm, and that the recovery

had gradually become widespread. Many members said that the employment situation

generally remained on its improving trend considering that, for example, (1) although the

recent pace of increase in payroll employment had slowed, it was necessary to take into

account fluctuations in statistics; and (2) the unemployment rate, which was measured by

the household survey, had been declining. In relation to this, a few members noted that

due attention should be paid to the point that the long-term declining trend in the labor force

participation rate had contributed to a significant extent to the decline in the unemployment

rate in recent years. As for the outlook, members shared the view that the pace of

economic recovery would gradually rise, as the debt ceiling problem had settled and the

fiscal drag was projected to fade. One member mentioned the possibility that, in the

January-March quarter of 2014, U.S. economic activity could be relatively weak due to the

effects of a winter snowstorm, while in the April-June quarter the growth momentum could

strengthen due to a reversal of the previous quarter's movements. This member continued

that, in such a case, movements in the U.S. economy could work toward offsetting the

slowdown in Japan's economy following the consumption tax hike.

Members shared the recognition that economic activity in the euro area had been

picking up. A few members pointed out that the pick-up had begun to spread, as shown by

the fact that, for example, household and business sentiment had improved and the real

GDP growth rate for the October-December quarter of 2013 had registered positive growth

for the third consecutive quarter. As for the outlook, members concurred that the economy

was likely to continue picking up as domestic demand was expected to do so as well, and as

exports would likely recover moderately. A few members, however, pointed out that

9


-----

attention should be paid to (1) the possibility that the disinflationary trend would become

prolonged due to continuous pressures to adjust wages in a situation where there was slack

in supply and demand conditions in the labor market, as well as (2) the risk of disinflation

compounding the European debt problem.

Members agreed that the Chinese economy continued to see stable growth on the

back of firm domestic demand. Some members commented that it had been difficult to

accurately grasp the underlying trend in Chinese economic indicators for the

January-February period of 2014, due to the effects of the Chinese New Year. As for the

outlook, most members expressed the view that the economy would maintain stable growth

at around the current pace as authorities would likely continue to pay consideration to

economic activity while progressing with structural reforms, and external demand was

expected to continue improving moderately. Many members added that careful attention

should continue to be paid to how the shadow banking problem would affect the financial

system.

Regarding the NIEs and the ASEAN countries, members concurred that, while

economic activities in the NIEs were picking up, growth momentum in the ASEAN

countries remained weak. Some members pointed out that exports from South Korea and

Taiwan showed signs of picking up due to the improvement in advanced economies. As

for the outlook for the NIEs and the ASEAN countries, members shared the recognition that,

for the time being, an adjustment phase would continue -- especially in the ASEAN

countries -- and the pace of economic growth in the NIEs and the ASEAN countries would

likely remain relatively slow. They continued that the pace would rise again, however, as

growth in advanced economies was expected to gain momentum over time.

Based on the above deliberations on economic and financial conditions abroad,

members discussed the state of Japan's economy.

With regard to economic activity, members shared the view that, as a virtuous

cycle among production, income, and spending continued to operate, the economy

continued to recover moderately, and a front-loaded increase in demand prior to the

consumption tax hike had recently been observed. Regarding real GDP for the

October-December quarter of 2013, some members said that net exports had pushed down

the GDP growth rate, mainly due to the relatively high growth in imports. At the same

time, however, these members pointed out that the economy continued to grow at a pace

10


-----

above its potential on the back of firmness in domestic demand. As for the outlook for the

economy, members shared the view that it was likely to continue its moderate recovery as a

trend, while it would be affected by the front-loaded increase and subsequent decline in

demand prior to and after the consumption tax hike. A few members expressed the view

that future economic developments depended on whether an increase in exports and

business fixed investment could offset the reversal decline in private consumption following

the consumption tax hike. One of these members added that, in the event of a decline in

household and business sentiment, it was necessary to closely monitor whether this would

bring about a self-fulfilling economic downturn through a contraction in consumption and

investment activities.

Members shared the recognition that, as overseas economies -- mainly advanced

economies -- were starting to recover, Japan's exports had generally been picking up, albeit

with fluctuations, although there continued to be a lack of momentum with weakness

remaining in exports to some emerging countries including the ASEAN countries. As for

the outlook, they agreed that exports were likely to increase moderately, mainly against the

background of the recovery in overseas economies. Some members said that, behind the

lack of momentum in exports despite the earlier depreciation of the yen, structural factors -
including the shift of Japanese firms' production sites to overseas accompanying increased

local procurement by Japanese manufacturers -- might be at work. One of these members

added that an increase in manufacturers' capability to earn profits overseas could have

positive effects, particularly by inducing an increase in national savings and net assets,

through an improvement in the balance of income. Some members pointed out that, in

some sectors, while firms seemed to place priority on domestic shipments in response to

firm domestic demand, export shipments had been contained. These members continued

that exports might gain momentum in the April-June quarter of 2014, at which time

domestic demand was projected to experience a reversal decline following the consumption

tax hike.

A few members pointed out that imports had recently continued to mark relatively

high growth, reflecting firm domestic demand including the effects of a front-loaded

increase in demand prior to the consumption tax hike and of replacement demand for

personal computers.

11


-----

Members concurred that business fixed investment had been picking up as

corporate profits had improved, and was projected to follow a moderate increasing trend.

With regard to machinery orders, many members noted that the significant decline in

December 2013 could be largely attributable to a reversal of the earlier increase, and that

they were judged to be on an increasing trend with monthly fluctuations taken into

consideration. A few members commented that it was a matter of concern that the forecast

figures for machinery orders for the January-March quarter showed a small decline.

As for the employment and income situation, members shared the recognition that

supply and demand conditions in the labor market continued to improve steadily, and that

employee income had also picked up moderately. As for the outlook regarding employee

income, they agreed that a pick-up was likely to become more evident, in line with the

recovery in economic activity and business performance. One member noted that due

attention needed to be paid to the fact that, although the number of employees continued to

increase, this increase was mainly in part-time employees. Furthermore, a different

member pointed out that, since the active job openings-to-applicants ratio for regular

employees was lower than the ratio for the total number of employees including part-time

employees, the wages of regular employees had been less likely to increase. Counter to

this, one member noted that, given Japan's employment practices, it could be expected that

the number of regular employees would rise from April, when new graduates would be

recruited. Moreover, a different member commented that, even if a tightening of supply

and demand conditions in the labor market was mainly seen for part-time employees,

upward pressure on wages could heighten on the whole. As for the outlook for wages,

some members expressed the intent to pay close attention to the outcome of wage

negotiations to be held this spring. One member expressed the view that the termination

of the measures for the reduction of salaries of government employees as of the end of

fiscal 2013 could work toward boosting wages -- including a rise in wages of those engaged

in medical and social welfare as well as education, which were linked to salaries of local

government employees.

Members shared the recognition that private consumption remained resilient, with

improvement in the employment and income situation, and a front-loaded increase in

demand prior to the consumption tax hike had also been observed. They agreed that it was

likely that the movements in consumption of durable consumer goods such as motor

12


-----

vehicles and household electrical appliances had been reflecting to some extent the

front-loaded increase in demand prior to the consumption tax hike, in addition to the

improvement in the employment and income situation evidenced by the increase in winter

bonus payments. Members concurred that private consumption was likely to remain

resilient as a trend, supported mainly by improvement in the employment and income

situation, albeit with some fluctuations caused by the front-loaded increase and subsequent

decline in demand prior to and after the consumption tax hike. Some members -- while

noting the relatively weak developments in consumer confidence since October 2013 -- said

that this might be attributable to consumers' awareness of the consumption tax hike, and

future developments warranted attention. In relation to this, one member said that the

breakdown of the consumer confidence index showed that consumer perception of "income

growth" and "overall livelihood" was deteriorating recently. This member expressed the

view that it was therefore necessary to be aware of the slowdown in the pace of

improvement in the employment and income situation as a downside risk to consumption.

In response to this view, one member pointed to the fact that consumer perception of

"employment" in the consumer confidence index remained on an improving trend, and

expressed the opinion that abatement of employment uncertainty led to a containment in

precautionary savings, thereby underpinning the mechanism for self-sustained economic

recovery led mainly by consumption and nonmanufacturers.

Members agreed that industrial production had been increasing moderately,

reflecting these developments in demand both at home and abroad, and that this was likely

to continue as a trend.

Regarding prices, members shared the view that the year-on-year rate of increase

in the CPI (all items less fresh food) was around 1¼ percent and the rate of increase,

excluding the direct effects of the consumption tax hike, was likely to be around 1¼ percent

for some time. Many members said that price rises had been observed not only in

energy-related goods but also across a wide range of items, as evidenced by the fact that the

year-on-year rate of increase in the CPI (all items less food and energy) for December 2013

had risen to 0.7 percent. Many members pointed out that, on the back of resilience in

private consumption and an improvement in the aggregate supply and demand balance,

firms continued to find it easy to pass on costs to sales prices. On this point, one member

added that, although the recent rise in the inflation rate was sometimes explained as a type

13


-----

of cost-push inflation caused by the depreciation of the yen, setbacks in production that

usually took place in cases of cost-push inflation were not actually being observed.

Meanwhile, one member pointed to the possibility that the effects of the depreciation of the

yen on prices had become larger. Members shared the recognition that inflation

expectations appeared to be rising on the whole, considering market indicators, the results

of various surveys, and other information.

**B. Financial Developments**

Members concurred that financial conditions in Japan were accommodative.

They shared the view that the monetary base had increased significantly, reflecting the

progress in asset purchases by the Bank, and that firms' funding costs had been hovering at

low levels. Members agreed that firms continued to see financial institutions' lending

attitudes as being on an improving trend. They also concurred that the year-on-year rate of

growth in the money stock had been on a rising trend in a situation where the amount

outstanding of bank lending, including that to small firms, had been increasing moderately.

**IV. Summary of Staff Reports on the Fund-Provisioning Measure to Stimulate Bank**

**Lending and Other Measures**

As the fund-provisioning measure to stimulate bank lending (hereafter the

Stimulating Bank Lending Facility) and other measures were due to expire shortly, the staff

provided the following explanation regarding the outline and usages of the measures under

the current framework.

In a situation where the year-on-year rate of increase in the amount outstanding of

bank lending had climbed to around 2.5 percent, financial institutions -- mainly major banks

-- had made active use of the Stimulating Bank Lending Facility and the amount

outstanding of Bank's fund-provisioning was currently around 5 trillion yen. This facility

had been providing financial institutions with the means to raise long-term funds at a low

fixed interest rate, and they had been making use of it even as a means to carry out

asset-liability management (ALM). As for the fund-provisioning measure to support

strengthening the foundations for economic growth (hereafter the Growth-Supporting

Funding Facility), the amount outstanding of the Bank's fund-provisioning under the main

rules had been around 3.2 trillion yen, almost reaching the maximum amount of 3.5 trillion

14


-----

yen. Some financial institutions had been making use of this facility close to the

maximum amount that could be provided to each of them -- namely, 150 billion yen. The

amounts of the Bank's fund-provisioning under the special rules for equity investments and

asset-based lending (ABL) and under the special rules for small-lot investments and loans

had been about 100 billion yen and about 7 billion yen, respectively, while the maximum

amount of the Bank's fund-provisioning was 500 billion yen under each rule. Financial

institutions had actively been making use of this facility; for example, for establishing loan

funds that relied on this facility as a funding source. Of the maximum amount of the

Bank's fund-provisioning -- that is, 1 trillion yen -- under the funds-supplying operation to

support financial institutions in disaster areas, about 400 billion yen had been used.

**V. Summary of Discussions on Monetary Policy for the Immediate Future and the**

**Treatment of the Stimulating Bank Lending Facility and Other Measures**

**A. Monetary Policy for the Immediate Future**

Regarding the guideline for money market operations for the intermeeting period

ahead, members agreed that it was appropriate to maintain the current guideline that the

Bank would conduct money market operations so that the monetary base would increase at

an annual pace of about 60-70 trillion yen.

With regard to the asset purchases, members concurred that it was appropriate for

the Bank to continue with the guidelines decided when it introduced quantitative and

qualitative monetary easing at the meeting on April 3 and 4, 2013. Specifically, they

confirmed the following. First, the Bank would purchase JGBs so that their amount

outstanding would increase at an annual pace of about 50 trillion yen, and the average

remaining maturity of the Bank's JGB purchases would be about seven years. Second, it

would purchase exchange-traded funds (ETFs) and Japan real estate investment trusts

(J-REITs) so that their amounts outstanding would increase at an annual pace of about 1

trillion yen and about 30 billion yen, respectively. And third, for CP and corporate bonds,

the Bank would maintain their amounts outstanding at about 2.2 trillion yen and about 3.2

trillion yen, respectively.

With respect to the Bank's thinking behind its conduct of monetary policy, most

members shared the recognition that the Bank would continue with quantitative and

qualitative monetary easing, aiming to achieve the price stability target of 2 percent, as long

15


-----

as it was necessary for maintaining this target in a stable manner. These members

continued that, in doing so, it would examine both upside and downside risks to economic

activity and prices, and make adjustments as appropriate. Members expressed the view

that it was appropriate for the Bank to continue to steadily pursue quantitative and

qualitative monetary easing in accordance with the current guidelines, taking into account

that Japan's economic and price developments had been broadly in line with the forecasts

presented in October 2013 and that risks -- particularly those surrounding overseas

economies -- had decreased.

On the other hand, one member said that, if a rise were to occur in markets'

anticipation that quantitative and qualitative monetary easing would continue for a

protracted period or extreme additional measures would be implemented in a situation

where it was unlikely that the price stability target would be achieved in about two years,

this could lead to economic instability in the medium to long term, such as through a

buildup of financial imbalances. On this basis, the member said that it was appropriate to

change the expression representing the Bank's commitment by stating that the time frame

for continuing quantitative and qualitative monetary easing should be restricted to about

two years, and that thereafter the Bank would review the monetary easing measures in a

flexible manner. This member added that the Bank needed to make constant efforts to

conduct an assessment with regard to "the second perspective" -- that is, an examination of

the risks considered most relevant to the conduct of monetary policy.

With regard to the effects of quantitative and qualitative monetary easing,

members shared the recognition that these continued to firmly take hold, and financial

conditions were easing steadily to underpin firms' and households' spending. Regarding

how much of an effect could be exerted on longer-term interest rates, they agreed that

long-term interest rates in Japan had been stable at low levels under the Bank's massive

JGB purchases. Members shared the recognition that, in a situation where nominal interest

rates had been stable, real interest rates were declining on the back of a rise in inflation

expectations.

16


-----

**B. Treatment of the Stimulating Bank Lending Facility and Other Measures**

As the Stimulating Bank Lending Facility and other measures were due to expire

shortly, members discussed whether these should be extended and, if so, what their content

and size should be.

With regard to the funds-supplying operation to support financial institutions in

disaster areas, members agreed that, in order to continue supporting the efforts of financial

institutions toward rebuilding disaster areas affected by the Great East Japan Earthquake, it

was appropriate for the Bank to extend the operation, together with the temporary rules

regarding the relaxation of the collateral eligibility standards for the debt of companies in

these areas, by one year.

Regarding the Stimulating Bank Lending Facility and the Growth-Supporting

Funding Facility, many members expressed the opinion that the Bank could extend the

deadlines for new applications under these facilities by one year, based on the recognition

that financial institutions' efforts to increase lending and strengthen the growth potential of

Japan's economy were vital to overcoming deflation. On this basis, many members said

that the Bank could decisively enhance the facilities in terms of the size and duration of

fund-provisioning, with a view to even further promoting financial institutions' actions as

well as significantly stimulating firms' and households' demand for credit and

demonstrating the Bank's "strong intention." Specifically, as for the maximum amount of

the Bank's fund-provisioning under the Stimulating Bank Lending Facility, some members

expressed the view that, considering that financial institutions -- mainly major banks -- were

currently making active use of this facility, the Bank could raise the amount up to twice as

much as the net increase in their lending, thereby providing them with a greater incentive.

In terms of the size of the Growth-Supporting Funding Facility, some members said that it

was appropriate for the Bank to set an amount that would be fully sufficient for financial

institutions to make efforts toward strengthening the growth potential of Japan's economy.

As for the duration of fund-provisioning under the two facilities, a few members were of the

view that, if the Bank extended the duration of its fund-provisioning at a fixed rate of 0.1

percent per annum from the current "one to three years" to "four years," this was expected

to lead to an increase in financial institutions' capacity to take interest rate risks. One of

these members said that, if each year financial institutions had an option to make a

prepayment, this, together with an extension of the duration of the Bank's fund-provisioning

17


-----

to four years, could allow financial institutions to adjust the size of their balance sheets

flexibly.

Based on this discussion, members shared the recognition that it was appropriate

for the Bank to make the following revisions to the Stimulating Bank Lending Facility and

the Growth-Supporting Funding Facility: (1) the deadlines for new applications under these

facilities would be extended by one year; (2) the maximum amounts of the Bank's

fund-provisioning under these facilities would be doubled; and (3) the duration of its

fund-provisioning at a fixed rate of 0.1 percent per annum would be extended from the

current "one to three years" to "four years."

With respect to the significance of revisions to the framework for the Stimulating

Bank Lending Facility and other measures, some members noted that it was vital for the

large scale monetary base provided under quantitative and qualitative monetary easing to be

utilized by financial institutions in their efforts to increase lending and strengthen the

growth potential of Japan's economy, and that the revisions discussed at this meeting would

strengthen the transmission mechanism of the effects of quantitative and qualitative

monetary easing. Many members said that the Bank had been stating that, in

implementing quantitative and qualitative monetary easing, it would examine both upside

and downside risks to economic activity and prices, and make adjustments as appropriate.

These members continued that the revisions discussed at this meeting should not be taken as

such "adjustments" given that Japan's economy was following a path toward achieving the

price stability target of 2 percent as expected. One member noted that, in communicating

to the public, caution was required to avoid causing speculation that the one-year extension

of the deadlines for new applications under the Stimulating Bank Lending Facility and other

measures, as well as the Bank's fund-provisioning at a fixed rate of 0.1 percent per annum

for four years, had any relationship to the time frame for continuing quantitative and

qualitative monetary easing. This member added that attention should also be paid to

possible effects on financial institutions' future financial soundness, including the possibility

of intensifying their lending competition. Meanwhile, one member commented that,

making effective use of this opportunity, the Bank might consider further enhancing its

communication to the public regarding the advantages of the Stimulating Bank Lending

Facility, given that regional banks were currently making less use of the facility than major

banks.

18


-----

**VI. Remarks by Government Representatives**

The representative from the Ministry of Finance made the following remarks.

(1) The Japanese economy continued to grow steadily, as evidenced by the fact that the real

GDP growth rate for the October-December quarter of 2013 was 1.0 percent on an

annualized quarter-on-quarter basis, registering positive growth for the fourth

consecutive quarter. Prices had been resilient, as seen in the fact that the year-on-year

rate of increase in the CPI for all items less fresh food for 2013 was 0.4 percent, turning

positive for the first time in five years. Nevertheless, the overcoming of deflation was

still only halfway accomplished, and therefore the government expected the Bank to

continue to steadily pursue quantitative and qualitative monetary easing and achieve the

price stability target of 2 percent at the earliest possible time.

(2) The supplementary budget for fiscal 2013 had been approved by the Diet on February 6,

2014. In order to avoid a greater-than-expected slowdown in the Japanese economy

after the consumption tax hike and swiftly get the Japanese economy back on a growth

path, the Minister of Finance had called for each minister to promptly and steadily

implement measures in the Economic Measures for Realization of Virtuous Cycles,

including those in the aforementioned supplementary budget, through, for example,

making efforts to swiftly and smoothly carry out public construction so that they would

produce appropriate effects within the first half of fiscal 2014. As for the tax reform in

fiscal 2014, the government, in line with the outline for tax reform decided by the

Cabinet at the end of 2013, had submitted to the Diet (1) bills to amend the Income Tax

Act and other laws, in order to implement measures such as tax breaks for capital

investment and the expansion of the tax incentives for income growth, and (2) a bill on

regional corporate tax in an effort to correct the uneven distribution of tax revenue

sources among regions. The government would work to promptly obtain the Diet's

approval of these bills, together with the budget for fiscal 2014, which was currently

being deliberated.

(3) With a view to promoting social security system reform, the government had set up the

Headquarters for the Promotion of Social Security System Reform comprised of

relevant ministers, including the Prime Minister, in accordance with a law enacted in

2013 that presented an overall picture of social security reform and a time frame for

implementing the reform. In order to make social security sustainable, striking a

19


-----

balance between benefits and burdens, the relevant ministers would work together to

proceed with reforms under the leadership of the Prime Minister.

(4) Through a series of the aforementioned measures, including those geared toward

materializing the growth strategy, the government would do its utmost to realize a

virtuous cycle of overcoming deflation, revitalizing the economy, stabilizing the social

security system, and achieving fiscal consolidation.

The representative from the Cabinet Office made the following remarks.

(1) The Japanese economy was recovering at a moderate pace. The real GDP growth rate

registered positive growth for the fourth consecutive quarter, in the October-December

quarter of 2013. As for the outlook, the economy was expected to be on a recovery

trend as household income and business investment increased, supported by a picking

up of exports and the effects of a range of policies. The government would also

closely monitor recent developments in financial markets -- particularly in emerging

economies -- and their effects.

(2) Following the passing of the supplementary budget, the Prime Minister had given

instructions to implement swiftly the Economic Measures for Realization of Virtuous

Cycles and to manage its progress. The government would work so that each of these

economic measures would produce effects within the first half of fiscal 2014, thereby

boosting economic growth through the following efforts: (1) a request by the Ministry

of Internal Affairs and Communications to local governments for swift implementation

of the measures; (2) implementation of measures to ensure the smooth execution of

public works construction projects and raising of the unit price of labor relating to

public construction and design projects by the Ministry of Land, Infrastructure,

Transport and Tourism; and (3) a survey on progress of the economic measures by the

Cabinet.

(3) In order to overcome deflation and revitalize the economy, the government deemed it

important to lead the upturn in corporate profits toward increases in wages. Specific

wage levels would be decided through individual labor-management negotiations. The

government expected wage increases to occur as serious discussion had taken place in

the course of the spring wage negotiations this year.

20


-----

(4) With a view to improving the current account balance through the improvement in the

trade balance and the increase in the surplus in the income balance by strengthening

Japan's industrial competitiveness, the government would further enhance the growth

strategy. It planned to proceed with deregulation, for example, by designating specific

regions as the National Strategic Special Zones in March 2014, and to decide on a

course toward employing foreign workers in the construction industry. In order to

develop a favorable environment for business and attract more investment to Japan, the

government would deliberate on how to set the effective corporate tax rate while

cooperating with the ruling parties and the Government Tax Commission.

(5) The Japanese economy was no longer at the stage of deflation, but the overcoming of

deflation was only halfway accomplished. The government deemed the Bank's

proposal made at this meeting to enhance the framework for the Stimulating Bank

Lending Facility and other measures to be a timely action. It expected the Bank to

continue its efforts to achieve the price stability target of 2 percent.

**VII. Votes**

**A. Vote on the Guideline for Money Market Operations**

Based on the above discussions, members shared the view that it was appropriate

to maintain the current guideline for money market operations, so that the monetary base

would increase at an annual pace of about 60-70 trillion yen.

To reflect this view, the chairman formulated the following proposal and put it to a

vote.

**The Chairman's Policy Proposal on the Guideline for Money Market Operations:**

1. The guideline for money market operations for the intermeeting period ahead will be as

follows.

The Bank of Japan will conduct money market operations so that the

monetary base will increase at an annual pace of about 60-70 trillion yen.

2. A public statement will be decided separately.

21


-----

Votes for the proposal: Mr. H. Kuroda, Mr. K. Iwata, Mr. H. Nakaso, Mr. R. Miyao,

Mr. Y. Morimoto, Ms. S. Shirai, Mr. K. Ishida, Mr. T. Sato, and Mr. T. Kiuchi.

Votes against the proposal: None.

**B. Vote on "Release of 'Outline of the Enhanced Framework for the Stimulating**

**Bank Lending Facility and the Growth-Supporting Funding Facility'"**

The chairman formulated a proposal to release "Outline of the Enhanced

Framework for the Stimulating Bank Lending Facility and the Growth-Supporting Funding

Facility" (see Attachment 2), which presented the content of the extension and enhancement

of the Stimulating Bank Lending Facility as well as the Growth-Supporting Funding Facility,

and put it to a vote. The Policy Board decided the proposal by a unanimous vote.

**C. Vote on "Amendment to 'Principal Terms and Conditions for the Funds-Supplying**

**Operation to Support Financial Institutions in Disaster Areas' and 'Temporary**

**Rules regarding the Eligibility Standards for Debt of Companies in Disaster**

**Areas'"**

The chairman formulated a proposal to extend the funds-supplying operation to

support financial institutions in disaster areas and the temporary rules regarding the

eligibility standards for debt of companies in disaster areas by one year, and put it to a vote.

The Policy Board decided the proposal by a unanimous vote, and agreed that the decision

should be made public accordingly.

**VIII. Discussion on the Statement on Monetary Policy**

On the basis of the above discussions, members discussed the Statement on

Monetary Policy, which included (1) an outline of the enhanced framework for the

Stimulating Bank Lending Facility and the Growth-Supporting Funding Facility and (2) a

description of the extension of the funds-supplying operation to support financial

institutions in disaster areas, and formed a majority view. Mr. T. Kiuchi, however,

formulated a proposal, and thus two proposals were submitted.

Meanwhile, Ms. S. Shirai expressed dissent from the description regarding risks to

the outlook presented in the draft of the statement that formed a majority view, suggesting

that the pace of improvement in the employment and income situation in Japan should be

22


-----

added. As the reason for this, she stated that, for domestic demand to maintain its firmness

in the future, it was important for the employment and income situation to continue

improving; therefore, considering the existence of recent indicators that showed a

deterioration in households' income outlook, this issue should be included as one of the

risks for the time being.

**A. Mr. T. Kiuchi's Policy Proposal**

With regard to the draft of the statement that formed a majority view, Mr. T.

Kiuchi proposed changing the current expression of the Bank's future monetary policy

stance that "the Bank will continue with quantitative and qualitative monetary easing,

aiming to achieve the price stability target of 2 percent, as long as it is necessary for

maintaining that target in a stable manner. It will examine both upside and downside risks

to economic activity and prices, and make adjustments as appropriate" to a new expression

that "the Bank will aim to achieve the price stability target of 2 percent in the medium to

long term. On this basis, it will designate quantitative and qualitative monetary easing as

an intensive measure with a time frame of about two years, and thereafter will review the

monetary easing measures in a flexible manner." The proposal was then put to a vote.

The proposal was defeated by a majority vote.

Votes for the proposal: Mr. T. Kiuchi.

Votes against the proposal: Mr. H. Kuroda, Mr. K. Iwata, Mr. H. Nakaso, Mr. R.

Miyao, Mr. Y. Morimoto, Ms. S. Shirai, Mr. K. Ishida, and Mr. T. Sato.

**B. The Chairman's Policy Proposal**

The chairman formulated the Statement on Monetary Policy, and put it to a vote.

The Policy Board decided the text by a unanimous vote. It was confirmed that the

statement would be released immediately after the meeting (see Attachment 1).

**IX. Approval of the Minutes of the Monetary Policy Meeting**

The Policy Board approved unanimously the minutes of the Monetary Policy

Meeting of January 21 and 22, 2014 for release on February 21, 2014.

23


-----

Attachment 1

February 18, 2014

Bank of Japan

**Statement on Monetary Policy**

1. At the Monetary Policy Meeting held today, the Policy Board of the Bank of Japan decided,

by a unanimous vote, to set the following guideline for money market operations for the

intermeeting period:

The Bank of Japan will conduct money market operations so that the monetary base will

increase at an annual pace of about 60-70 trillion yen.

2. With regard to the asset purchases, the Bank will continue with the following guidelines:

a) The Bank will purchase Japanese government bonds (JGBs) so that their amount

outstanding will increase at an annual pace of about 50 trillion yen, and the average

remaining maturity of the Bank's JGB purchases will be about seven years.

b) The Bank will purchase exchange-traded funds (ETFs) and Japan real estate investment

trusts (J-REITs) so that their amounts outstanding will increase at an annual pace of about

1 trillion yen and about 30 billion yen respectively.

c) As for CP and corporate bonds, the Bank will maintain their amounts outstanding at about

2.2 trillion yen and about 3.2 trillion yen respectively.

3. The Policy Board also decided, by a unanimous vote, to double the scale of (i) the

Fund-Provisioning Measure to Stimulate Bank Lending (hereafter "Stimulating Bank

Lending Facility") and (ii) the Fund-Provisioning Measure to Support Strengthening the

Foundations for Economic Growth (hereafter "Growth-Supporting Funding Facility"), and to

extend the application period for these facilities by one year.[1] Before today's decision, these

were due to expire shortly.

Specifically, under the Stimulating Bank Lending Facility, financial institutions will be able

to borrow funds from the Bank up to an amount that is twice as much as the net increase in

their lending. As for the Growth-Supporting Funding Facility, the maximum amount of the

1 See Attachment 2 for details.

24


-----

Bank's fund-provisioning under the main rules will be doubled from 3.5 trillion yen to 7

trillion yen. Under these facilities, financial institutions will be able to borrow funds at a

fixed rate of 0.1 percent per annum for 4 years instead of 1-3 years at present.

The Bank expects that these enhancements will further promote financial institutions' actions

as well as stimulate firms' and households' demand for credit, with a view to encouraging

banks' lending and strengthening the foundations for economic growth.

4. Furthermore, the Policy Board decided, by a unanimous vote, to extend the Funds-Supplying

Operation to Support Financial Institutions in Disaster Areas affected by the Great East Japan

Earthquake and the Temporary Rules regarding the Eligibility Standards for Debt of

Companies in Disaster Areas by one year.

5. Japan's economy has continued to recover moderately, and a front-loaded increase in demand

prior to the consumption tax hike has recently been observed. Overseas economies -
mainly advanced economies -- are starting to recover, although a lackluster performance is

still seen in part. In this situation, exports have generally been picking up. Business fixed

investment has been picking up as corporate profits have improved. Public investment has

continued to increase. With improvement in the employment and income situation, housing

investment has continued to increase and private consumption has remained resilient; in these

segments of the economy, the front-loaded increase in demand prior to the consumption tax

hike has also been observed. Reflecting these developments in demand both at home and

abroad, industrial production has been increasing moderately. Meanwhile, financial

conditions are accommodative. On the price front, the year-on-year rate of increase in the

consumer price index (CPI, all items less fresh food) is around 1¼ percent. Inflation

expectations appear to be rising on the whole.

6. With regard to the outlook, Japan's economy is expected to continue a moderate recovery as a

trend, while it will be affected by the front-loaded increase and subsequent decline in demand

prior to and after the consumption tax hike. The year-on-year rate of increase in the CPI,

excluding the direct effects of the consumption tax hike, is likely to be around 1¼ percent for

some time.

7. Risks to the outlook include developments in the emerging and commodity-exporting

economies, the prospects for the European debt problem, and the pace of recovery in the U.S.

economy.[[Note 1]]

25


-----

8. The Bank will continue with quantitative and qualitative monetary easing, aiming to achieve

the price stability target of 2 percent, as long as it is necessary for maintaining that target in a

stable manner. It will examine both upside and downside risks to economic activity and

prices, and make adjustments as appropriate.[[Note 2]]

Such conduct of monetary policy will support the positive movements in economic activity

and financial markets, contribute to a rise in inflation expectations, and lead Japan's economy

to overcome the deflation that has lasted for nearly 15 years.

[Note 1] Ms. S. Shirai dissented from the description in paragraph 7, suggesting that the pace of improvement
in the employment and income situation in Japan should be added.

[Note 2] Mr. T. Kiuchi proposed that the Bank will aim to achieve the price stability target of 2 percent in the
medium to long term and designate quantitative and qualitative monetary easing as an intensive
measure with a time frame of about two years. The proposal was defeated by an 8-1 majority vote.
Voting for the proposal: Mr. T. Kiuchi. Voting against the proposal: Mr. H. Kuroda, Mr. K. Iwata,
Mr. H. Nakaso, Mr. R. Miyao, Mr. Y. Morimoto, Ms. S. Shirai, Mr. K. Ishida, and Mr. T. Sato.

26


-----

Attachment 2

**Outline of the Enhanced Framework for the Stimulating Bank Lending Facility and the**

**Growth-Supporting Funding Facility[[Note 1]]**

1. Stimulating Bank Lending Facility

A. The deadline for new applications under the facility shall be extended by one year.[[Note 2]]

B. The maximum amount of the Bank's fund-provisioning to each financial institution shall be

an amount that is twice as much as the net increase in its lending.[[Note 3]]

C. The interest rate applied to the facility shall be fixed at 0.1 percent per annum for four years.

Financial institutions have an option to make prepayment every year.

2. Growth-Supporting Funding Facility

A. The deadline for new applications under the main rules as well as special rules for equity

investments and asset-based lending, small-lot investments and loans, and the U.S. dollar

lending arrangement shall be extended by one year.[[Note 4]]

B. The maximum amount of the Bank's fund-provisioning under the main rules shall be

doubled from 3.5 trillion yen to 7 trillion yen. The maximum amount of its

fund-provisioning to each financial institution shall be increased from 150 billion yen to 1

trillion yen.

[Note 1] Amendments to relevant principal terms and conditions will be decided at the next Monetary Policy
Meeting.

[Note 2] The disbursement under the current framework shall end in March 2014. The disbursement after
June 2014 shall be based on the new framework (1.B. and C. mentioned above). Unused amount
under the current framework cannot be carried over to the new framework. Under the new
framework, unused amount at the time of disbursement cannot be carried over to subsequent
disbursements.

[Note 3] Based on the assumption that the growth rate of bank lending and the utilization rate of this facility
remain more or less at current levels, the amount outstanding of fund-provisioning under this facility
is estimated to be around 30 trillion yen.

[Note 4] The disbursement under the new framework (2.B. and C. mentioned above) will begin in June 2014.

27


-----

C. The interest rate applied to the facility under the main rules and special rules for equity

investments and asset-based lending, and small-lot investments and loans shall be fixed at

0.1 percent per annum for four years. Financial institutions have an option to make

prepayment every year.

28


-----

