Not to be released until 8:50 a.m.
Japan Standard Time on Wednesday,
May 7, 2014.

May 7, 2014

Bank of Japan

# Minutes of the
 Monetary Policy Meeting

## on April 7 and 8, 2014

(English translation prepared by the Bank's staff based on the Japanese original)


-----

Please contact the Bank of Japan at the address below in advance to request permission

when reproducing or copying the content of this document for commercial purposes.

Secretariat of the Policy Board, Bank of Japan

P.O. Box 30, Nihonbashi, Tokyo 103-8660, Japan

Please credit the source when quoting, reproducing, or copying the content of this

document.


-----

A Monetary Policy Meeting of the Bank of Japan Policy Board was held in the

Head Office of the Bank of Japan in Tokyo on Monday, April 7, 2014, from 2:00 p.m. to

4:08 p.m., and on Tuesday, April 8, from 9:00 a.m. to 11:45 a.m.[1]

**Policy Board Members Present**

**Mr. H. Kuroda, Chairman, Governor of the Bank of Japan**

**Mr. K. Iwata, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Japan**

**Mr. H. Nakaso, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Japan**

**Mr. R. Miyao**

**Mr. Y. Morimoto**

**Ms. S. Shirai**

**Mr. K. Ishida**

**Mr. T. Sato**

**Mr. T. Kiuchi**

Government Representatives Present

Mr. Y. Furukawa, Senior Vice Minister of Finance, Ministry of Finance[2]

Mr. S. Sato, Deputy Vice Minister, Ministry of Finance[3]

Mr. K. Umetani, Vice Minister for Policy Coordination, Cabinet Office

Reporting Staff

Mr. M. Amamiya, Executive Director

Mr. N. Kinoshita, Executive Director

Mr. K. Momma, Executive Director (Assistant Governor)

Mr. S. Uchida, Director-General, Monetary Affairs Department

Mr. K. Masaki, Head of Policy Planning Division, Monetary Affairs Department

Mr. H. Yamaoka, Director-General, Financial Markets Department

1 The minutes of this meeting were approved by the Policy Board at the Monetary Policy Meeting
held on April 30, 2014 as "a document describing an outline of the discussion at the meeting"
stipulated in Article 20, paragraph 1 of the Bank of Japan Act of 1997. Those present are referred
to by their titles at the time of the meeting.
2 Mr. Y. Furukawa was present on April 8.
3 Mr. S. Sato was present on April 7.

1


-----

Mr. E. Maeda, Director-General, Research and Statistics Department

Mr. S. Kameda, Head of Economic Research Division, Research and Statistics

Department

Mr. H. Toyama, Director-General, International Department

Secretariat of the Monetary Policy Meeting

Mr. N. Yoshioka, Director-General, Secretariat of the Policy Board

Mr. N. Fukunaga, Director, Deputy Head of Planning and Coordination Division,

Secretariat of the Policy Board

Mr. Y. Komaki, Senior Economist, Monetary Affairs Department

Mr. R. Hattori, Senior Economist, Monetary Affairs Department

2


-----

**I. Summary of Staff Reports on Economic and Financial Developments[4]**

**A. Money Market Operations in the Intermeeting Period**

The Bank, in accordance with the guideline decided at the previous meeting on

March 10 and 11, 2014, had been providing funds through purchases of Japanese

government bonds (JGBs) and other measures.[5] In this situation, the amount outstanding

of the monetary base had been in the range of 200-222 trillion yen.

**B. Recent Developments in Financial Markets**

Money market rates, including longer-term ones, had been at low levels. The

uncollateralized overnight call rate had been at a level below 0.1 percent. General

collateral (GC) repo rates had fallen into negative territory at the fiscal year-end, but

rebounded thereafter. As for interest rates on term instruments, yields on treasury discount

bills (T-Bills) had been rising somewhat. Rates on longer-term interbank instruments had

been flat.

Yields on 10-year JGBs had dipped marginally in the face of a decline in Japanese

stock prices, but had since almost recovered the level at the time of the previous meeting;

they had recently been in the range of 0.60-0.65 percent. The Nikkei 225 Stock Average

had moved downward, mainly in view of uncertainty about the situation in Ukraine, but

then rebounded primarily in response to the rise in U.S. stock prices. It had recently been

in the range of 14,500-15,000 yen. Yield spreads between corporate bonds and JGBs had

been narrowing on the whole, albeit very moderately, reflecting solid demand from

investors, although some corporate bond spreads had been wide. In the foreign exchange

market, the yen had appreciated against the U.S. dollar, mainly reflecting uncertainty about

the situation in Ukraine, but then depreciated due primarily to speculation among market

participants that the Federal Reserve would move forward the timing of a hike in the target

federal funds rate. The U.S. dollar/yen rate had recently been at around 103 yen.

4 Reports were made based on information available at the time of the meeting.
5 The guideline was as follows:

The Bank of Japan will conduct money market operations so that the monetary base will
increase at an annual pace of about 60-70 trillion yen.

3


-----

**C. Overseas Economic and Financial Developments**

Overseas economies -- mainly advanced economies -- were starting to recover,

although a lackluster performance was still seen in part.

The U.S. economy remained on a moderate recovery despite the continued effects

of a winter snowstorm, and the recovery had gradually become widespread. Housing

investment continued to generally pick up, although the pace had become moderate.

Private consumption had been firm, reflecting not only wealth effects but also the continued

improving trend in the employment situation. Exports also remained on an increasing

trend. Reflecting these developments in demand, business sentiment and production had

been on an improving trend, and business fixed investment was picking up, albeit

moderately. As for prices, the year-on-year rate of increase in the consumer price index

(CPI) for all items less food and energy, or the core CPI, had been more or less flat. In this

situation, the year-on-year rate of increase in the CPI for all items had declined, mainly

because the year-on-year rate of change in energy prices had turned negative.

A pick-up in the European economy had become evident. Private consumption

continued to show a moderate pick-up, with consumer sentiment continuing to improve,

although the employment and income situation remained severe. There were movements

toward a pick-up in business fixed investment, mainly in Germany. In addition, exports

were starting to pick up. Reflecting these developments in demand, production was

picking up moderately. As for prices, slack in supply and demand conditions in the goods

and labor markets was exerting downward pressure on prices, and the year-on-year rates of

increase in both the Harmonized Index of Consumer Prices (HICP) excluding energy and

unprocessed food and the HICP for all items remained on a disinflationary trend.

Meanwhile, economic activity in the United Kingdom continued to recover, particularly in

domestic demand.

With regard to Asia, the Chinese economy continued to see stable growth on the

back of firm domestic demand, although the economy's growth momentum was slowing

somewhat. Fixed asset investment, although remaining firm, had been increasing at a

somewhat reduced pace. Production had been growing at a slower pace due in part to the

effects of adjustments in inventories, mainly of materials and related goods. However,

exports continued to pick up, particularly those to Europe and the United States. Moreover,

stable growth in private consumption continued against the background of a favorable

4


-----

employment and income situation. Regarding the NIEs and the ASEAN countries, while

economic developments in the NIEs were picking up somewhat on the back of recovery in

external demand, growth momentum in the ASEAN countries remained weak, particularly

in domestic demand. In India, the economy remained in a state of deceleration,

particularly in domestic demand. As for prices, there were differences by country and

region. Specifically, the year-on-year rate of increase in the CPI had been somewhat low

as a trend in China, the NIEs, and Thailand, while that in Indonesia and India continued to

be relatively high, mainly reflecting the rise in administered prices.

Global financial markets had temporarily shown some nervousness, mainly due to

uncertainty about the situation in Ukraine, but investors were gradually taking a more active

risk-taking stance on the back of expectations for global economic recovery, particularly in

advanced countries. Markets in emerging economies had also regained their calmness on

the whole because policy actions such as the raising of interest rates had been adopted to

address current account deficits and high inflation, although markets in some emerging

economies continued to be nervous. International commodity prices had been weak from

a relatively longer-term perspective in a situation where emerging economies lacked growth

momentum, and had recently been somewhat sluggish.

**D. Economic and Financial Developments in Japan**

1. Economic developments

Exports had recently leveled off more or less. Developments in real exports since

the start of 2014 showed large monthly fluctuations: they had decreased in January, partly

because exports to East Asia had been affected by the Lunar New Year holidays, but

rebounded in February. On a quarterly basis, they had registered a slight negative in the

January-February period on average compared with the October-December quarter of 2013.

These developments appeared to be driven by temporary downward pressure, such as

supply constraints, driven by the front-loaded increase in demand prior to the consumption

tax hike, and a winter snowstorm in the United States. Exports were expected to increase

moderately, mainly against the background of the recovery in overseas economies.

Meanwhile, imports continued to increase moderately as a trend against the backdrop of

firm domestic demand, despite the effects of some fluctuations in private consumption

caused by the consumption tax hike, and were expected to continue to do so.

5


-----

Public investment continued to increase and was expected to become more or less

flat at a high level.

The pick-up in business fixed investment had become increasingly evident as

corporate profits had improved. The aggregate supply of capital goods (excluding

transport equipment), a coincident indicator of machinery investment, had been solid.

Machinery orders (private sector, excluding orders for ships and those from electric power

companies) -- a leading indicator of machinery investment -- and construction starts (floor

area, private, nondwelling use) -- a leading indicator of construction investment -
continued to increase as a trend, albeit with monthly fluctuations. Business sentiment

continued to improve, although some cautiousness about the outlook had been observed.

In the March 2014 _Tankan (Short-Term Economic Survey of Enterprises in Japan), the_

diffusion index for business conditions for all industries and enterprises (the proportion of

firms responding that business conditions were "favorable" minus the proportion of those

responding that they were "unfavorable") improved for the fifth straight term, surpassing

the peak in the previous phase of economic expansion. As for the outlook, the diffusion

index was projected to deteriorate, mainly in view of the subsequent decline in demand

following the front-loaded increase; nevertheless, it was still projected to be in "favorable"

territory to a marginal degree. This suggested that business sentiment would generally

stay at a favorable level. Business fixed investment was projected to follow a moderate

increasing trend as corporate profits continued their improving trend. Business fixed

investment plans for fiscal 2014 in the March _Tankan were somewhat strong compared to_

past averages.

As for the employment and income situation, supply and demand conditions in the

labor market continued to improve steadily, as evidenced by the continued rise in the job

openings-to-applicants ratios and the declining trend in the unemployment rate. Regarding

wages, although the year-on-year rate of change in scheduled cash earnings had still been

slightly negative, non-scheduled cash earnings and special cash earnings had increased. In

this situation, employee income had picked up moderately, as it had recently continued to

register year-on-year increases.

Private consumption remained resilient as a trend with improvement in the

employment and income situation, albeit with some fluctuations due to the consumption tax

hike. Regarding consumption of durable goods, the number of new passenger-car

6


-----

registrations and sales of household electrical appliances had been relatively strong, due

mainly to the effects of the front-loaded increase in demand. Judging from interviews with

firms and other relevant information, there appeared to have been front-loaded consumption

of items other than durable goods, such as apparel and general merchandise, through March.

Private consumption was expected to remain resilient as a trend, supported mainly by

improvement in the employment and income situation, with some temporary decreases

caused by the subsequent decline in demand following the front-loaded increase.

Housing investment remained resilient as a trend with improvement in the

employment and income situation, albeit with some fluctuations due to the consumption tax

hike. It was expected to remain resilient as a trend, supported mainly by improvement in

the employment and income situation and by accommodative financial conditions, with

some temporary decreases caused by the subsequent decline in demand following the

front-loaded increase.

Industrial production had been on a moderate increasing trend, albeit with some

fluctuations due to the consumption tax hike. Inventories had declined, affected partly by

the front-loaded increase in demand. Industrial production was expected to follow a

moderate increasing trend, mainly reflecting developments in demand at home and abroad,

despite being affected by the subsequent decline in demand following the front-loaded

increase.

As for prices, domestic corporate goods prices were rising moderately relative to

three months earlier, mainly against the backdrop of movements in international commodity

prices and foreign exchange rates. The year-on-year rate of increase in the CPI (all items

less fresh food) was around 1¼ percent. With regard to the outlook, excluding the direct

effects of the consumption tax hike, domestic corporate goods prices were expected to be

more or less flat for the time being, and the year-on-year rate of increase in the CPI (all

items less fresh food) was likely to be around 1¼ percent for some time. Meanwhile,

inflation expectations appeared to be rising on the whole.

2. Financial environment

Financial conditions were accommodative.

The monetary base had increased significantly as asset purchases by the Bank had

progressed, and the year-on-year rate of growth had been at around 55 percent.

7


-----

Firms' funding costs had been hovering at low levels. With regard to credit

supply, firms continued to see financial institutions' lending attitudes as being on an

improving trend. Issuing conditions for CP and corporate bonds continued to be favorable.

Firms' credit demand had been increasing moderately, mainly for working capital and funds

related to mergers and acquisitions. Against this backdrop, the year-on-year rate of

increase in the amount outstanding of bank lending had been at around 2.5 percent. The

year-on-year rate of change in the amount outstanding of CP and corporate bonds had been

negative. Firms retained their recovered financial positions. Meanwhile, the

year-on-year rate of growth in the money stock had been at around 4 percent, mainly due to

the increase in bank lending.

**II. Summary of Discussions by the Policy Board on Economic and Financial**

**Developments**

**A. Economic Developments**

Members shared the recognition that global financial markets had temporarily

shown some nervousness, mainly reflecting the situation in Ukraine, but had recently

regained their calmness somewhat. A few members added that markets in emerging

economies were starting to calm down on the whole, due in part to each country's efforts to

address economic and structural problems. Regarding the situation in Ukraine, one

member expressed the view that, depending on future developments, it might affect

commodity markets and the European economy -- which was closely linked to Ukraine on

the financial and economic fronts -- and thereby exert a global adverse effect. Based on

this discussion, members agreed that it was necessary to continue to closely monitor market

developments, including geopolitical risks.

Members concurred that overseas economies -- mainly advanced economies -
were starting to recover, although a lackluster performance was still seen in part of the

emerging economies. As for the outlook, they shared the recognition that overseas

economies -- mainly advanced economies -- would recover moderately.

With regard to developments in overseas economies by region, members agreed

that the U.S. economy remained on a moderate recovery, although some economic

indicators continued to show that the economy had been affected by a winter snowstorm,

and that the recovery had gradually become widespread. As for the outlook, they shared

8


-----

the view that the pace of economic recovery would gradually rise, with the recovery

becoming widespread from the household sector to the corporate sector, as the fiscal drag

was projected to fade. Many members added that recent economic indicators suggested

that the effects of a winter snowstorm were gradually disappearing. A few members

expressed the view that the continued improvement in the employment situation, as

evidenced, for example, by the steady rise in nonfarm payroll employment, would support

future economic recovery.

Members shared the recognition that a pick-up in the euro area economy had

become evident. Some members expressed the view that private consumption and firms'

production activity had been picking up moderately amid further improvement in household

and business sentiment. As for the outlook, members concurred that the economy was

likely to recover moderately as domestic demand was expected to continue picking up,

reflecting improvement in sentiment, and as exports would likely improve. Meanwhile,

some members pointed out that the disinflationary trend was continuing, particularly in

peripheral countries. These members continued that attention needed to be paid to the risk

that, if such a trend became prolonged, this could adversely affect the European economy

through a decline in inflation expectations and an increase in the real debt burden.

Members agreed that the Chinese economy continued to see stable growth on the

back of firm domestic demand, although the economy's growth momentum was slowing

somewhat. As for the outlook, most members expressed the view that the economy would

generally maintain stable growth at around the current pace, mainly reflecting the fact that

(1) the Chinese authorities had taken the stance of continuing to pay consideration to

economic activity while progressing with structural reforms, and had recently announced

the intention to underpin economic activity by taking actions including the introduction of

several specific measures; and (2) external demand was expected to continue improving

moderately. As for the outlook from a relatively longer-term perspective, some members

expressed the recognition that it might become difficult for the economy to maintain growth

at around the current pace without depending on the government's stimulus measures. In

response, one member pointed out that the economy could continue to see stable growth

once productivity of state-owned enterprises was raised through structural reforms that were

currently being implemented.

9


-----

Regarding the NIEs and the ASEAN countries, members concurred that, while

economic activity in the NIEs was picking up, growth momentum in the ASEAN countries

remained weak. As for the outlook, they shared the view that, for the time being, an

adjustment phase would continue -- especially in the ASEAN countries -- and the pace of

economic growth in the NIEs and the ASEAN countries would likely remain relatively slow.

However, they continued that the pace would rise again thereafter as growth in advanced

economies was expected to gain momentum over time.

Based on the above deliberations on economic and financial conditions abroad,

members discussed the state of Japan's economy.

With regard to economic activity, members shared the view that, as a virtuous

cycle among production, income, and spending continued to operate, the economy

continued to recover moderately as a trend, albeit with some fluctuations due to the

consumption tax hike. As for the outlook for the economy, they shared the recognition

that it was likely to continue its moderate recovery as a trend, while it would be affected by

the subsequent decline in demand following the front-loaded increase prior to the

consumption tax hike. Members concurred that, although it was difficult to gauge on a

real-time basis the degree of the subsequent decline in demand, it was necessary to grasp

the ongoing situation by utilizing interviews with firms and other relevant information.

Members shared the recognition that, in a situation where weakness remained in

exports to some emerging countries including the ASEAN countries, Japan's exports had

leveled off more or less, due in part to temporary factors such as the effects of a winter

snowstorm in the United States and firms' moves to place priority on domestic shipments in

response to the front-loaded increase in demand prior to the consumption tax hike. As for

the outlook, they agreed that exports were likely to increase moderately, mainly against the

background of the waning of temporary downward pressure and the recovery in overseas

economies. One member added that, if exports increased in the future, this would mitigate

the effects of a decline in domestic demand following the front-loaded increase prior to the

consumption tax hike.

Members concurred that the pick-up in business fixed investment had become

increasingly evident as corporate profits had improved, and was projected to follow a

moderate increasing trend. A few members pointed out that recent developments showed

a clear pick-up; for example, the aggregate supply of capital goods was showing higher

10


-----

growth and machinery orders continued to increase. As for the results of the March 2014

_Tankan, members shared the recognition that business sentiment continued to improve at a_

wide range of industries, although some cautiousness about the outlook had been observed.

They agreed that the decline in the diffusion indices for future business conditions reflected

firms' concerns about the decline in demand following the front-loaded increase prior to the

consumption tax hike. However, many members added that firms were nonetheless

maintaining a positive attitude, as the diffusion indices for future business conditions were

still at relatively high levels and business fixed investment plans for fiscal 2014 were

somewhat higher than in normal years.

As for the employment and income situation, members shared the recognition that

supply and demand conditions in the labor market continued to improve steadily, and that

employee income had also picked up moderately. With respect to the outlook regarding

employee income, they agreed that a pick-up was likely to become more evident, in line

with the recovery in economic activity and business performance. Some members

expressed the view that labor market conditions were likely to continue tightening and

upward pressure on wages was likely to strengthen further, given, for example, that the

unemployment rate had declined to 3.6 percent and the diffusion indices for employment

conditions in the March 2014 _Tankan had continued to register larger negative figures,_

which suggested that the shortage in employment had continued to expand. With regard to

the wage negotiations this spring, some members pointed out that movements toward wage

increases -- including in base pay -- were spreading to a wider range of firms, reflecting

tighter labor market conditions and the improvement in business performance. One of

these members added that, according to the aggregate results of wage negotiations compiled

by the Japanese Trade Union Confederation (Rengo) so far, movements toward wage

increases were expected to spread even among small firms. A different member pointed

out that resumption of base pay increases could lead to a situation where price increases

were likely to be reflected in wage developments. Meanwhile, one member expressed the

view that, given a possible decline in the rate of increase in corporate profits and other

factors, the momentum for increasing wages might instead decelerate at the time of wage

negotiations to be held in spring 2015.

Members shared the recognition that private consumption remained resilient as a

trend with improvement in the employment and income situation, albeit with some

11


-----

fluctuations due to the consumption tax hike. One member expressed the view that,

judging from interviews with firms and other relevant information, the front-loaded increase

in demand this time was greater than that at the time of the previous consumption tax hike

in 1997. As the background to this, the member pointed to the larger degree of a hike in

the tax rate, as well as households' stronger appetite for spending due to improvement in the

employment and income situation. With regard to the outlook, members concurred that

private consumption was likely to remain resilient as a trend, supported mainly by

improvement in the employment and income situation, with some temporary decreases

caused by the subsequent decline in demand following the front-loaded increase. One

member expressed the recognition that consumer confidence, which had been relatively

weak recently, would pick up if it was confirmed for the April-June quarter of 2014 that the

economy as a whole was being underpinned by the increase in exports and the bringing

forward of public investment plans. A different member said that a rise in medium- to

long-term growth expectations was important for consumption to remain resilient, but the

diffusion index of the economy's growth potential -- presented in the Bank's Opinion Survey

_on the General Public's Views and Behavior -- had not improved in the past six months or_

so. The member therefore expressed hope that the government would make further efforts,

for example, in advancing structural reforms.

Reflecting these developments in demand both at home and abroad, members

agreed that industrial production had been on a moderate increasing trend, and that it was

likely to follow this trend. A few members pointed out that the production forecast index

for April 2014 saw only a marginal decline. One of these members noted that production

of transport equipment for April was also projected to mark a marginal drop, even though

the diffusion index for future business conditions for transportation machinery industry in

the March 2014 Tankan showed a considerable decline. This member then expressed the

view that production for shipment overseas and inventory restocking could work toward

mitigating the drop in production for domestic shipments.

Regarding prices, members shared the view that the year-on-year rate of increase

in the CPI (all items less fresh food) was around 1¼ percent and the rate of increase,

excluding the direct effects of the consumption tax hike, was likely to be around 1¼ percent

for some time. Many members said that price rises had been observed not only in

energy-related goods but also across a wide range of items, as evidenced by the fact that the

12


-----

year-on-year rate of increase in the CPI (all items less food and energy) for February 2014

had marked 0.8 percent. One member expressed the recognition that the inflation rate,

excluding the effects of the consumption tax hike, could in fact rise from April 2014 onward

because firms could take the consumption tax hike as an opportunity to pass on earlier rises

in costs to prices. A few members pointed out that the diffusion indices for output prices

in the March 2014 _Tankan were improving, mainly for nonmanufacturing. Meanwhile,_

one member expressed the view that prices had become more susceptible to developments

in the foreign exchange market than before, reflecting the increased import penetration ratio,

mainly for digital appliances. This member continued that it was therefore necessary to

closely monitor how the halt to the yen's depreciation would affect prices. Members

shared the recognition that inflation expectations appeared to be rising on the whole,

considering market indicators, the results of various surveys, and other information. With

regard to firms' outlook for general prices in the March _Tankan, many members, while_

noting that the results should be assessed with a degree of latitude since the set of questions

regarding the outlook was addressed for the first time in this survey, expressed the view that

(1) firms' outlook was higher than that of market participants and economists and (2) firms'

medium- to long-term outlook for the prices was higher than their short-term one,

suggesting that firms expected the inflation rate to rise over time. One of these members

pointed out that the March _Tankan showed that this tendency in firms' outlook for future_

general prices was rather noticeable among small firms, which seemed to face difficulty in

terms of passing on costs to prices. Meanwhile, one member said that, according to the

outlook for output prices in the March Tankan, it was implied that the year-on-year rate of

increase in these prices would decline gradually, which suggested a possibility that firms

might deem it difficult to raise the output prices of their own products and services.

With respect to the relationship between the economic growth rate and prices,

members discussed how to understand the following developments: CPI inflation had been

somewhat higher, while there was an increasing probability of the economic growth rate

being lower, compared with the forecasts presented in January 2014. Many members

expressed the view that, because the current economic recovery was led mainly by

nonmanufacturing, which created more employment than other sectors, labor market

conditions were inclined to tighten, and therefore prices had exhibited a greater tendency to

rise due to the factors associated with the labor market. Some of these members added

13


-----

that, while economic growth itself had been at a lower rate than projected, an estimation of

the output gap based on the degree of utilization of production factors, such as labor and

production capacity, indicated that the output gap had recently narrowed to around zero.

These members continued that this suggested that upward pressure on wages and prices had

become stronger than that on the growth rate. A few members expressed the recognition

that developments in wages tended to have a more significant effect on overall prices, as

Japan's industrial structure had been shifting to one led mainly by nonmanufacturing. In

response to this, one member said that wage increases and price rises resulting from

supply-side constraints might not be sustainable. Regarding firms' price-setting behavior,

many members expressed the view that firms might be taking a more positive stance toward

raising prices -- which they had previously refrained from doing -- mainly due to the

improvement in supply and demand conditions, the reduced competition on the back of the

yen's depreciation, and the rise in inflation expectations. One member added that, in a

situation where labor market conditions were tightening, it was likely that an increasing

number of firms would actively increase wages to secure the necessary human capital and

pass accompanying labor costs on to services prices. Meanwhile, one member pointed out

that the lower-than-projected headline growth rate was largely attributable to downward

pressure from the unexpected strength in imports that reflected the firmness in domestic

demand. The member continued that, when excluding the effects of such pressure, the

growth rate for the second half of 2013 remained at around 3 percent on an annualized

basis.

**B. Financial Developments**

Members concurred that financial conditions in Japan were accommodative.

They shared the view that the monetary base had increased significantly, reflecting the

progress in asset purchases by the Bank, and that firms' funding costs had been hovering at

low levels. Members agreed that firms continued to see financial institutions' lending

attitudes as being on an improving trend, as suggested by the March 2014 _Tankan. They_

also concurred that the year-on-year rate of growth in the money stock had been at a

relatively high level in a situation where the amount outstanding of bank lending, including

that to small firms, had been increasing moderately.

14


-----

**III. Summary of Discussions on Monetary Policy for the Immediate Future**

Based on the above assessment of economic and financial developments, members

discussed monetary policy for the immediate future.

Regarding the guideline for money market operations for the intermeeting period

ahead, members agreed that it was appropriate to maintain the current guideline that the

Bank would conduct money market operations so that the monetary base would increase at

an annual pace of about 60-70 trillion yen.

With regard to the asset purchases, members concurred that it was appropriate for

the Bank to continue with the guidelines decided when it introduced quantitative and

qualitative monetary easing at the meeting on April 3 and 4, 2013. Specifically, they

confirmed the following. First, the Bank would purchase JGBs so that their amount

outstanding would increase at an annual pace of about 50 trillion yen, and the average

remaining maturity of the Bank's JGB purchases would be about seven years. Second, it

would purchase exchange-traded funds (ETFs) and Japan real estate investment trusts

(J-REITs) so that their amounts outstanding would increase at an annual pace of about 1

trillion yen and about 30 billion yen, respectively. And third, for CP and corporate bonds,

the Bank would maintain their amounts outstanding at about 2.2 trillion yen and about 3.2

trillion yen, respectively.

With respect to the Bank's thinking behind its conduct of monetary policy, most

members shared the recognition that the Bank would continue with quantitative and

qualitative monetary easing, aiming to achieve the price stability target of 2 percent, as long

as it was necessary for maintaining this target in a stable manner. These members

continued that, in doing so, it would examine both upside and downside risks to economic

activity and prices, and make adjustments as appropriate. Members expressed the view

that it was appropriate for the Bank to continue to steadily pursue quantitative and

qualitative monetary easing in accordance with the current guidelines, as Japan's economic

and price developments had been broadly in line with the forecasts presented in October

2013.

On the other hand, one member said that, if a rise were to occur in markets'

anticipation that quantitative and qualitative monetary easing would continue for a

protracted period or extreme additional measures would be implemented in a situation

where it was unlikely that the price stability target would be achieved in about two years,

15


-----

this could lead to economic instability in the medium to long term, such as through a

buildup of financial imbalances. On this basis, the member said that it was appropriate to

change the expression representing the Bank's commitment by stating that the time frame

for continuing quantitative and qualitative monetary easing should be restricted to about

two years, and that thereafter the Bank would review the monetary easing measures in a

flexible manner.

With regard to the effects of quantitative and qualitative monetary easing,

members shared the recognition that these continued to firmly take hold, and financial

conditions were easing steadily to underpin firms' and households' spending. Regarding

how much of an effect could be exerted on longer-term interest rates, they agreed that

long-term interest rates in Japan had been stable at low levels under the Bank's massive

JGB purchases. Members shared the recognition that, in a situation where nominal interest

rates had been stable, real interest rates were declining on the back of a rise in inflation

expectations. One member said that, at present, the financial system was sound and

economic fundamentals such as firms' profitability and the employment and income

situation were improving significantly, and thus monetary easing effects were likely to

increase.

**IV. Remarks by Government Representatives**

The representative from the Ministry of Finance made the following remarks.

(1) The government highly appreciated that the Bank had introduced quantitative and

qualitative monetary easing in April 2013 immediately after the new leadership with

Governor Kuroda took effect, and had been steadily pursuing it. It acknowledged that

the Japanese economy was steadily progressing toward achieving the overcoming of

deflation and economic revitalization amid the Bank's steady pursuit of bold monetary

easing over the past year. The government expected the Bank to continue to steadily

pursue quantitative and qualitative monetary easing and achieve the price stability target

of 2 percent at the earliest possible time.

(2) The government deemed it important to avoid downside risks to the Japanese economy

following the consumption tax hike and thereby lead the current economic recovery

toward sustainable growth. Therefore, with regard to the budget for fiscal 2014, which

had been approved by the Diet on March 20, 2014, the government as a whole had set a

16


-----

goal for its expenses for public construction in particular and for items that would bring

about swift economic effects -- that is, it would implement more than 40 percent of the

budget by the end of June 2014 and more than 60 percent by the end of September -- so

that the budget would produce appropriate effects within the first half of fiscal 2014.

The government would work to swiftly implement the budget for fiscal 2014, together

with the supplementary budget for fiscal 2013, and thereby respond in an appropriate

manner mainly to downside risks to the Japanese economy.

(3) Based on firms' offers during the wage negotiations this spring, the average wage

increase amount was at the highest level compared with the results of negotiations at

this time of the year over the past decade, which suggested that wage increases on a

scale not seen in recent years were started to take hold. With regard to the growth

strategy, the government intended to submit over 30 related bills to the Diet. Many of

these had already been submitted and were currently being deliberated. In addition,

with a view to revising the growth strategy, the government would make integrated

efforts to proceed with further structural reforms based on the Agenda for the Evolution

of the Growth Strategy, such as restraining energy costs and carrying out reforms in

areas of employment and human resources, medical and nursing care, and agriculture.

Through a series of these measures, the government would further its ongoing efforts

toward realizing a positive cycle between self-maintained and sustainable economic

growth, led by private demand, and fiscal consolidation.

The representative from the Cabinet Office made the following remarks.

(1) A year had passed since the introduction of quantitative and qualitative monetary easing.

The government acknowledged that concrete results were being yielded steadily, as

evidenced by the fact that consumer prices as a whole, which had registered a

year-on-year rate of decline at around this time last year, were rising moderately, with

recent price increases across a wide range of items. Meanwhile, the Japanese

economy was recovering at a moderate pace.

(2) The consumption tax rate had been raised to 8 percent on April 1, 2014. The

government would address downside risks to the Japanese economy by setting specific

goals in terms of an implementation rate for the supplementary budget for fiscal 2013

and the budget for fiscal 2014 -- which contained concrete plans for the Economic

17


-----

Measures for Realization of Virtuous Cycles -- and making efforts to swiftly implement

the budget in the first half of fiscal 2014. It would also carefully monitor

developments in economic activity -- private consumption in particular -- based on

weekly data and information from interviews.

(3) With the aim of realizing a positive cycle of the economy, the government had been

working to take bold taxation measures and to form a common understanding at

Government-Labor-Management Meetings. As a result of earnest discussions between

employers and employees in view of the government's efforts, movements toward wage

increases on a scale not seen in recent years were strongly taking hold at a wider range

of firms during the wage negotiations this spring.

(4) The government had identified the National Strategic Special Zones and had presented

reform guidelines for each. The national government, local governments, and the

private sector would work together to compile each of their specific program plans.

The government had also held a joint meeting of the Council on Economic and Fiscal

Policy and the Industrial Competitiveness Council, at which discussions on the issue of

globalization within Japan had taken place. As for the utilization of foreign human

resources, it was decided at a ministerial meeting on April 4, 2014, to grant residence

status to those who had completed government-sponsored training programs, so that

they would be able to continue to engage in construction work in Japan. With a view

to doubling the outstanding balance of foreign direct investment to Japan, the

government would launch the Council for Promotion of Foreign Direct Investment to

Japan and thereby promote these efforts. Moreover, the government would steadily

pursue the overcoming of deflation and economic revitalization, as well as fiscal

consolidation. It deemed it important first of all to achieve the primary balance target

of halving the ratio of the fiscal deficit to GDP by fiscal 2015, and it would proceed

with discussions at the Council on Economic and Fiscal Policy in this regard. The

government expected the Bank to continue its efforts to achieve the price stability target

of 2 percent.

18


-----

**V. Votes**

Based on the above discussions, members shared the view that it was appropriate

to maintain the current guideline for money market operations, so that the monetary base

would increase at an annual pace of about 60-70 trillion yen.

To reflect this view, the chairman formulated the following proposal and put it to a

vote.

**The Chairman's Policy Proposal on the Guideline for Money Market Operations:**

1. The guideline for money market operations for the intermeeting period ahead will be as

follows.

The Bank of Japan will conduct money market operations so that the

monetary base will increase at an annual pace of about 60-70 trillion yen.

2. A public statement will be decided separately.

Votes for the proposal: Mr. H. Kuroda, Mr. K. Iwata, Mr. H. Nakaso, Mr. R. Miyao,

Mr. Y. Morimoto, Ms. S. Shirai, Mr. K. Ishida, Mr. T. Sato, and Mr. T. Kiuchi.

Votes against the proposal: None.

**VI. Discussion on the Statement on Monetary Policy**

On the basis of the above discussions, members discussed the Statement on

Monetary Policy, and formed a majority view. Mr. T. Kiuchi, however, formulated a

proposal, and thus two proposals were submitted.

Meanwhile, Ms. S. Shirai expressed dissent from the description regarding risks to

the outlook presented in the draft of the statement that formed a majority view, suggesting

that the pace of improvement in the employment and income situation in Japan should be

added. As the reason for this, she stated that, for domestic demand to maintain its firmness

in the future, it was important for the employment and income situation to continue

improving; therefore, considering that it was uncertain whether households' expectations for

future income growth would rise in a situation where the decline in real income could

become prolonged, this issue should be included as one of the risks for the time being.

19


-----

**A. Mr. T. Kiuchi's Policy Proposal**

With regard to the draft of the statement that formed a majority view, Mr. T.

Kiuchi proposed changing the current expression of the Bank's future monetary policy

stance that "the Bank will continue with quantitative and qualitative monetary easing,

aiming to achieve the price stability target of 2 percent, as long as it is necessary for

maintaining that target in a stable manner. It will examine both upside and downside risks

to economic activity and prices, and make adjustments as appropriate" to a new expression

that "the Bank will aim to achieve the price stability target of 2 percent in the medium to

long term. On this basis, it will designate quantitative and qualitative monetary easing as

an intensive measure with a time frame of about two years, and thereafter will review the

monetary easing measures in a flexible manner." The proposal was then put to a vote.

The proposal was defeated by a majority vote.

Votes for the proposal: Mr. T. Kiuchi.

Votes against the proposal: Mr. H. Kuroda, Mr. K. Iwata, Mr. H. Nakaso, Mr. R.

Miyao, Mr. Y. Morimoto, Ms. S. Shirai, Mr. K. Ishida, and Mr. T. Sato.

**B. The Chairman's Policy Proposal**

The chairman formulated the Statement on Monetary Policy, and put it to a vote.

The Policy Board decided the text by a unanimous vote. It was confirmed that the

statement would be released immediately after the meeting (see Attachment).

**VII. Approval of the Minutes of the Monetary Policy Meeting**

The Policy Board approved unanimously the minutes of the Monetary Policy

Meeting of March 10 and 11, 2014 for release on April 11, 2014.

20


-----

Attachment

April 8, 2014

Bank of Japan

**Statement on Monetary Policy**

1. At the Monetary Policy Meeting held today, the Policy Board of the Bank of Japan decided,

by a unanimous vote, to set the following guideline for money market operations for the

intermeeting period:

The Bank of Japan will conduct money market operations so that the monetary base will

increase at an annual pace of about 60-70 trillion yen.

2. With regard to the asset purchases, the Bank will continue with the following guidelines:

a) The Bank will purchase Japanese government bonds (JGBs) so that their amount

outstanding will increase at an annual pace of about 50 trillion yen, and the average

remaining maturity of the Bank's JGB purchases will be about seven years.

b) The Bank will purchase exchange-traded funds (ETFs) and Japan real estate investment

trusts (J-REITs) so that their amounts outstanding will increase at an annual pace of about

1 trillion yen and about 30 billion yen respectively.

c) As for CP and corporate bonds, the Bank will maintain their amounts outstanding at about

2.2 trillion yen and about 3.2 trillion yen respectively.

3. Japan's economy has continued to recover moderately as a trend, albeit with some

fluctuations due to the consumption tax hike. Overseas economies -- mainly advanced

economies -- are starting to recover, although a lackluster performance is still seen in part.

Exports have recently leveled off more or less. The pick-up in business fixed investment

has become increasingly evident as corporate profits have improved. Public investment has

continued to increase. Private consumption and housing investment have remained resilient

as a trend with improvement in the employment and income situation, albeit with some

fluctuations due to the consumption tax hike. Reflecting these developments in demand

both at home and abroad, industrial production has been on a moderate increasing trend.

Business sentiment has continued to improve, although some cautiousness about the outlook

has been observed. Meanwhile, financial conditions are accommodative. On the price

21


-----

front, the year-on-year rate of increase in the consumer price index (CPI, all items less fresh

food) is around 1¼ percent. Inflation expectations appear to be rising on the whole.

4. With regard to the outlook, Japan's economy is expected to continue a moderate recovery as a

trend, while it will be affected by the subsequent decline in demand following the

front-loaded increase prior to the consumption tax hike. The year-on-year rate of increase in

the CPI, excluding the direct effects of the consumption tax hike, is likely to be around 1¼

percent for some time.

5. Risks to the outlook include developments in the emerging and commodity-exporting

economies, the prospects for the European debt problem, and the pace of recovery in the U.S.

economy.[[Note 1]]

6. The Bank will continue with quantitative and qualitative monetary easing, aiming to achieve

the price stability target of 2 percent, as long as it is necessary for maintaining that target in a

stable manner. It will examine both upside and downside risks to economic activity and

prices, and make adjustments as appropriate.[[Note 2]]

Such conduct of monetary policy will support the positive movements in economic activity

and financial markets, contribute to a rise in inflation expectations, and lead Japan's economy

to overcome the deflation that has lasted for nearly 15 years.

[Note 1] Ms. S. Shirai dissented from the description in paragraph 5, suggesting that the pace of improvement
in the employment and income situation in Japan should be added.

[Note 2] Mr. T. Kiuchi proposed that the Bank will aim to achieve the price stability target of 2 percent in the
medium to long term and designate quantitative and qualitative monetary easing as an intensive
measure with a time frame of about two years. The proposal was defeated by an 8-1 majority vote.
Voting for the proposal: Mr. T. Kiuchi. Voting against the proposal: Mr. H. Kuroda, Mr. K. Iwata,
Mr. H. Nakaso, Mr. R. Miyao, Mr. Y. Morimoto, Ms. S. Shirai, Mr. K. Ishida, and Mr. T. Sato.

22


-----

