Not to be released until 8:50 a.m.
Japan Standard Time on Monday,
January 26, 2015.

January 26, 2015

Bank of Japan

# Minutes of the Monetary Policy Meeting
## on December 18 and 19, 2014

(English translation prepared by the Bank's staff based on the Japanese original)


-----

Please contact the Bank of Japan at the address below in advance to request permission

when reproducing or copying the content of this document for commercial purposes.

Secretariat of the Policy Board, Bank of Japan

P.O. Box 30, Nihonbashi, Tokyo 103-8660, Japan

Please credit the source when quoting, reproducing, or copying the content of this

document.


-----

A Monetary Policy Meeting of the Bank of Japan Policy Board was held in the

Head Office of the Bank of Japan in Tokyo on Thursday, December 18, 2014, from 2:00

p.m. to 4:28 p.m., and on Friday, December 19, from 9:00 a.m. to 12:23 p.m.[1]

**Policy Board Members Present**

**Mr. H. Kuroda, Chairman, Governor of the Bank of Japan**

**Mr. K. Iwata, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Japan**

**Mr. H. Nakaso, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Japan**

**Mr. R. Miyao**

**Mr. Y. Morimoto**

**Ms. S. Shirai**

**Mr. K. Ishida**

**Mr. T. Sato**

**Mr. T. Kiuchi**

Government Representatives Present

Mr. I. Miyashita, State Minister of Finance, Ministry of Finance[2]

Mr. H. Sakota, Deputy Vice Minister for Policy Planning and Coordination, Ministry of

Finance[3]

Mr. Y. Nishimura, State Minister of Cabinet Office, Cabinet Office[2]

Mr. A. Nakamura, Deputy Director-General, Economic and Fiscal Management, Cabinet

Office[3 ]

Reporting Staff

Mr. M. Amamiya, Executive Director

Mr. K. Momma, Executive Director (Assistant Governor)

Mr. S. Kuwabara, Executive Director

1 The minutes of this meeting were approved by the Policy Board at the Monetary Policy Meeting
held on January 20 and 21, 2015 as "a document describing an outline of the discussion at the
meeting" stipulated in Article 20, paragraph 1 of the Bank of Japan Act of 1997. Those present are
referred to by their titles at the time of the meeting.
2 Messrs. I. Miyashita and Y. Nishimura were present on December 19.
3 Messrs. H. Sakota and A. Nakamura were present on December 18.

1


-----

Mr. S. Uchida, Director-General, Monetary Affairs Department

Mr. K. Masaki, Head of Policy Planning Division, Monetary Affairs Department

Mr. H. Yamaoka, Director-General, Financial Markets Department

Mr. E. Maeda, Director-General, Research and Statistics Department

Mr. S. Kameda, Head of Economic Research Division, Research and Statistics

Department

Mr. S. Nagai, Director-General, International Department

Secretariat of the Monetary Policy Meeting

Mr. N. Yoshioka, Director-General, Secretariat of the Policy Board

Mr. N. Fukunaga, Director, Deputy Head of Planning and Coordination Division,

Secretariat of the Policy Board

Mr. R. Hattori, Senior Economist, Monetary Affairs Department

Mr. R. Kato, Senior Economist, Monetary Affairs Department

2


-----

**I. Summary of Staff Reports on Economic and Financial Developments[4]**

**A. Money Market Operations in the Intermeeting Period**

The Bank, in accordance with the guideline decided at the previous meeting on

November 18 and 19, 2014, had been providing funds through purchases of Japanese

government bonds (JGBs) and other measures.[5] In this situation, the amount outstanding

of the monetary base had been in the range of 256-269 trillion yen.

**B. Recent Developments in Financial Markets**

In the money market, interest rates on both overnight and term instruments

continued to be at low levels. The uncollateralized overnight call rate and general

collateral (GC) repo rates had been at levels below 0.1 percent, the interest rate applied to

the Bank's complementary deposit facility. As for interest rates on term instruments,

yields on treasury discount bills (T-Bills) continued to be negative but had recently marked

somewhat smaller negative figures.

In the bond market, interest rates across the entire yield curve had declined further

since the previous meeting. Specifically, yields in the long-term zone had followed a

moderate downward trend on the back of a general decline in long-term interest rates

abroad, mainly reflecting a decline in crude oil prices, and had recently been at around 0.35

percent. In this situation, yields on the shorter end had sometimes been slightly negative

as the negative yields on T-Bills had gradually affected them. Yields in the medium-term

zone had been below the 0.1 percent level. The Nikkei 225 Stock Average had risen at one

time, mainly as a reflection of the yen's depreciation, and temporarily exceeded the 18,000

yen level. It had fallen recently to around 17,000 yen, mainly against the background of

declines in overseas stock prices. In the foreign exchange market, the yen had depreciated

against the U.S. dollar, mainly since the difference in the direction of monetary policy

between Japan and the United States continued to be recognized. The yen then

appreciated somewhat against the U.S. dollar, mainly reflecting declines in overseas stock

prices. Meanwhile, the euro had generally been more or less flat against the dollar.

4 Reports were made based on information available at the time of the meeting.
5 The guideline was as follows:
The Bank will conduct money market operations so that the monetary base will increase at
an annual pace of about 80 trillion yen.

3


-----

**C. Overseas Economic and Financial Developments**

Overseas economies -- mainly advanced economies -- had been recovering, albeit

with a lackluster performance still seen in part.

The U.S. economy continued to recover steadily, led by private demand. Private

consumption had increased firmly, with employment increasing at a faster pace. Housing

investment had also followed a moderate pick-up trend. Exports continued on their

increasing trend. Reflecting these developments in demand, business sentiment and the

momentum in production activity had been strengthening, and business fixed investment

continued to recover. As for prices, the year-on-year rate of increase in the consumer price

index (CPI) for all items less food and energy, or the core CPI, had risen marginally while

that for all items had dropped slightly, mainly due to the decline in energy prices.

The recovery in the European economy had been losing momentum recently.

Private consumption continued to recover moderately on the back of an improving trend in

compensation of employees. However, the pace of the pick-up in exports had been

sluggish and production was roughly flat. Not only had business sentiment turned

cautious in manufacturing, but this development was spreading to other sectors as well, and

movements toward a pick-up in business fixed investment had come to a pause. As for

prices, the year-on-year rates of increase in the Harmonized Index of Consumer Prices

(HICP) excluding energy and unprocessed food and in the HICP for all items remained low,

both being clearly below the quantitative definition of price stability set by the European

Central Bank (ECB), which was below, but close to, 2 percent. Meanwhile, economic

activity in the United Kingdom continued to recover, led mainly by domestic demand.

With regard to emerging economies, the Chinese economy generally maintained

its stable growth, due mainly to an improvement in external demand and the stimulus

measures by the government, although there remained downward pressure associated with

structural reforms. Exports continued to increase, particularly to the United States and

Asia. Stable growth in private consumption continued against the background of a

favorable employment and income situation. On the other hand, the slowing trend in the

pace of growth in fixed asset investment continued on the whole, since the paces of increase

in investment in real estate and manufacturing had slowed, although public investment

remained firm. The pace of growth in production had been slowing moderately.

Meanwhile, although the pace of pick-up in exports had been decelerating recently, the

4


-----

NIEs had been improving on the whole as domestic demand continued on a pick-up trend.

On the other hand, despite a continued improving trend in exports, the ASEAN economies

as a whole had been lacking growth momentum since improvement in private consumption

had been slow in some economies. In India, the economy had bottomed out on the back of

improvement in sentiment and a decline in inflation rates. Economic activity in Russia

had been stagnant, particularly in domestic demand, reflecting a tightening of financial

conditions due to the raising of policy interest rates and to capital outflow.

As for prices of emerging economies, inflation rates in many economies had

decreased, mainly because of the decline in energy prices. On the other hand, inflation

rates had been rising in some Asian economies due to the effects of a reduction in fuel

subsidies; rates had also been rising in countries such as Brazil and Russia, mainly due to

the effects of the depreciation of their currencies and to the increase in food prices.

Regarding global financial markets, the U.S. dollar had appreciated, reflecting

market participants' awareness of the differences in perceived business conditions and the

direction of monetary policy between the United States and other countries. In this

situation, currencies in emerging economies had been weak on the whole, and they had

fallen substantially in oil- and commodity-exporting economies in particular, such as Russia.

In international commodity markets, crude oil prices continued to decline substantially,

partly due to the effects of the decision by the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting

Countries (OPEC) not to reduce oil production.

**D. Economic and Financial Developments in Japan**

1. Economic developments

Exports had shown signs of picking up. Real exports, after turning slightly

positive in the July-September quarter of 2014 on a quarter-on-quarter basis, had risen

noticeably in the October-November period relative to the July-September quarter.

Exports were expected to increase moderately, mainly against the background of the

recovery in overseas economies.

Public investment had more or less leveled off at a high level. It was expected to

continue to stay at around this level for the time being and thereafter gradually enter a

declining trend.

5


-----

Business fixed investment had been on a moderate increasing trend as corporate

profits had improved. Meanwhile, business sentiment had generally stayed at a favorable

level, although some cautiousness had been observed. In the December 2014 _Tankan_

(Short-Term Economic Survey of Enterprises in Japan), the diffusion index for business

conditions for all industries and enterprises (the proportion of firms responding that

business conditions were "favorable" minus the proportion of those responding that they

were "unfavorable") had improved marginally from the September Tankan and remained in

"favorable" territory to a marginal degree. However, (1) the diffusion index had shown

mixed movements by industry and size, and (2) some cautiousness about the outlook had

been observed. Business fixed investment was projected to continue a moderate

increasing trend as corporate profits followed their improving trend. Business fixed

investment plans (for all industries and enterprises, excluding software investment and

including land purchasing expenses) for fiscal 2014 in the December _Tankan_ had been

revised upward from those in the September _Tankan, to a year-on-year increase of 5.5_

percent -- which represented relatively high growth compared with the rate of increase in

investment plans for fiscal 2013 as of December 2013. This upward revision was made as

current profits in firms' business plans had been forecasted to maintain their high level on a

par with those for fiscal 2013, which had seen large profit increases.

As for the employment and income situation, labor market conditions continued to

improve steadily, as evidenced by the moderate improving trend in the unemployment rate.

Regarding wages, nominal wages per employee had been rising moderately, albeit with

fluctuations, as non-scheduled cash earnings continued to increase and the pick-up in

scheduled cash earnings had recently become evident. Reflecting these developments in

employment and wages, the year-on-year rate of increase in employee income had been

climbing moderately.

Private consumption remained resilient as a trend with the employment and

income situation improving steadily, and the effects of the decline in demand following the

front-loaded increase prior to the consumption tax hike had been waning on the whole.

Many sales statistics had started to show a moderate increase in the July-September quarter,

after a substantial fall in the April-June quarter, and had maintained their uptrend in October,

excluding the negative effects stemming from the landfall of two typhoons. As for durable

goods, the number of new passenger-car registrations had almost bottomed out, and sales of

6


-----

household electrical appliances had started picking up moderately. Services consumption,

such as that related to travel, remained steady. However, looking at indicators related to

consumer confidence, the consumer confidence index -- which had improved temporarily

around summer 2014, after having exhibited cautiousness from around the end of 2013

through around spring 2014 -- once again was starting to indicate caution. Private

consumption was expected to remain resilient with the employment and income situation

continuing to improve steadily, and the effects of the decline in demand following the

front-loaded increase were expected to dissipate gradually.

Housing investment, which had continued to decline following the front-loaded

increase, had recently started to bottom out. The number of housing starts -- a leading

indicator of housing investment -- had continued to fall since the January-March quarter,

mainly in owner-occupied homes and houses, but had virtually bottomed out recently.

Such investment was projected to regain its resilience gradually with the employment and

income situation continuing to improve steadily, supported as well by accommodative

financial conditions.

Industrial production had started to bottom out, due in part to the progress in

inventory adjustments. It had fallen back noticeably from the front-loaded increase in

demand in the April-June quarter on a quarter-on-quarter basis and continued to decrease in

the July-September quarter, but had turned upward for October relative to the

July-September quarter, by 1.8 percent. Industrial production was expected to resume its

moderate increase with final demand continuing to rise and inventory adjustments

progressing further.

As for prices, excluding the direct effects of the consumption tax hike, the

producer price index (PPI) was declining relative to three months earlier, reflecting the

significant fall in international commodity prices. The year-on-year rate of increase in the

CPI (all items less fresh food) was around 1 percent. With regard to the outlook, the PPI

was expected to continue declining for the time being, reflecting movements in international

commodity prices, and the year-on-year rate of increase in the CPI was likely to be at

around the current level for the time being.

7


-----

2. Financial environment

Financial conditions were accommodative.

The monetary base had increased significantly as asset purchases by the Bank had

progressed, and the year-on-year rate of growth had been at around 35 percent.

Firms' funding costs had been hovering at low levels. With regard to credit

supply, firms continued to see financial institutions' lending attitudes as being on an

improving trend. Issuing conditions for CP and corporate bonds continued to be favorable.

Firms' credit demand had been increasing moderately, mainly for working capital and funds

related to mergers and acquisitions. Against this backdrop, the year-on-year rate of

increase in the amount outstanding of bank lending had been in the range of 2.5-3.0 percent.

Firms' financial positions had been favorable. The year-on-year rate of growth in the

money stock had been at around 3.5 percent, mainly due to the increase in bank lending.

Inflation expectations appeared to be rising on the whole from a somewhat longer-term

perspective. The break-even inflation rates had been declining, partly because crude oil

prices continued to fall. Meanwhile, there was no significant change in the inflation

outlook of households, firms, and economists.

3. The fund-provisioning measure to support strengthening the foundations for economic

growth and the fund-provisioning measure to stimulate bank lending

On December 5, 2014, the Bank had carried out a new loan disbursement,

amounting to 1,153.0 billion yen, under the main rules for the fund-provisioning measure to

support strengthening the foundations for economic growth. The outstanding balance of

loans disbursed by the Bank under these rules amounted to 4,319.6 billion yen after the new

loan disbursement. The outstanding balance of loans disbursed by the Bank under the

special rules for equity investments and asset-based lending (ABL) came to 115.6 billion

yen, and that under the special rules for small-lot investments and loans amounted to 9.083

billion yen. As for the special rules for the U.S. dollar lending arrangement, the

outstanding balance of loans had reached the limit of loans to be disbursed, which was 12.0

billion dollars.

On December 16, 2014, the Bank had carried out a new loan disbursement,

amounting to 3,133.6 billion yen, under the fund-provisioning measure to stimulate bank

8


-----

lending. The outstanding balance of loans disbursed by the Bank amounted to 18,977.3

billion yen after the new loan disbursement.

**II. Summary of Discussions by the Policy Board on Economic and Financial**

**Developments**

**A. Economic Developments**

Members shared the recognition that global financial markets had shown some

nervousness, as seen, for example, in the fact that crude oil prices continued to decline

substantially and that the currencies of some emerging and commodity-exporting economies

had fallen sharply. In particular, many members noted that it was necessary to closely

monitor developments in Russia as a risk to global financial markets and to the global

economy, notably the European economy. A few members pointed out that the currencies

of some commodity-importing economies had also fallen noticeably recently amid the

transition to a change in U.S. monetary policy. Some members expressed the recognition

that, although the decline in crude oil prices generally had positive effects on the global

economy as a whole, particularly on advanced economies, it could entail the risks of

destabilizing financial markets and of exerting downward pressure on the economy, mainly

through the fall in currencies of commodity-exporting economies and a deterioration in the

creditworthiness of energy-related firms.

Members concurred that overseas economies -- mainly advanced economies -- had

been recovering, albeit with a lackluster performance still seen in part. As for the outlook,

they shared the recognition that overseas economies -- particularly advanced economies -
would continue to recover moderately.

With regard to developments in overseas economies by region, members agreed

that the U.S. economy continued to recover steadily, led by private demand. They shared

the view that private consumption had increased firmly on the back of improvement in the

employment situation and the decline in gasoline prices, and that this had been exerting

positive effects on corporate activity. One member noted that imports from emerging

economies such as those in Asia had increased on the back of the continued U.S. economic

recovery, exerting positive effects on other regions as well. As for the outlook, members

shared the recognition that the economy was likely to continue to see a solid recovery as

firmness in the household sector would continue to spread to the corporate sector. A few

9


-----

members added that the pace of recovery could accelerate given, for example, that

improvement in the employment situation had been progressing rapidly.

Members shared the recognition that the recovery in the euro area economy had

been losing momentum recently. As for the outlook, they concurred that the economy

would likely maintain its recovery as a trend -- albeit at a moderate pace -- supported

mainly by the resilience in private consumption and an increase in exports, although the

recovery would likely be sluggish for the time being due in part to the spread of business

sentiment turning cautious. Members also shared the recognition that the possibility of

low inflation rates becoming entrenched and the effects of developments in Russia

warranted attention. Some members added that the political turmoil in Greece might have

adverse effects on the euro area economy.

Members agreed that the Chinese economy generally maintained its stable growth

due mainly to an improvement in external demand and the stimulus measures by the

government, although there remained downward pressure associated with structural reforms.

As for the outlook, they shared the view that the economy would likely continue to see

generally stable growth, albeit at a somewhat slower pace, as authorities carried out

stimulus measures while progressing with structural reforms.

Regarding emerging economies, members agreed that the number of countries and

regions where economic activity had been picking up had been increasing gradually,

triggered by a rise in exports to advanced economies; however, some weakness remained,

particularly in some ASEAN countries, Brazil, and Russia. They then concurred that

emerging economies as a whole remained lackluster in terms of growth. Many members

expressed the view that economic activity in Russia had been stagnant, particularly in

domestic demand, reflecting the tightening of financial conditions due to the raising of

policy interest rates -- a policy action taken in response to the acceleration in the

depreciation of the Russian ruble against the background of the decline in crude oil prices.

Members shared the recognition that emerging economies were likely to gradually increase

their growth rates as positive effects of recovery in advanced economies -- particularly in

the United States -- spread, and as this process triggered a pick-up in domestic demand,

although differences remained across countries and regions.

Based on the above deliberations on economic and financial conditions abroad,

members discussed the state of Japan's economy.

10


-----

With regard to economic activity, members concurred that, in a situation where a

virtuous cycle from income to spending continued to operate steadily in both the household

and corporate sectors, the economy continued to recover moderately as a trend, and effects

such as those of the decline in demand following the front-loaded increase prior to the

consumption tax hike had been waning on the whole. With regard to the outlook for the

economy, they shared the recognition that it was likely to continue on its moderate recovery

trend, and that effects such as those of the decline in demand following the front-loaded

increase prior to the consumption tax hike were likely to dissipate. Some members added

that the recent decline in crude oil prices would be a factor that would exert upward

pressure on economic activity through rises in corporate profits and households' real

income.

Members agreed that Japan's exports had shown signs of picking up and were

likely to increase moderately, mainly against the background of the recovery in overseas

economies. One member expressed the view that the effects of the yen's depreciation

might be starting to appear, particularly in capital goods. As for future developments in

exports of automobiles, a few members noted that the decline in gasoline prices might act as

a headwind against Japanese automobiles that had an edge in terms of fuel efficiency.

Members shared the view that business fixed investment had been on a moderate

increasing trend as corporate profits had improved, and it was projected to continue on such

a trend. Many members expressed the recognition that, as shown in the December 2014

_Tankan, business sentiment had generally stayed at a favorable level, although some_

cautiousness had been observed, and firms' business plans indicated that firms were

planning to steadily increase fixed investment in view of improvement in the profit outlook.

One member pointed out that actual investment had been proceeding at a slower pace than

that suggested by the business fixed investment plans for fiscal 2014 in the _Tankan. On_

this basis, the member expressed the recognition that the downward revisions made to the

investment plans for the first half of the fiscal year had been somewhat large, suggesting

that there might be a growing tendency by firms to postpone their plans. In response, a

few members commented that, although postponement of business fixed investment

reflecting the sluggish economic recovery had been observed in the first half of fiscal 2014,

such investment was projected to follow an increasing trend, taking into account the pick-up

in the aggregate supply of capital goods, for example. One member expressed the

11


-----

recognition that current profits in firms' business plans could be revised further upward, as

the yen had been depreciating further from firms' projected value of it against the U.S.

dollar, in comparison with the time when the December _Tankan was conducted._

Meanwhile, some members expressed the view that the results of various surveys indicated

that business sentiment had turned cautious, and therefore careful attention should be paid

to future developments.

As for the employment and income situation, members shared the view that, with

labor market conditions continuing to improve steadily, employee income had increased

moderately and was likely to continue to do so. Some members said that winter bonus

payments for 2014 also seemed to have increased.

Members agreed that private consumption remained resilient as a trend with the

employment and income situation improving steadily, and the effects of the decline in

demand following the front-loaded increase prior to the consumption tax hike had been

waning on the whole. They shared the view that many sales statistics had maintained their

uptrend, and that demand for durable consumer goods, which exhibited a protracted decline

following the front-loaded increase, had almost bottomed out for automobile sales and had

started picking up moderately for sales of household electrical appliances. Members

concurred that private consumption was likely to remain resilient, and the effects of the

decline in demand following the front-loaded increase were likely to dissipate gradually.

Meanwhile, many members noted that relatively weak developments had recently been

observed in indicators of consumer sentiment. As background to this, some members

expressed the opinion that this might be attributable to a decline in real income due to a rise

in prices of food and other items, reflecting the depreciation of the yen, and to the

consumption tax hike. One of these members added that real wages would likely clearly

turn positive on a year-on-year basis, as the effects of price increases associated with the

consumption tax hike would dissipate from fiscal 2015. Some members expressed the

view that consumer sentiment was likely to improve, given that the employment and

income situation had been improving steadily, winter bonus payments seemed to have been

increasing, and moves toward wage increases in 2015 were expected to make progress.

Members shared the recognition that housing investment, which had continued to

decline following the front-loaded increase, had recently started to bottom out and was

projected to regain its resilience gradually.

12


-----

Members concurred that industrial production had started to bottom out, due in

part to the progress in inventory adjustments, and was likely to resume its moderate increase.

Some members pointed out that the production forecast index and interviews with firms

suggested that production was expected to increase moderately.

As for prices, members concurred that, excluding the direct effects of the

consumption tax hike, the year-on-year rate of increase in the CPI (all items less fresh food)

was around 1 percent and likely to be at around the current level for the time being. Many

members expressed the view that the earlier decline in crude oil prices was likely to exert

downward pressure on the CPI for the time being. Some of these members pointed out

that, excluding the direct effects of the consumption tax hike, the year-on-year rate of

increase in the CPI might hover below 1 percent through the first half of 2015. Many

members, however, expressed the recognition that the decline in crude oil prices would

have positive effects on economic activity and, from a somewhat longer-term perspective,

would likely push up the trend inflation through an improvement in the output gap.

Members shared the view that inflation expectations had been rising on the whole from a

somewhat longer-term perspective.

**B. Financial Developments**

Members concurred that financial conditions in Japan were accommodative.

They shared the view that the monetary base had increased significantly, reflecting the

progress in asset purchases by the Bank, and that firms' funding costs had been hovering at

low levels. Members agreed that firms' financial positions had been favorable, as firms

continued to see financial institutions' lending attitudes as being on an improving trend and

issuing conditions for CP and corporate bonds continued to be favorable. They shared the

view that firms' credit demand had been increasing moderately, and that the amount

outstanding of bank lending, including that to small firms, had been increasing moderately.

**III. Summary of Discussions on Monetary Policy for the Immediate Future**

Based on the above assessment of economic and financial developments, members

discussed monetary policy for the immediate future.

Many members shared the assessment that quantitative and qualitative monetary

easing (QQE) continued to exert its intended effects after the Bank had decided to expand

13


-----

the QQE at the Monetary Policy Meeting held on October 31, 2014. Specifically, these

members expressed the recognition that long-term interest rates in Japan had been declining

moderately while inflation expectations had been rising from a somewhat longer-term

perspective, and thus real interest rates were trending downward. They continued that

such developments had been underpinning firms' and households' spending.

With regard to the relationship between the decline in crude oil prices and the

conduct of monetary policy, some members noted that some market participants regarded

the expansion of the QQE as a direct response to the decline in crude oil prices, and that

there was speculation about additional monetary easing in view of a subsequent further

decline in crude oil prices. Most members expressed the recognition that the expansion

had been implemented not to directly respond to the decline in crude oil prices but to

pre-empt manifestation of the risk that conversion of the deflationary mindset would be

delayed, in a situation where the rate of increase in prices had not accelerated in the short

term due to somewhat weak developments in demand and the decline in crude oil prices.

One member said that the primary focus should be on the underlying trend in prices when

considering the future conduct of monetary policy, and that the key was developments in

inflation expectations in a broad context.

Regarding inflation expectations, members expressed the recognition that it was

important not only to assess market indicators and the results of surveys such as those

conducted on economists but also to capture firms' and households' views on prices as well

as a change in behavior based on such views. On this basis, with regard to developments

in inflation expectations after the expansion of the QQE, many members expressed the view

that there had been steady progress in the conversion of the deflationary mindset despite the

further drop in crude oil prices and the decline in the actual inflation rate. Some members

expressed the recognition that firms' and households' behavior had started to change, as seen,

for example, in the fact that (1) the Japanese Trade Union Confederation (Rengo) had

released the guidelines for wage negotiations in spring 2015, which called for a base pay

increase of more than 2 percent; and (2) the statement on government-labor-management

initiatives for maintaining a positive cycle of the economy -- released on December 16,

2014 -- had clarified that the business community would exert their full efforts to achieve

wage increases. On the other hand, one member said that, based on the experience of 2014,

one should not have high hopes for positive effects from the results of wage negotiations at

14


-----

major firms on future price developments. A few members expressed the view that market

indicators of inflation expectations such as the break-even inflation rates had recently

declined slightly amid their global downtrend following the fall in crude oil prices; however,

the rates of decline in these indicators in Japan were smaller than those in Europe and the

United States due in part to the effects of the expansion of the QQE. Some members said

that, according to surveys conducted on households, firms, and economists, medium- to

long-term inflation expectations had generally been maintained, and the December 2014

_Tankan had shown that firms continued to expect a rise in the inflation rate._

With respect to the effects on prices of the decline in crude oil prices, members

shared the following view: (1) the decline would exert downward pressure on prices in the

short term; (2) on the other hand, from a somewhat longer-term perspective, the decline

would have positive effects on economic activity and would exert upward pressure on the

underlying trend in prices; and (3) downward pressure on prices in the short term on a

year-on-year basis would dissipate eventually. On this basis, many members said that, if

the conversion of the deflationary mindset continued, the decline in crude oil prices would

eventually push up the inflation rate. Members expressed the recognition that the Bank

should continue to clearly communicate such thinking regarding the effects on prices of the

crude oil price decline.

Based on this discussion, regarding the guideline for money market operations for

the intermeeting period ahead, most members expressed the view that it was appropriate to

maintain the current guideline that the Bank would conduct money market operations so

that the monetary base would increase at an annual pace of about 80 trillion yen.

With regard to the asset purchases, most members expressed the recognition that it

also was appropriate for the Bank to continue with the current guideline. Specifically,

these members confirmed the following. First, the Bank would purchase JGBs so that

their amount outstanding would increase at an annual pace of about 80 trillion yen. With a

view to encouraging a decline in interest rates across the entire yield curve, the Bank would

conduct purchases in a flexible manner in accordance with financial market conditions.

The average remaining maturity of the Bank's JGB purchases would be about 7-10 years.

Second, it would purchase exchange-traded funds (ETFs) and Japan real estate investment

trusts (J-REITs) so that their amounts outstanding would increase at annual paces of about 3

trillion yen and about 90 billion yen, respectively. And third, for CP and corporate bonds,

15


-----

the Bank would maintain their amounts outstanding at about 2.2 trillion yen and about 3.2

trillion yen, respectively.

With respect to the Bank's thinking behind its future conduct of monetary policy,

many members shared the recognition that the Bank would continue with the QQE, aiming

to achieve the price stability target of 2 percent, as long as it was necessary for maintaining

this target in a stable manner. These members continued that, in doing so, it would

examine both upside and downside risks to economic activity and prices, and make

adjustments as appropriate. Members agreed that, even though monthly movements in the

CPI tended to draw attention in terms of the Bank's conduct of monetary policy in a

situation where downward pressure from the decline in crude oil prices continued, it was

important to grasp the underlying trend in prices by carefully examining developments such

as those in the output gap, inflation expectations, and wages. A few members -- noting

that some official statistics employed the CPI for all items less imputed rent to deflate such

figures as wages -- expressed the view that, in assessing price developments, it should be

noted that imputed rent had recently been exerting downward pressure on the CPI, partly

reflecting changes in the environment surrounding the housing market.

Meanwhile, one member said that -- given that downward pressure on the entire

yield curve brought about by the QQE had strengthened further -- when examining risks, it

was necessary to pay even closer attention to the effects this would have on financial

institutions' business conditions and the broadly-defined settlement system.

A different member expressed the view that, if a rise were to occur in markets'

anticipation that the QQE would continue for a protracted period or extreme additional

measures would be implemented in a situation where it was unlikely that the price stability

target would be achieved in about two years, this could lead to economic instability in the

medium to long term, such as through a buildup of financial imbalances. On this basis,

this member argued that (1) the Bank should change the guidelines for money market

operations and asset purchases back to those employed before the expansion of the QQE;

and (2) with regard to the future conduct of monetary policy, the Bank should reconsider the

time frame for achieving the price stability target and change the expression representing

the Bank's commitment by stating that the time frame for continuing the QQE should be

restricted to about two years, and that thereafter the Bank would review the monetary easing

measures in a flexible manner.

16


-----

Some members expressed the view that the downgrading of JGBs had had limited

effects on the JGB market thus far. Nevertheless, these members added that it was

necessary to carefully monitor how the downgrading of the credit ratings of financial

institutions and nonfinancial firms in Japan following that of JGBs would affect their

funding in foreign currencies and compliance with international financial regulations.

Meanwhile, some members reaffirmed that, in order to maintain the credibility at home and

abroad of Japan's fiscal management, they expected the government to continue to steadily

promote measures aimed at establishing a sustainable fiscal structure.

**IV. Remarks by Government Representatives**

The representative from the Ministry of Finance made the following remarks.

(1) The second preliminary estimate of the real GDP growth rate for the July-September

quarter of 2014 -- which had been released on December 8 -- was minus 1.9 percent on

an annualized quarter-on-quarter basis, having been revised downward from the first

preliminary estimate. Meanwhile, regarding the current state of the economy, the

government acknowledged that the economy was on a moderate recovery given that

positive developments continued to be observed. For example, the number and

compensation of employees had increased and firms' fixed investment plans for fiscal

2014 had been revised upward in the December 2014 Tankan released on December 15.

(2) With a view to maintaining a positive cycle of the economy accompanying a rise in

wages, the government had held the Government-Labor-Management Meeting for

Realizing a Positive Cycle of the Economy on December 16 and formed a common

understanding with labor and management, as it had done in 2013. Based on this

common understanding, the government would continue to proceed with coordinated

measures to overcome deflation. With regard to attaining fiscal soundness, the

government would make the maximum possible effort during the process of budget

formulation to achieve the target of halving its primary balance deficit relative to GDP

by fiscal 2015. It also would resolutely stay the course toward its goal of generating a

surplus in the primary balance for fiscal 2020 and draw up concrete plans by the

summer of 2015 for achieving this goal. The government would continue to aim to

achieve economic revitalization and fiscal consolidation simultaneously.

17


-----

(3) The government expected the Bank to continue to steadily pursue the QQE and achieve

the price stability target of 2 percent at the earliest possible time.

The representative from the Cabinet Office made the following remarks.

(1) The second preliminary estimate of the real GDP growth rate for the July-September

quarter of 2014 -- which had been released on December 8 -- was minus 1.9 percent on

an annualized quarter-on-quarter basis, registering negative growth for the second

consecutive quarter. Regarding the current state of the economy, however, the

government acknowledged that the economy remained on a moderate recovery given

that economic activity continued to see positive developments, such as the increase in

compensation of employees in a situation where corporate profits were at high levels.

The decline in crude oil prices was expected to lead to an improvement in the trade

balance and the terms of trade as well as to a positive contribution to the GDP deflator,

thereby exerting positive effects on the economy as a whole. Taking this into

consideration, the government deemed it necessary to closely monitor future price

developments.

(2) Although the government had decided to postpone raising the consumption tax rate to

10 percent, it would make sure the increase was implemented in April 2017 and never

"lower the flag" of attaining fiscal soundness. During the process of formulating the

budget for fiscal 2015, the government would make the maximum possible effort to

steadily achieve the target of halving its primary balance deficit relative to GDP by

fiscal 2015. It would also resolutely stay the course toward its goal of generating a

surplus in the primary balance for fiscal 2020. By drawing up concrete plans by the

summer of 2015 to achieve this goal, the government would clarify the path toward

realizing both economic revitalization and fiscal soundness.

(3) The government would continue to give highest priority to the economy and implement

economic measures -- mainly for the growth strategy -- more strongly and boldly. At

the Government-Labor-Management Meeting for Realizing a Positive Cycle of the

Economy held on December 16, the government had reached an agreement with labor

and management on the efforts toward maintaining a positive cycle of the economy. It

was established in the agreement that the business community would exert their full

efforts to achieve wage increases. Moreover, in response to the instructions from the

18


-----

prime minister, the government was currently working on drawing up plans for a new

economic stimulus package, particularly to boost private consumption and to improve

regional economies, and would develop it by the end of 2014. During the latest

extraordinary session of the Diet, the government had obtained the Diet's approval of

two bills related to building up local regions. The government would aim to formulate

a "long-term vision" and a "comprehensive strategy" by the end of 2014. It expected

the Bank to steadily continue its efforts to achieve the price stability target of 2 percent.

**V. Votes**

**A. Vote on the Guideline for Money Market Operations**

Based on the above discussions, to reflect the majority view of the members, the

chairman formulated the following proposal and put it to a vote.

The Policy Board decided the proposal by a majority vote.

**The Chairman's Policy Proposal on the Guideline for Money Market Operations:**

1. The guideline for money market operations for the intermeeting period ahead will be as

follows.

The Bank of Japan will conduct money market operations so that the

monetary base will increase at an annual pace of about 80 trillion yen.

2. A public statement will be decided separately.

Votes for the proposal: Mr. H. Kuroda, Mr. K. Iwata, Mr. H. Nakaso, Mr. R. Miyao,

Mr. Y. Morimoto, Ms. S. Shirai, Mr. K. Ishida, and Mr. T. Sato.

Votes against the proposal: Mr. T. Kiuchi.

**B. Vote on the Guideline for Asset Purchases**

To reflect the majority view of the members, the chairman formulated the

following proposal to continue with the guideline for asset purchases and put it to a vote:

(1) to purchase JGBs so that their amount outstanding would increase at an annual pace of

about 80 trillion yen, to conduct purchases in a flexible manner in accordance with financial

19


-----

market conditions -- with a view to encouraging a decline in interest rates across the entire

yield curve -- and to make the average remaining maturity of the Bank's JGB purchases

about 7-10 years; (2) to purchase ETFs and J-REITs so that their amounts outstanding

would increase at annual paces of about 3 trillion yen and about 90 billion yen, respectively;

and (3) to maintain the amounts outstanding of CP and corporate bonds at about 2.2 trillion

yen and about 3.2 trillion yen, respectively.

The Policy Board decided the proposal by a majority vote.

Votes for the proposal: Mr. H. Kuroda, Mr. K. Iwata, Mr. H. Nakaso, Mr. R. Miyao,

Mr. Y. Morimoto, Ms. S. Shirai, Mr. K. Ishida, and Mr. T. Sato.

Votes against the proposal: Mr. T. Kiuchi.

**VI. Discussion on the Statement on Monetary Policy**

On the basis of the above discussions, members discussed the Statement on

Monetary Policy, and formed a majority view. Mr. T. Kiuchi, however, formulated a

proposal, and thus two proposals were submitted.

**A. Mr. T. Kiuchi's Policy Proposal**

With regard to the draft of the statement that formed a majority view, Mr. T.

Kiuchi proposed changing the current expression of the Bank's future monetary policy

stance that "the Bank will continue with the QQE, aiming to achieve the price stability

target of 2 percent, as long as it is necessary for maintaining that target in a stable manner.

It will examine both upside and downside risks to economic activity and prices, and make

adjustments as appropriate" to a new expression that "the Bank will aim to achieve the price

stability target of 2 percent in the medium to long term. On this basis, it will designate the

QQE as an intensive measure with a time frame of about two years, and thereafter will

review the monetary easing measures in a flexible manner." The proposal was then put to

a vote.

20


-----

The proposal was defeated by a majority vote.

Votes for the proposal: Mr. T. Kiuchi.

Votes against the proposal: Mr. H. Kuroda, Mr. K. Iwata, Mr. H. Nakaso, Mr. R.

Miyao, Mr. Y. Morimoto, Ms. S. Shirai, Mr. K. Ishida, and Mr. T. Sato.

**B. The Chairman's Policy Proposal**

The chairman formulated the Statement on Monetary Policy, and put it to a vote.

The Policy Board decided the text by a unanimous vote. It was confirmed that the

statement would be released immediately after the meeting (see Attachment 1).

**VII. Approval of the Minutes of the Monetary Policy Meeting**

The Policy Board approved unanimously the minutes of the Monetary Policy

Meeting of November 18 and 19, 2014 for release on December 25, 2014.

**VIII. Approval of the Scheduled Dates of the Monetary Policy Meetings in**

**January-December 2015**

At the end of the meeting, the Policy Board approved unanimously the dates of the

Monetary Policy Meetings to be held in the period of January-December 2015 for

immediate release (see Attachment 2).

21


-----

Attachment 1

December 19, 2014

Bank of Japan

**Statement on Monetary Policy**

1. At the Monetary Policy Meeting held today, the Policy Board of the Bank of Japan decided,

by an 8-1 majority vote, to set the following guideline for money market operations for the

intermeeting period:[[Note 1]]

The Bank of Japan will conduct money market operations so that the monetary base will

increase at an annual pace of about 80 trillion yen.

2. With regard to the asset purchases, the Bank decided, by an 8-1 majority vote, to continue

with the following guidelines:[[Note 2]]

a) The Bank will purchase Japanese government bonds (JGBs) so that their amount

outstanding will increase at an annual pace of about 80 trillion yen. With a view to

encouraging a decline in interest rates across the entire yield curve, the Bank will conduct

purchases in a flexible manner in accordance with financial market conditions. The

average remaining maturity of the Bank's JGB purchases will be about 7-10 years.

b) The Bank will purchase exchange-traded funds (ETFs) and Japan real estate investment

trusts (J-REITs) so that their amounts outstanding will increase at annual paces of about 3

trillion yen and about 90 billion yen respectively.

c) As for CP and corporate bonds, the Bank will maintain their amounts outstanding at about

2.2 trillion yen and about 3.2 trillion yen respectively.

3. Japan's economy has continued to recover moderately as a trend, and effects such as those of

the decline in demand following the front-loaded increase prior to the consumption tax hike

have been waning on the whole. Overseas economies -- mainly advanced economies -
have been recovering, albeit with a lackluster performance still seen in part. In this situation,

exports have shown signs of picking up. Business fixed investment has been on a moderate

increasing trend as corporate profits have improved. Public investment has more or less

leveled off at a high level. Private consumption has remained resilient as a trend with the

employment and income situation improving steadily, and the effects of the decline in

demand following the front-loaded increase have been waning on the whole. Housing

22


-----

investment, which continued to decline following the front-loaded increase, has recently

started to bottom out. Against the backdrop of these developments in demand both at home

and abroad, industrial production has started to bottom out, due in part to the progress in

inventory adjustments. Business sentiment has generally stayed at a favorable level,

although some cautiousness has been observed. Meanwhile, financial conditions are

accommodative. On the price front, the year-on-year rate of increase in the consumer price

index (CPI, all items less fresh food), excluding the direct effects of the consumption tax hike,

is around 1 percent. Inflation expectations appear to be rising on the whole from a

somewhat longer-term perspective.

4. With regard to the outlook, Japan's economy is expected to continue its moderate recovery

trend, and the effects such as those of the decline in demand following the front-loaded

increase prior to the consumption tax hike are expected to dissipate. The year-on-year rate

of increase in the CPI is likely to be at around the current level for the time being.

5. Risks to the outlook include developments in the emerging and commodity-exporting

economies, the prospects regarding the debt problem and the risk of low inflation rates being

protracted in Europe, and the pace of recovery in the U.S. economy.

6. Quantitative and qualitative monetary easing (QQE) has been exerting its intended effects,

and the Bank will continue with the QQE, aiming to achieve the price stability target of 2

percent, as long as it is necessary for maintaining that target in a stable manner. It will

examine both upside and downside risks to economic activity and prices, and make

adjustments as appropriate.[[Note 3]]

[Note 1] Voting for the action: Mr. H. Kuroda, Mr. K. Iwata, Mr. H. Nakaso, Mr. R. Miyao, Mr. Y. Morimoto,
Ms. S. Shirai, Mr. K. Ishida, and Mr. T. Sato. Voting against the action: Mr. T. Kiuchi. The
member voting against the action considered that the guideline for money market operations before
the decision regarding the "Expansion of the Quantitative and Qualitative Monetary Easing" on
October 31, 2014 was appropriate.

[Note 2] Voting for the action: Mr. H. Kuroda, Mr. K. Iwata, Mr. H. Nakaso, Mr. R. Miyao, Mr. Y. Morimoto,
Ms. S. Shirai, Mr. K. Ishida, and Mr. T. Sato. Voting against the action: Mr. T. Kiuchi. The
member voting against the action considered that the guideline for asset purchases before the
decision regarding the "Expansion of the Quantitative and Qualitative Monetary Easing" on October
31, 2014 was appropriate.

[Note 3] Mr. T. Kiuchi proposed that the Bank will aim to achieve the price stability target of 2 percent in the
medium to long term and designate the QQE as an intensive measure with a time frame of about two
years. The proposal was defeated by an 8-1 majority vote. Voting for the proposal: Mr. T. Kiuchi.
Voting against the proposal: Mr. H. Kuroda, Mr. K. Iwata, Mr. H. Nakaso, Mr. R. Miyao,
Mr. Y. Morimoto, Ms. S. Shirai, Mr. K. Ishida, and Mr. T. Sato.

23


-----

Attachment 2

December 19, 2014

Bank of Japan

### Scheduled Dates of Monetary Policy Meetings in January-December 2015


(Reference)

Publication of

Monthly Report


Publication of
Date of MPM

MPM Minutes


Publication of

Outlook Report

(The Bank's View)


Jan. 2015 20 (Tues.), 21 (Wed.) Feb. 23 (Mon.) -- 22 (Thurs.)

Feb. 17 (Tues.), 18 (Wed.) Mar. 20 (Fri.) -- 19 (Thurs.)

Mar. 16 (Mon.), 17 (Tues.) Apr. 13 (Mon.) -- 18 (Wed.)

Apr. 7 (Tues.), 8 (Wed.) May 8 (Fri.) -- 9 (Thurs.)

30 (Thurs.) May 27 (Wed.) 30 (Thurs.) -
May 21 (Thurs.), 22 (Fri.) June 24 (Wed.) -- 25 (Mon.)

June 18 (Thurs.), 19 (Fri.) July 21 (Tues.) -- 22 (Mon.)

July 14 (Tues.), 15 (Wed.) Aug. 12 (Wed.) -- 16 (Thurs.)

Aug. 6 (Thurs.), 7 (Fri.) Sept. 18 (Fri.) -- 10 (Mon.)

Sept. 14 (Mon.), 15 (Tues.) Oct. 13 (Tues.) -- 16 (Wed.)

Oct. 6 (Tues.), 7 (Wed.) Nov. 5 (Thurs.) -- 8 (Thurs.)

30 (Fri.) Nov. 25 (Wed.) 30 (Fri.) -
Nov. 18 (Wed.), 19 (Thurs.) Dec. 24 (Thurs.) -- 20 (Fri.)

Dec. 17 (Thurs.), 18 (Fri.) To be announced -- 21 (Mon.)

Note: The time of release will be, in principle, as follows.

MPM Minutes will be released at 8:50 a.m.
_Outlook for Economic Activity and Prices (Outlook Report):_
"The Bank's View" in the Outlook Report will be released at 3:00 p.m., and the full text at 2:00 p.m. on the next
business day. As an exception to this principle, the full text of the October 2015 Outlook Report will be released at
2:00 p.m. on October 31 (Sat.), 2015.
_Monthly Report of Recent Economic and Financial Developments (Monthly Report):_
The Japanese original and the English translation for summary will be released at 2:00 p.m. (the English translation for
the full text will be published at 4:30 p.m. on the next business day).

24


-----

