**HIGHLIGHTS OF THE MEETING OF THE MONETARY BOARD ON**

**MONETARY POLICY ISSUES  HELD ON 10 APRIL 2003[∗]**


**Background**

The Monetary Board held its fifth meeting for the year to discuss
monetary policy issues on 10 April 2003. This followed the Advisory
Committee meeting held on 8 April 2003.[1] During the meeting, the
Advisory Committee presented a policy paper for the Monetary Board’s
consideration. The said paper contained an extensive discussion of the
developments in the agriculture sector, foreign exchange market, oil
prices, user charges in utilities, interest rates, domestic credit conditions
and other key demand indicators as well as the developments and
outlook in the world economy. The policy paper also incorporated the
results of the discussions and the recommendations of the Advisory
Committee. This served as the basis for the Monetary Board’s
assessment of the appropriate stance of monetary policy.

**I. Key Considerations in the Formulation of the Monetary Policy**
**Stance**

- Headline inflation decelerated in March due to lower food inflation,
which helped cushion the impact of higher fuel prices. First quarter
average inflation was 2.9 percent, significantly lower than the 3.6
percent average inflation recorded during the same period last year
and the 4.5-5.5 percent target for the year. Core inflation also slowed
down in March. Estimated core inflation (CPI less food and energy)
eased slightly to 2.6 percent in March from 2.7 percent in the previous
month. Average core inflation for the first quarter was 2.6 percent,
about half of the average core inflation rate of 5.1 percent for the
same period in 2002.

∗ The highlights of the discussions of the 10 April 2003 Monetary Board meeting were approved by
the Monetary Board during its meeting held on 15 May 2003.
1 The Advisory Committee is composed of the Governor of the BSP as Chairman and four other
members, namely the Deputy Governor for the Banking Services Sector, Research and Treasury, the
Deputy Governor for Supervision and Examination Sector, the Managing Director, In-Charge of
Research and the Director of the Treasury Department.

**10-04-2003** **1**


-----

- Domestic demand indicators showed encouraging signs but no
evidence of a sustained pickup. The overall strength of aggregate
demand remained quite moderate, as may be gauged from the
following indicators:

a. Manufacturing activity continued to improve in January 2003. The
volume of production index (VOPI) rose by 3.7 percent (revised)
year-on-year as against the 6.1 percent decline in February 2003.
Likewise, the value of production index (VAPI) expanded by 12.8
percent (revised) year-on-year in January. Average capacity
utilization in manufacturing also improved slightly to 76.1 percent
(revised) in January from 74.5 percent in the previous month.

b. Commercial bank lending rose for the fifth consecutive month by
4.4 percent year-on-year in January 2003.

c. The volume of passenger car sales surged by 14.6 percent
month-on-month in January 2003, reflecting a marked turnaround
from the 10.8 percent drop in December 2002.

d. Growth in energy sales of the Manila Electric Company (Meralco),
a leading indicator of overall power consumption, slowed down
sharply to 5.6 percent annually in February following an 11.6
percent rise in the previous month.

e. Unemployment remained relatively high at 10.6 percent in the first
quarter compared to 10.2 percent in the previous quarter and
10.3 percent a year earlier.

- Supply-side pressure on inflation showed some signs of weakening.
For example, the effects of the El Niño phenomenon have started to
recede as temperature levels over the tropical Pacific registered sharp
declines in January 2003. This suggests more favorable food supply
conditions and stable food prices. International crude oil prices have
also begun to soften on expectations of a quick resolution of the USIraq conflict. From a high of US$30.02 per barrel in February 2003,
the average monthly price of Dubai crude declined by 8.8 percent to
settle at US$27.38 per barrel in March 2003.

- Market interest rates inched up in March, although liquidity remained
ample. The average yield on the benchmark 91-day T-bills reached
an 11-month high of 7.145 percent, up by 78.9 basis points from
6.356 percent in the previous auction on 17 March 2003. Meanwhile,

**10-04-2003** **2**


-----

domestic liquidity (M3) grew by 6.7 percent year-on-year as of endFebruary 2003.

- The peso weakened further in March against the US dollar but
recovered following stricter regulatory and monitoring measures on
foreign exchange transactions of banks by the BSP. The lifting of the
tiering scheme of banks’ placements with the BSP under the RRP and
SDA and the one-percentage point increase in the liquidity reserve
requirement to 8 percent helped contain the pressures in the foreign
exchange market, which posed a threat on the inflation outlook.

- The fiscal deficit for the first two months of the year was lower than
the levels posted for the same period a year ago. This supports
expectations that the NG could likely keep the deficit for the year on
track with the target.

- Economic indicators in the major economies continued to point to a
hesitant and uneven global economic recovery. Greater cautiousness
among consumers and businesses has dampened firms’ hiring
outlook. As a result, the growth of industrial production was sluggish,
labor markets remained soft and the main leading economic indicators
continued to be weak in advanced economies.

a. US GDP growth slowed to an annual rate of 1.4 percent in the
fourth quarter of 2002 compared to 4 percent in the previous
quarter while unemployment in March remained at 5.8 percent as
in the previous month. Consumer confidence appeared to
weaken as the University of Michigan’s consumer confidence
index fell sharply to 77.6 in March from 79.9 in the previous
month. Manufacturing activity showed signs of a contraction, with
the Institute for Supply Management (ISM) index of manufacturing
falling further to 50.5 percent in February from 53.9 percent in
January 2003.

b. Euro area unemployment rate rose further to 8.7 percent in
February from 8.6 percent a month earlier, while inflation edged
up to 2.3 percent in February from 2.2 percent a month earlier.
The Bank of England revised downwards its outlook for growth in
the UK over the next two years due mainly to weaker prospects
for the world economy as well as further declines in equity prices
and business investment.

c. Economic activity in Japan remained stagnant as weak consumer
spending and continued deflationary pressures offset

**10-04-2003** **3**


-----

improvements in employment. Unemployment fell unexpectedly in
February to 5.2 percent from 5.5 percent in the previous month.
However, spending by Japanese wage earners fell by 1.6 percent
in real terms in February  from a year-ago level, and consumer
prices declined anew by 0.2 percent year-on-year in February
following a 0.4 percent drop in the previous month.

- The fragile state of the global economy implies that the current
accommodative stance of the majority of central banks would likely be
maintained to support economic recovery and growth. During their
most recent monetary policy meetings, the US Federal Reserve, the
European Central Bank and the Bank of England all voted to keep
policy interest rates unchanged. Meanwhile, the Bank of Japan voted
unanimously to maintain its current account balance target to a
range of 17-22 trillion yen beginning April 2003 from 15-20 trillion
yen, noting that the economy is unlikely to show clear signs of
recovery for some time as business investment remained weak and
high levels of unemployment and debt persisted.

**II. Review of the Monetary Policy Stance**

- During the Monetary Board’s discussion on the appropriate monetary
stance, the members noted that the overall outlook for inflation has
not drifted away from the full-year average inflation target of 4.5-5.5
percent in 2003. The recent pressures on headline inflation have
remained largely driven by specific CPI components, notably fuel
prices. In addition, the relative absence of broad-based price
increases suggests that demand-side pressures on inflation are
largely muted. Thus, the Monetary Board believed that the major
risks to future inflation relate mainly to cost-push influences which are
also expected to be largely transitory.

- The Monetary Board also noted that the absence of strong demandside risks to inflation coincides with the lack of clear-cut signs of
sustained improvement in domestic economic activity. The overall
strength of aggregate demand remains tentative, given soft labor
market conditions (which have prevented strong calls for wage
adjustments) and sizable spare capacity in key areas such as the
manufacturing sector. They agreed that there is still adequate room
for the impact of monetary policy to feed on through to the real sector
without endangering the government’s inflation objective. Moreover,
the continued mixed evidence on domestic activity is complicated by
weakness in external demand.

**10-04-2003** **4**


-----

- In sum, therefore, the Monetary Board was of the view that the nearterm risks to the inflation outlook appear to be largely contained.
Future inflation is expected to remain benign, given the absence of
demand-side risks to prices and the short-lived nature of potential
supply-side pressures. Average headline inflation in 2003-2004 is
expected to broadly track the government’s targets. At the same time,
the muted demand-side influences on the outlook for inflation and
growth support the case for ensuring that liquidity conditions remain
appropriate for the domestic economy’s requirements.

**III.  Monetary Policy Decision**

- Based on the analysis of various indicators on the macroeconomy and
the financial sector that have become available since the special
meeting of the Monetary Board on 19 March 2003 and a careful
assessment of the balance of risks on inflation and inflationary
expectations, the Monetary Board believed that the current monetary
policy stance continued to ensure price stability at the same time that
it was appropriately supportive of the economy’s growth objective.
Thus the Monetary Board, by a unanimous vote, approved the
following measures:

a. Maintain the BSP’s policy rates at the current levels of 7.0
percent for the overnight RRP (borrowing) rate—without the
tiering scheme—and 9.25 percent for the overnight RP (lending)
rate; and

b. Maintain the reserve requirement ratios for banks at their current
levels of 9 percent for regular reserves and 8 percent for liquidity
reserves.

The next meeting of the Monetary Board to discuss the monetary
policy setting was scheduled on 8 May 2003.

**- The Monetary Board of the Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas**

**10-04-2003** **5**


-----

