Not to be released until 2:00 p.m.
Japan Standard Time on Friday,
December 22, 2006.

December 22, 2006

Bank of Japan

# Minutes of the Monetary Policy Meeting
## on November 15 and 16, 2006

(English translation prepared by the Bank's staff based on the Japanese original)


-----

A Monetary Policy Meeting of the Bank of Japan Policy Board was held in the

Head Office of the Bank of Japan in Tokyo on Wednesday, November 15, 2006, from 2:00

p.m. to 4:01 p.m., and on Thursday, November 16, from 9:00 a.m. to 12:20 p.m.[1]

**Policy Board Members Present**

**Mr. T. Fukui, Chairman, Governor of the Bank of Japan**

**Mr. T. Muto, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Japan**

**Mr. K. Iwata, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Japan**

**Ms. M. Suda**

**Mr. H. Haru**

**Mr. T. Fukuma**

**Mr. A. Mizuno**

**Mr. K. G. Nishimura**

**Mr. T. Noda**

Government Representatives Present

Mr. K. Tanaka, Senior Vice Minister of Finance, Ministry of Finance[2]

Mr. E. Katsu, Deputy Vice Minister for Policy Planning and Coordination, Ministry of

Finance[3]

Mr. J. Hamano, Vice Minister for Policy Coordination, Cabinet Office

Reporting Staff

Mr. N. Inaba, Executive Director

Mr. A. Horii, Executive Director (Assistant Governor)

Mr. K. Ido, Executive Director

Mr. M. Amamiya, Director-General, Monetary Affairs Department

Mr. S. Uchida, Senior Economist, Monetary Affairs Department

1 The minutes of this meeting were approved by the Policy Board at the Monetary Policy Meeting
held on December 18 and 19, 2006 as "a document which contains an outline of the discussion at the
meeting" stipulated in Article 20, Paragraph 1 of the Bank of Japan Law of 1997. Those present
are referred to by their titles at the time of the meeting.
2 Mr. K. Tanaka was present on November 16.
3 Mr. E. Katsu was present on November 15.

1


-----

Mr. H. Nakaso, Director-General, Financial Markets Department

Mr. H. Hayakawa, Director-General, Research and Statistics Department

Mr. E. Maeda, Deputy Director-General, Research and Statistics Department

Mr. T. Idesawa, Director-General, International Department

Secretariat of the Monetary Policy Meeting

Mr. Y. Nakayama, Director-General, Secretariat of the Policy Board

Mr. Y. Iino, Adviser to the Governor, Secretariat of the Policy Board

Mr. K. Shigyoh, Director, Secretariat of the Policy Board

Mr. K. Murakami, Director, Secretariat of the Policy Board

Mr. S. Yamaguchi, Senior Economist, Monetary Affairs Department

Mr. K. Kamiyama, Senior Economist, Monetary Affairs Department

2


-----

**I. Summary of Staff Reports on Economic and Financial Developments[4]**

**A. Money Market Operations in the Intermeeting Period**

The Bank conducted money market operations in accordance with the guideline

decided at the previous meeting on October 31, 2006.[5] The uncollateralized overnight call

rate had been at around 0.25 percent.

**B. Recent Developments in Financial Markets**

In the money market, interest rates on three-month instruments, such as financing

bills (FBs) and Euroyen, had risen since the previous meeting. Interest rates on Euroyen

futures had edged somewhat higher, particularly for those with nearby contract months.

Japanese stock prices had been more or less unchanged. The Nikkei 225 Stock

Average was recently in the range of 16,000-16,500 yen.

Long-term interest rates had also been more or less unchanged, and were recently

at around 1.7 percent.

The yen had been fluctuating against the U.S. dollar, partly reflecting releases of

U.S. economic indicators. It was recently being traded in the range of 117.5-118.0 yen to

the dollar.

**C. Overseas Economic and Financial Developments**

The U.S. economy continued to expand, but the pace of growth was decelerating.

Housing investment continued to decrease and private consumption was decelerating

moderately, while business fixed investment continued to increase. As for prices, the pace

of increase in the consumer price index (CPI) for all items moderated with the fall in energy

prices, but the core inflation rate (the CPI for all items less food and energy) continued to

increase moderately, mainly reflecting tighter supply-demand conditions due to the

economic expansion.

In the euro area, economic recovery had become evident, as the increase in

production and improvement in corporate profits had led to recovery in business fixed

4 Reports were made based on information available at the time of the meeting.
5 The guideline was as follows:
The Bank of Japan will encourage the uncollateralized overnight call rate to remain at
around 0.25 percent.

3


-----

investment and private consumption. The U.K. economy had returned to a stable growth

path.

With regard to East Asian economies, in China both domestic and external demand

continued to expand strongly. The rate of increase in fixed asset investment remained high,

although it was recently slowing somewhat. Private consumption, exports, and production

remained on an uptrend. The NIEs and ASEAN economies continued to expand at a

moderate pace, as both domestic and external demand were firm on the whole.

In U.S. financial markets, long-term interest rates and stock prices had been more

or less unchanged, reflecting mixed developments in recently released economic indicators.

In Europe, long-term interest rates had been more or less unchanged. Stock prices had

risen slightly, partly due to favorable earnings reports released by some firms. In many

emerging economies, financial markets generally remained firm, as evidenced by the

continuing rise in stock prices.

**D. Economic and Financial Developments in Japan**

1. Economic developments

Exports had continued to increase against the background of the expansion of

overseas economies, and were expected to continue to rise as overseas economies taken as a

whole continued to expand.

As for domestic private demand, business fixed investment had continued to

increase, and was expected to keep increasing since the growth in domestic and external

demand and the high level of corporate profits were likely to be maintained.

Private consumption had generally been on an increasing trend, although the figure

in the GDP statistics decreased in the July-September quarter. Sales at department stores

and supermarkets were relatively sluggish from the spring to around July, dampened by

unfavorable weather. However, sales particularly for apparel had picked up in August and

September, when the weather improved. As for services consumption, sales in the food

service industry had been on a steady uptrend, and outlays for travel, especially overseas

travel, had generally been firm. Private consumption was likely to continue to increase

steadily, mainly reflecting the gradual increase in household income.

Production had continued to increase against the background of the growth in

domestic and external demand. Inventories as a whole had been more or less in balance

4


-----

with shipments. Although attention should be paid to developments in inventories of

electronic parts, the upward trend in production was expected to continue as overseas

economies continued to grow and domestic demand kept expanding. Anecdotal

information suggested that production was likely to inch up in the October-December

quarter.

With regard to the employment and income situation, household income had

continued rising moderately in a situation where various indicators continued to show

tighter labor market conditions. The gradual increase in household income was likely to

continue against the background that firms were increasingly feeling a shortage of labor and

corporate profits were expected to remain high.

On the price front, crude oil prices had dropped sharply since mid-August against

the background of easing geopolitical risks, but they had recently been hovering at levels

observed around the spring, partly due to cutbacks in production by OPEC. On the other

hand, prices of nonferrous metals had remained high, albeit with some fluctuations. The

pace of increase in domestic corporate goods prices had been slowing due to the drop in

crude oil prices, and was expected to continue to slow in the immediate future, with the

effects of the drop in crude oil prices remaining. The year-on-year rate of change in the

CPI (excluding fresh food, on a nationwide basis) had been on a positive trend. This trend

was projected to continue, as the output gap continued to be positive.

2. Financial environment

The environment for corporate finance was accommodative. The issuing

environment for CP and corporate bonds was favorable, and the lending attitudes of private

banks had continued to be accommodative. Credit demand in the private sector had been

increasing. Under these circumstances, the amount outstanding of lending by private

banks had been increasing. The amount outstanding of CP and corporate bonds issued was

slightly below the previous year's level.

**II. Summary of Discussions by the Policy Board on Economic and Financial**

**Developments**

**A. Economic Developments**

On the current state of Japan's economy, members concurred that the economy

5


-----

continued to expand moderately, generally in line with the Bank's projection presented in

the October 2006 Outlook for Economic Activity and Prices (hereafter the Outlook Report),

and was likely to experience a sustained period of expansion with domestic and external

demand increasing and the positive influence of the strength in the corporate sector feeding

through into the household sector. Members also agreed that so far mixed developments

in recent economic indicators did not suggest that the Bank needed to change its assessment

of the mechanisms underlying the economy made in the October Outlook Report, but

members should watch future developments in economic activity and prices carefully.

Members concurred that the U.S. economy was likely to realize a soft landing,

although the pace of growth was decelerating, and with the growth in Europe, Asia, and

other regions, overseas economies taken as a whole continued to expand, with more

economies gaining momentum, and were likely to keep expanding.

On the U.S. economy, members agreed that the pace of expansion was

decelerating mainly due to the decrease in housing investment, but the deceleration was

moderate on the whole, as seen in the fact that so far business fixed investment and

production continued to increase and the deceleration of growth in private consumption and

employment was moderate. As for the outlook, members concurred that the U.S. economy

was likely to realize a soft landing and move toward sustainable growth partly supported by

the decline in crude oil prices. Some members noted points that supported this view: there

were signs that the decrease in housing investment was coming to a halt, and stock prices

had risen. A few members commented that developments in Christmas sales were the key

factor in the immediate future for further examination of the likelihood of a soft landing.

As for prices, some members said that the risk that inflation might accelerate should

continue to be watched closely, taking into consideration the continued rises in the core

inflation rate and the increase in inflation pressures as a result of the decline in the

unemployment rate and the rise in unit labor costs. These members said that there was a

view that the potential growth rate of the U.S. economy had recently declined, and added

that they would take this into account as they watched developments in inflation pressures

with close attention.

With regard to European economies, members agreed that economic recovery had

become evident, as seen in the fact that private consumption was recovering as exports and

production increased.

6


-----

On East Asian economies, members concurred that both domestic and external

demand continued to expand strongly in China. They also agreed that the NIEs and

ASEAN economies on the whole continued to expand at a moderate pace although negative

effects of the past rise in crude oil prices could be seen in some economic activity.

A few members said that, although crude oil prices had recently stopped declining

after falling since August, close attention should continue to be paid to them since there

were uncertainties that could cause them to move in either direction.

Regarding Japan's economy, members agreed that the increase in exports had

continued, reflecting the expansion of overseas economies, and there seemed to have been

no clearly discernible effects from the slowing of the U.S. economy to date. They also

concurred that exports were likely to continue to increase.

As for domestic private demand, members concurred that the strength in the

corporate sector continued and this was benefiting the household sector.

With regard to developments in the corporate sector, members agreed that

corporate profits continued to be at high levels. A few members said that the interim

results of listed firms available at this point suggested that corporate profits remained strong.

Members concurred that business fixed investment continued to increase and was likely to

keep increasing, reflecting the continuing growth in domestic and external demand and the

high level of corporate profits. Some members commented that the substantial decline in

machinery orders in the July-September quarter was a reaction to the sharp increase in the

April-June quarter, and was also attributable to a temporary factor, namely, a reduction in

major telecommunications firms' cellular phone orders. A few of these members

expressed the view that, even if those factors were excluded, the pace of increase in

machinery orders might be decelerating. They said that it was therefore necessary to

watch carefully whether the deceleration in machinery orders was consistent with the

projection presented in the October Outlook Report, in which the growth rate of business

fixed investment was expected to decline gradually in view of the capital stock cycle.

Members shared the view that private consumption had been on an increasing

trend and was likely to continue to increase steadily, mainly reflecting the gradual increase

in household income. Some members said that, although many sales indicators picked up

after the weather improved in August, future developments in private consumption should

be examined carefully since the growth in consumption had remained only modest in a

7


-----

situation where wages had not recorded a clear increase.

Many members commented that a substantial decrease in the figure for private

consumption in the July-September quarter from the previous quarter in the first

preliminary estimates of GDP was due to the following factors. First, the index of living

expenditure in the _Family Income and Expenditure Survey, which provided the basic_

information for calculating private consumption in the GDP statistics, posted a relatively

sharp decline partly reflecting sampling factors. And second, unfavorable weather until

around July had affected the figure. One member said that the underlying trend of private

consumption was unlikely to decline since household income was rising, albeit moderately.

Another member said that there might be structural factors exerting downward pressure on

the underlying trend of consumption, and such factors might include the following. First,

with the aging of the population, the growth in income might no longer lead directly to

growth in consumption. And second, the elderly might be experiencing difficulty in

liquidating their assets to obtain funds for consumption due to the low liquidity of

residential property, which was the most important household asset. In response to this

view, one member said that, although it was necessary to examine closely the effects of

such possible structural factors on consumption behavior, their impact on short-term and

cyclical developments in consumption was questionable.

Members agreed that production had continued to increase and was likely to

continue to be on an increasing trend against the background of the growth in domestic and

external demand. Members also concurred that inventories had been more or less in

balance with shipments in the industrial sector as a whole. Regarding inventories of

electronic parts and devices, some members said that the year-on-year rate of increase in

inventories had recently exceeded that of shipments partly because of an unintended

accumulation of inventories due to weaker-than-expected demand for cellular phones and

new game consoles, and there was a risk that firms might have to adjust production in the

immediate future. These members added that, so far, the risk of a production adjustment

was limited to some products intended for the domestic market and any adjustment was

unlikely to spread to a wider range of products, but developments in final demand

worldwide such as Christmas sales in the U.S. economy warranted attention.

As for the employment and income situation, members concurred that household

income had continued rising moderately in a situation where various indicators continued to

8


-----

show tighter labor market conditions. They also agreed that the gradual increase in

household income was likely to continue against the background that firms were

increasingly feeling a shortage of labor and corporate profits were expected to remain high.

One member said that the fact that there was no clear increase in wages despite the

tightening of labor market conditions might merely be due to a time lag, but attention

should continue to be paid to how firms' persistent stance of restraining labor costs would

affect wages. A different member pointed out that compared to the past, strong corporate

profits were less likely to lead to a rise in wages in Japan because the share of profits from

overseas business operations had increased.

Some members said that the real GDP growth rate in the first preliminary

estimates of GDP for the July-September quarter turned out to be higher than market

expectations, but the figures were mixed: while net exports and business fixed investment

increased, private consumption dropped significantly and the contribution from an increase

in inventories was relatively large.

With regard to prices, members agreed that the pace of increase in domestic

corporate goods prices had been slowing due to the drop in crude oil prices, and was likely

to continue to slow in the immediate future, with the effects of the drop in crude oil prices

remaining. One member said that prices were rising across a broader range of items, as

evident in the fact that the share of items whose prices increased from a year earlier

accounted for almost half of all the items selected to calculate the domestic corporate goods

price index, marking the highest proportion since 2001.

Members concurred that the year-on-year rate of change in the CPI (excluding

fresh food, on a nationwide basis) had been on a positive trend, and that this trend was

likely to continue, as the output gap continued to be positive. A few members said that,

although the statistical figures had been affected by the decline in crude oil prices and

imputed rent, the underlying trend of the CPI was gradually rising. A different member

expressed the view that while the rate of increase in the CPI would definitely rise gradually

as a trend, there remained some uncertainty about the precise pace of its rise. With regard

to factors that might affect the rate of change in the CPI in the immediate future, one

member said that there were both negative and positive factors: while the positive

contribution of petroleum products would fade, the weakness of the yen, the increase in

medical treatment costs paid by the elderly, and the disappearance of the negative

9


-----

contribution from the previous year's fall in cellular telephone charges would have a

positive effect. The member continued that, from a longer-term perspective, the member

would pay close attention to the effects on prices of the continuing positive output gap, and

to the pace at which the decline in unit labor costs decelerated.

As for developments in asset prices, one member expressed the view that the

current recovery in demand for commercial and residential real estate was a natural

consequence of the bottoming out of demand, and real estate investment was unlikely to

overheat for the following reasons. First, financial institutions were becoming cautious

about extending real estate loans. And second, there was little rush to purchase residential

real estate despite the rise in interest rates, and price rises were being seen only in

high-priced real estate.

**B. Financial Developments**

On the financial front, members reaffirmed their view that the financial

environment remained accommodative as seen in the fact that the lending attitudes of

private banks and the issuing conditions in capital markets were favorable. One member

commented that the deceleration of growth in the amount outstanding of lending by private

banks reflected the fact that firms were increasing credit demand mainly to obtain operating

funds but were keeping fixed investment within cash flow. This member continued that

the deceleration seemed to be consistent with the current moderate economic recovery.

**III. Summary of Discussions on Monetary Policy for the Immediate Future**

On the monetary policy stance for the immediate future, members agreed that,

based on their assessment of the economic and financial situation, it was appropriate to

maintain the current guideline for money market operations that the Bank would encourage

the uncollateralized overnight call rate to remain at around 0.25 percent.

Some members noted that formation of interest rates in the money market had

been stable, and expressed the view that this was against the backdrop of not only the

Bank's flexible conduct of money market operations but also the increased efficiency and

smoothness of funds transactions that had been achieved as market participants had become

accustomed to trading in the current financial environment. A few of these members

added that, as the restoration of the proper functioning of the money market progressed,

10


-----

market interest rates would be likely to reflect factors such as market participants' view of

Japan's economy better, and this would contribute to more constructive communication of

the Bank with market participants.

Regarding the future path of monetary policy, members agreed that they would

continue to carefully assess economic activity and prices, and that if developments in

economic activity and prices were likely to follow the Bank's projection presented in the

October Outlook Report, it would be appropriate to conduct monetary policy in line with

the thinking described in it that the Bank would adjust the level of the policy interest rate

gradually in the light of developments in economic activity and prices. One member said

that, if it was confirmed with greater certainty at a future meeting that developments in

economic activity and prices were following the Bank's projection presented in the October

Outlook Report, the Bank should not hesitate to consider a policy change.

With regard to the fact that the timing of a possible policy change was increasingly

attracting the attention of the public, including market participants, members agreed that the

Bank should explain carefully that the timing of any policy change depended entirely on

developments in economic activity and prices as it should not be thought that the timing

was predetermined. Some members said that a divergence had emerged between market

participants and the Bank on the view of the economic situation due partly to the release of

some sluggish economic indicators. These members noted that the Bank should, in the

process of assessing economic activity and prices, examine the divergence carefully, and

that it should communicate with market participants more closely. A few members

commented that it was important that the Bank utilize the new framework for the conduct of

monetary policy introduced in March 2006 in communicating with the market, and that the

Bank should make efforts to promote deeper understanding of the new framework among

the public, including market participants.

**IV. Remarks by Government Representatives**

The representative from the Ministry of Finance made the following remarks.

(1) Japan's economy continued to recover, as evidenced by the first preliminary estimate of

real GDP growth rate for the July-September quarter, which showed an increase of 0.5

percent on a quarter-on-quarter basis. However, looking at growth by component,

domestic demand edged up only by 0.1 percent and private consumption became

11


-----

negative. Some other indicators released recently also showed weak developments.

(2) Prices were unlikely to decline continuously, but careful attention should continue to be

paid to future price developments since factors such as the fall in crude oil prices could

affect them.

(3) Given the current developments in economic activity and prices, the government

considered that it was important that the Bank continue to firmly support the economy

based on the Bank's current guideline for money market operations in order to achieve

sustainable economic growth with price stability.

(4) The government would like the Bank to give due consideration to developments in

financial markets. In order to prevent financial markets from becoming unstable due

to speculation regarding the future conduct of monetary policy, it would also like the

Bank to clearly explain, based on the Bank's decisions at previous meetings, its thinking

regarding the future course of monetary policy to market participants and the public.

The representative from the Cabinet Office made the following remarks.

(1) Although Japan's economy was recovering, a close watch needed to be kept on the

effects on price movements of developments in overseas economies.

(2) The government projected that the economic recovery supported by domestic private

demand would continue, as resiliency in the corporate sector was extending into the

household sector. With regard to the upside and downside risks to the outlook for

economic activity and prices, the government considered that particular attention should

be paid to downside risks, since key factors for the future course of Japan's economy

would be how developments in crude oil prices affected the domestic and overseas

economies and how wages changed, rather than upside risks. In order to ensure price

stability during the concentrated consolidation period and achieve sustainable economic

growth led by private demand based on that price stability, it was important for the

government and the Bank to make joint efforts. The government would accelerate and

deepen structural reforms based on "Basic Policies for Economic and Fiscal

Management and Structural Reform 2006." As for the future path of monetary policy,

the Bank had stated that it would maintain the accommodative financial conditions

ensuing from very low interest rates for some time. The government would like the

Bank to implement effective monetary policy that was consistent with the government's

12


-----

policy efforts and with its outlook for the economy while paying due consideration to

developments in financial markets, and to support the economy from the financial side

responsibly, taking into account downside risks to the outlook for economic activity and

prices.

(3) To prevent financial markets from becoming unstable due to uncertainty about the

Bank's future conduct of monetary policy, the government would like the Bank to

clearly explain its outlook for economic activity and prices as well as the future course

of monetary policy, so as to make it easier for market participants and the public to form

an economic outlook.

**V. Votes**

Based on the above discussions, members agreed that it was appropriate to

maintain the current guideline for money market operations, which encouraged the

uncollateralized overnight call rate to remain at around 0.25 percent.

To reflect this view, the chairman formulated the following proposal and put it to

the vote.

**The Chairman's Policy Proposal on the Guideline for Money Market Operations:**

The guideline for money market operations for the intermeeting period ahead will

be as follows, and will be made public by the attached statement (see Attachment).

The Bank of Japan will encourage the uncollateralized overnight call rate

to remain at around 0.25 percent.

Votes for the proposal: Mr. T. Fukui, Mr. T. Muto, Mr. K. Iwata, Ms. M. Suda, Mr.

H. Haru, Mr. T. Fukuma, Mr. A. Mizuno, Mr. K. G. Nishimura, and Mr. T. Noda.

Votes against the proposal: None.

**VI. Discussion on the Bank's View of Recent Economic and Financial Developments**

Members discussed "The Bank's View" in the Monthly Report of Recent Economic

_and Financial Developments (consisting of "The Bank's View" and "The Background"), and_

put it to the vote.

13


-----

The Policy Board decided, by a unanimous vote, the text of "The Bank's View."

It was confirmed that "The Bank's View" would be published on November 16, 2006 and

the whole report on November 17, 2006.[6]

**VII. Approval of the Minutes of the Monetary Policy Meeting**

The Policy Board approved unanimously the minutes of the Monetary Policy

Meeting of October 12 and 13, 2006 for release on November 21, 2006.

6 The English version of the whole report was published on November 20, 2006.

14


-----

Attachment

November 16, 2006

Bank of Japan

At the Monetary Policy Meeting held today, the Bank of Japan decided, by a

unanimous vote, to set the following guideline for money market operations for the

intermeeting period:

The Bank of Japan will encourage the uncollateralized overnight call rate

to remain at around 0.25 percent.

15


-----

