HIGHLIGHTS OF THE MEETING OF THE MONETARY BOARD ON MONETARY POLICY ISSUES

HELD ON 19 APRIL 2012[1]


I. Monetary Policy Decision

The Monetary Board (MB) decided to:

a) Maintain the BSP’s policy interest rates at 4.0 percent for the overnight RRP
(borrowing) rate and 6.0 percent for the overnight RP (lending) rate;

b) Maintain the current interest rates on term RRPs, RPs and SDAs; and

c) Maintain the current reserve requirement ratios.

II. Key Considerations in the Formulation of the Monetary Policy Stance

  - Latest baseline forecasts continue to indicate that inflation will likely settle near the
lower half of the 3-5 percent target range in 2012 and 2013, with a downward
adjustment in the forecasted inflation path for 2012-2013 compared to the previous
policy meeting. Consistent with the inflation forecast trajectory, inflation expectations
based on the latest BSP and private sector surveys have remained well anchored.

  - Meanwhile, the MB noted that the balance of risks to the inflation outlook now leans
slightly toward the upside as oil prices have remained elevated and at risk from ongoing
tensions in the Middle East as well as strong demand from emerging economies. The
pressures on oil prices constitute the main source of upside risk to the inflation outlook
because of their adverse implications on inflation expectations and on the prices of
other goods and services. Other upside risks relate to the impact of sustained foreign
exchange inflows on domestic liquidity. Meanwhile, the weak global economy and the
stable peso could provide a moderating effect on inflation.

  - The uncertainty in the factors affecting the outlook for inflation supports the need for a
pause in monetary policy adjustment. A prudent pause allows policymakers to better
assess how the upside and downside risks to inflation will play out and enables the prior
cumulative 50-basis-point reduction in policy rates to continue to work its way through
the economy.

1 The discussions presented reflect the assessment made by the Monetary Board based on the information available at the
time of the policy meeting. A comprehensive set of economic information was provided by the Technical Secretariat of the
Advisory Committee (AC). The AC is composed of the Governor of the BSP as Chairman and four members, namely: the Deputy
Governor of the Monetary Stability Sector, the Deputy Governor of the Supervision and Examination Sector, the Assistant
Governor of the Monetary Policy Sub-Sector, and the Assistant Governor of the Treasury Department. The highlights of the
discussions on the 19 April 2012 meeting were approved by the Monetary Board during its regular meeting held on 3 May
2012. The next meeting of the Monetary Board on monetary policy issues is scheduled on 14 June 2012.


-----

  - The MB also noted that prospects for overall domestic economic activity have gradually
strengthened. For the first two months of 2012, government spending accelerated,
merchandise exports growth recovered while bank lending growth maintained its
momentum. Recent indicators of global economic activity have also improved
modestly, although sovereign debt concerns in Europe have continued to weigh down
on the global outlook. The monetary policy easing undertaken since January combined
with the adequate liquidity in the system and early disbursement by the NG to fast
track government spending should give the economy enough room to continue to grow.

III.   Recent Developments and Inflation Outlook

The MB considered the following developments in coming up with its policy decision:

A. Domestic price conditions

  - Year-on-year average headline inflation has continued to slow down in March, driven
mainly by lower inflation for non-food items, particularly power rates. Other price
indicators also reflected a downtrend, including the following: the year-on-year core
inflation, seasonally-adjusted month-on-month core inflation, three alternative
measures of core inflation estimated by the BSP, and the number and weight of abovethreshold items.

  - Food inflation also held steady as some food commodities showed slower price
movement. In particular, slower increases in the prices of vegetables and sugar due to
favorable domestic supply conditions, helped pull down inflation.

B.  Inflation expectations

  - Inflation expectations continue to be well anchored. Inflation expectations based on the
BSP and private sector forecast surveys remain within the 3-5 percent target range over
the policy horizon. Similarly, data from the latest business and consumer expectations
surveys also showed an improved inflation outlook. Results from the Q1 2012
Consumer Expectations Survey (CES) indicated that consumers expect lower inflation
over the next 12 months while findings from the Business Expectations Survey (BES) for
Q1 2012 showed a smaller number of respondents anticipating inflation to move up in
both the current and succeeding quarters.

C. Inflation outlook

  - The latest baseline forecasts continue to point to within-target inflation for 2012 and
2013. The downward adjustment in the forecasted inflation path for 2012-2013
compared to the previous policy meeting is attributed mainly to the lower-thanforecasted actual inflation in February and March which offset the impact of higher oil
prices.

  - The MB also considered various alternative scenarios for the inflation forecast, taking
into consideration both the upside and downside risks to inflation and possible second

-----

round effects from oil price shocks. Using these alternative scenarios, average inflation
for 2012 and 2013 are expected to remain within target over the policy horizon.

  - However, the balance of risks appeared to have tilted to the upside. The uptrend in oil
prices and the potential second-round effects that it could generate are the principal
risks to future inflation. Moreover, additional petitions for electricity rate adjustments
and sustained strong capital inflows could fuel inflationary pressures.

  - Meanwhile, the downside risks to inflation include continued uncertainty over the
strength of the global economy and its implications on the pace of economic activity.
At the same time, the broadly stable peso could help temper the prices of imported
commodities.

D.  Demand conditions

  - There have been recent signs that domestic activity and exports have picked up.
Merchandise exports grew for the first two months of 2012 as electronic exports
recovered after 11 consecutive declines. This is consistent with the US semiconductor
book-to-bill ratio of 1.01―the highest recorded since October 2010. Bank lending
growth maintained its momentum while consumer confidence improved in the first
quarter. Other demand indicators, including energy and vehicle sales and capacity
utilization rates showed moderate increases.

E.  Supply-side indicators

Developments in Agriculture

  - Favorable supply conditions have kept prices of meat, fish, sugar and fruits generally
stable in the first quarter. Meanwhile, after posting considerable crop output gains in
2011, the Bureau of Agricultural Statistics (BAS) projects palay and corn production to
grow slightly in the first semester of 2012 due to higher harvest area and yield, with the
expected favorable wet weather conditions brought by the La Niña episode.

  - In addition, the MB noted that the FAO food price index was broadly stable in March
after climbing for two consecutive months, with indices of cereals, sugar and meat
prices remaining largely unchanged from last month’s level.

Oil Price Developments

  - Oil prices advanced in March following US and Europe sanctions on Iran, which limited
the country’s crude oil shipments, sustained strong demand from emerging markets,
and the announcement by the US Fed that it would maintain a low interest
environment to stimulate the US economy, raising speculation of increasing oil demand
going forward. However, oil prices eased in mid-April amid the resumption of
international talks on Iran’s nuclear program.


-----

Developments in the Utilities Sector

    - Electricity rates of Manila Electric Co. (Meralco) went down in March on account of
lower generation charges from the Wholesale Electricity Spot Market (WESM), which in
turn, was due to improved availability of power supply among the generating
companies, especially the coal-fired power plants. Rates of independent power plants
(IPPs) to Meralco also declined due to slightly higher dispatch, lower natural gas prices
and the appreciation of the peso.

    - Meanwhile, the Energy Regulatory Commission (ERC) approved the petitions of the
National Power Corporation and the Power Sector Assets and Liabilities Management
Corporation to recover a) incremental fuel and purchased power costs under the
Generation Rate Adjustment Mechanism and b) foreign exchange costs under the
Incremental Currency Exchange Rate Adjustment Mechanism, which were incurred
during the period January 2007 to April 2010.

F. Financial market developments

    - During the 16 April 2012 auction, interest rates declined for the 182-day and 364-day
T-bills relative to the rates fetched at the 5 and 19 March 2012 auctions. Meanwhile, all
bids for the 91-day T-bill were rejected as investors posted bids that were deemed
unusually high by the Auction Committee. In addition, the NG was very liquid at this
time (in view of the income tax period in March and April) thus, it projected no need for
short-term funds. The Auction Committee awarded in full the offered amounts for the
182-day and 364-day T-bills. Total tenders reached P14.3 billion or around 1.9 times the
offered amount of P7.5 billion.

    - The PSEi set fresh historic highs as it broke through the 5,000 mark in March, driven by
favorable domestic inflation environment, tentative signs of improvement in the US job
market and the European Union’s approval of the second Greek bailout package, which
boosted investors’ risk appetite for emerging market equities. The index continued to
trade above the 5,000 mark in mid-April following the US Fed’s assurance that it would
keep policy rates low and the IMF’s upgrade of global growth forecast for the first time
in more than a year. These favorable developments likewise caused debt spreads to
narrow to its lowest levels for the year. For the period 1-19 April, however, debt
spreads widened amid concerns of a possible downgrade in Italy’s credit rating and
weaker US non-farm payroll data relative to the previous month.

    - The peso depreciated in March as concerns about the slowing growth in China, along
with the soft recovery in the US, caused investors to reduce their exposure to risky
assets. For the period 1-18 April, the peso slightly recovered given improving exports
and solid support from remittance.

G. Domestic liquidity and credit conditions

    - Domestic liquidity or M3 grew at a steady rate of 7.2 percent in February 2012 to reach
P4.5 trillion. This was the same growth rate recorded a month earlier. Net foreign
assets (NFA) continued to grow at a steady pace of 13.1 percent in February while net


-----

domestic credits expanded at a stable rate of 13.4 percent on account of higher private
and public sector borrowings. However, this was offset by the continued increase in
placements with the BSP’s SDA facility, which has served to moderate liquidity growth.

    - Bank lending growth, net of banks’ RRP placements with the BSP, grew at solid pace of
18.0 percent in February, albeit slightly slower than the 19.1 percent expansion in the
previous month. Loans for production activities grew by 18.4 percent in February from
19.7 percent a month earlier. Meanwhile, growth of consumer loans accelerated
slightly to 20.3 percent in February from 19.9 percent in January, reflecting mainly the
growth of credit card receivables.

    - Corporate issuers continue to tap the equity and bond markets. Capital-raising activities
in the Philippine Stock Exchange for the period January-February 2012 reached
P5.2 billion, albeit 70 percent lower from the previous year’s level of P16.9 billion.
However, corporate bond issuances for the same period amounted to P65.2 billion,
higher by 45 percent compared to the previous year’s level of P45.1 billion.

H.  Fiscal developments

    - The fiscal deficit in January-February 2012 was P5.3 billion, 34.4 percent lower than the
P8.1 billion deficit incurred during the same period in 2011. The lower deficit figure is
attributed mainly to increased revenue collections (14.0 percent year-on-year).
Meanwhile, early disbursement by the Department of Budget and Management (DBM)
has raised government expenditures in the first two months by 12 percent year-onyear. In January, the DBM also released 72 percent of the P1 trillion national budget to
jump-start most of the programmed infrastructure projects.

I.  External developments

    - The MB noted that prospects for global economic activity have improved but downside
risks to the global outlook remain. According to the latest assessment of the IMF, global
economic activity is gradually strengthening. In the April 2012 World Economic Outlook,
the IMF revised upward its global growth forecast for 2012 and 2013 by 0.2 percentage
point and 0.1 percentage point, respectively. The IMF noted that improved activity in
the US during the second half of 2011 and better policies in the euro area in response
to its deepening economic crisis have eased the risk of a sharp global slowdown.
Meanwhile, activity is expected to remain relatively solid in most emerging and
developing economies. However, downside risks to global growth remain elevated with
the recovery expected to be weak and vulnerable due mainly to the legacy of the
financial crisis.


-----

