**Press release**

**Communications**

P.O. Box, CH-8022 Zurich
Telephone +41 58 631 00 00
[communications@snb.ch](mailto:communications@snb.ch)

Zurich, 24 March 2022

# Monetary policy assessment of 24 March 2022 Swiss National Bank retains expansionary monetary policy

The SNB is retaining its expansionary monetary policy. It is keeping the SNB policy rate and
interest on sight deposits at the SNB at −0.75% and is willing to intervene in the foreign
exchange market as necessary, in order to counter upward pressure on the Swiss franc. In so
doing, it takes the overall currency situation and the inflation rate differential with other
countries into consideration. The Swiss franc remains highly valued. Russia’s invasion of
Ukraine has led to a strong increase in uncertainty worldwide. Against this backdrop, the SNB
with its monetary policy is ensuring price stability and supporting the Swiss economy.

Inflation has risen again in recent months, and stood at 2.2% in February. This is primarily
due to the significant increase in the prices for oil products and goods affected by supply
bottlenecks. The tight situation with regard to these products and goods is likely to persist in
the coming months owing to the war in Ukraine. The SNB’s new conditional inflation
forecast is therefore above that of December, particularly for 2022 (cf. chart 1). The upward
revision is less pronounced over the longer term. The new forecast stands at 2.1% for 2022,
and 0.9% for 2023 and 2024 (cf. table 1). The conditional inflation forecast is based on the
assumption that the SNB policy rate remains at −0.75% over the entire forecast horizon.

The global economic recovery continued in the fourth quarter of 2021. However, economic
activity was temporarily impaired at the turn of the year by a renewed wave of the pandemic.
At the same time, inflation continued to rise in the US and the euro area. As a result of the
war in Ukraine, there was a significant increase in financial market volatility in February,
with strong rises in the prices of fossil fuels and other commodities.

In its baseline scenario for the global economy, the SNB assumes that energy prices will
remain high for the time being, but that there will be no acute energy shortages in the major
economic areas. It also anticipates that the global economic recovery will continue overall
despite the war in Ukraine, albeit somewhat subdued. The higher commodity prices will lift
inflation further in the short term.


-----

**Press release**

Economic growth has slowed in Switzerland. Following a strong increase in both preceding
quarters, GDP rose by 1.1% in the fourth quarter of 2021. For the year as a whole, however,
the Swiss economy grew by 3.7%. Momentum remained positive through to February 2022.
The situation on the labour market also continued to improve.

Thus far, the war in Ukraine has had an effect on the Swiss economy above all via the strong
increase in commodity prices. The higher commodity prices are likely to weigh on
consumption and increase companies’ production costs. Foreign trade is also likely to be
affected by the war, albeit not severely given Switzerland’s limited direct economic ties to
Ukraine and Russia. Supply bottlenecks in the case of imported intermediate products could
deteriorate further, and uncertainty could have an adverse impact on investment activity.

In its baseline scenario for 2022, the SNB anticipates GDP growth of around 2.5%, this being
lower than its previous forecast. In this scenario, growth is briefly subdued before rebounding,
and unemployment is likely to decline further somewhat.

It is difficult to assess the future course of the war and its economic impact. The forecasts for
the global economy and for Switzerland are therefore subject to very high uncertainty. The
risks to growth are considerable and to the downside. In particular, a further escalation of the
war and a widening of the sanctions could weigh more heavily on economic activity
worldwide and in Switzerland than assumed in the baseline scenario. At the same time, a
worsening in the tight supply of raw materials could lead to a further rise in inflation globally.
This would also increase the risk of inflation dynamics firming as a result of second-round
effects. Added to this, a renewed deterioration in the pandemic situation cannot be ruled out.

The momentum on the mortgage and real estate markets has continued, and the vulnerabilities
have increased further overall. Against this backdrop, the Federal Council reactivated the
sectoral countercyclical capital buffer on 26 January 2022 following a proposal by the SNB,
setting the level at 2.5% of risk-weighted exposures secured by residential property in
Switzerland. This will increase the capital requirements for these exposures as of
30 September 2022, and will maintain – and where necessary, strengthen – the banking
sector’s resilience. The SNB will continue to monitor developments on the mortgage and real
estate markets closely.


-----

**Press release**


-----

