**BANK OF ISRAEL**
Office of the Spokesperson and Economic Information

Bank of Israel

**Report to the public of the Bank of Israel’s discussions prior to setting the**
**interest rate for August 2007**

**The discussions took place on July 22 and 23, 2007**

6August 2007

**General**

Before the Governor makes the monthly interest rate decision, discussions are held at
two levels. The first discussion takes place in a broad forum, in which the relevant
background economic conditions are presented, including real and monetary
developments in Israel’s economy and developments in the global economy.
Participants in this discussion include the Governor, the Deputy Governor, the
directors of the economic departments of the Bank (the Research, Monetary, Foreign
Currency, and Foreign Exchange Activity departments) and economists from various
departments who prepare and present the material for discussion.
In the narrow forum, the directors of the economic departments present their
recommendations regarding the interest rate and, following a discussion, the Governor
makes his decision.

A. THE BROAD-FORUM DISCUSSION—THE STATE OF THE ECONOMY

**1. Developments on the real side**

_General assessment_
Economic activity continued to grow in the second quarter of 2007. This can be seen
from the Bank of Israel’s Companies Survey, National Accounts data, and the
composite state-of-the-economy index. As economic activity increased, so did the
number of employees in most of the principal industries. The Bank of Israel’s growth
forecast for 2008 is of a modest slowdown in the rate of growth to 4.1 percent.

_The Companies Survey of the Bank of Israel_
Companies’ responses to the Companies Survey for the second quarter of 2007,
published on 23 July 2007, show that economic activity continued to expand in
2007:Q2, with expectations in all industries that this would persist in 2007:Q3. The
rise in the second quarter occurred in the manufacturing, commerce, transport,

POB 780, 91007 Jerusalem Tel: 972–2–6552713

www.bankisrael.gov.il


-----

communications and services industries. There was a modest recovery in the level of
activity in the construction industry.

_Composite state-of-the-economy index_
The composite state-of-the-economy index showed an increase of 0.7 percent in June,
and the indices for the previous months were adjusted upwards, signaling continued
expansion in economic activity. The rise in the index reflected increases in the
manufacturing index and the trade and services sales revenue index. These were
partially offset by a drop in the foreign trade indices––the goods and services exports
index and the imports index both recorded drops in June.

_The labor market_
According to trend data, the average wage per employee post among Israelis in
February–April rose at an annual rate of 5.8 percent, faster than the rate over the
previous twelve months. In those months the number of employee posts increased by
1.5 percent, slower than the rate in the previous twelve months. The increase in the
average nominal wage in February–April was higher than the rise in productivity in the
business sector, which led to a rise in unit labor costs. Data from the Companies
Survey also point to a rise in employment in the manufacturing industries, and a
marked surge in the services industries.

_Foreign trade_
In the last few months imports rose rapidly. In 2007:Q2 imports (excluding ships,
planes, diamonds, and energy products) rose at an annual rate of 20 percent, seasonally
adjusted. The rate of increase in the first half of 2007 was similar to that in the second
half of 2006. Seasonally adjusted quarterly data show a 2.2 percent fall in exports in
the second quarter (excluding ships, planes and diamonds), following a rise of 34
percent in the previous quarter. The trade deficit rose to $ 1 billion, twice the average
monthly deficit in the first half of 2007. At the end of the first half of the year Israel’s
trade deficit was $ 3.5 billion. The jump in the trade deficit in June resulted from the
drop in exports, which continued to exhibit the high volatility they have shown since
the beginning of the year.

**2. Budget data**

Budget performance in the first half of 2007 is consistent with a deficit significantly
below the government’s target. Buoyant tax revenues and expenditure that was lower
than the (seasonally adjusted) budget levels led to a cumulative budget surplus,
excluding credit, of NIS 5.6 billion. These figures give rise to a forecast deficit for
2007 of between 1 percent and 1.5 percent of GDP.

**3. Developments on the nominal side**

_Inflation_

POB 780, 91007 Jerusalem Tel: 972–2–6552713

www.bankisrael.gov.il


-----

The Consumer Price Index (CPI) rose by 0.7 percent in June, exceeding forecasters’
predictions. Despite the relatively high index, prices in the previous twelve months fell
by 0.7 percent. However, since the beginning of 2007 prices have risen by 1 percent,
giving an annual rate of 2 percent, consistent with the inflation target. If the
components of the CPI are divided into those directly affected by the exchange rate
and the price-of-energy component (“imported” items) on the one hand, and
“domestic” components not directly affected by them on the other, a marked difference
is evident between the paths followed by the two in the past year. According to one of
the Bank of Israel’s econometric models,[1] prices of the domestic components rose at a
higher rate than the upper limit of the inflation target, while the prices of imported
items correspondingly fell by more than the reduction in the CPI in the last twelve
months.

_Expectations and forecasts of inflation and of the Bank of Israel interest rate_
In the wake of the publication of the CPI for June, Israeli forecasters revised their
predictions upwards, and on average expect inflation in 2007 and over the next twelve
months to reach 2.7 percent. On average they expect that the Bank of Israel’s interest
rate will rise again this year, and will be 4.2 percent twelve months from now. Breakeven inflation (expected inflation derived from the capital market as the difference
between the yield to maturity on unindexed bonds and the yield on twelve-month
indexed bonds) was 1.9 percent, around the middle of the target range. Market
expectations are that the Bank of Israel interest rate will rise by about 40 basis points
in the next twelve months. Predictions from the Bank of Israel’s econometric models
are that in 2007 and 2008 inflation will be within the target range, with a rise in the
interest rate by the end of the year.

_The makam and bond markets_
Since the previous interest rate decision on 25 June, until the current discussion on 22
July, the yield on one-year _makam rose by 0.2 percentage points. The yields on 10-_
year unindexed (Shahar) bonds and 10-year indexed (Galil) bonds remained steady at
5.5 percent and 3.2 percent respectively.

_The interest rate differential and the yield gap between Israel and abroad_
At the time of the discussion, the Bank of Israel interest rate was 1.75 percentage
points lower than the US federal funds rate. Based on the US yield curve, the US
interest rate will remain unchanged till the end of the year. In most countries there is
currently an upward trend in interest rates. The gap between the yields on unindexed
shekel bonds and US 10-year bonds widened during the last month from 50 to 60 basis
points.

_The expected real interest rate_
The expected real interest rate (the Bank of Israel interest rate _minus inflation_
expectations) for one year forward was 1.6 percent, close to its level at the end of June.

1 For a discussion of the domestic and imported components of the CPI see the Bank of Israel Annual
Report 2006, p. 107, and Box 3.2, pp. 128–31.

POB 780, 91007 Jerusalem Tel: 972–2–6552713

www.bankisrael.gov.il


-----

This followed the sharp drop in June that resulted from the rise in inflation
expectations.

_The money supply_
The rate of increase of the (M1) money supply over the previous twelve months was
16.2 percent: the current-account deposits component rose by 22.8 percent, and the
cash element by 7.1 percent.

_The econometric models_
Various scenarios were examined using the Bank of Israel’s econometric models.
According to these models, in the scenario with the exchange rate at a level of around
NIS 4.24 to the dollar, inflation in 2007 and in the next twelve months is expected to
be close to the upper limit of the inflation target. The models also showed that to keep
within the inflation target, the interest rate would need to be raised during the third
quarter.

**4. Capital flows, the foreign currency market, and the share market**

_The foreign-currency market and capital flows_
From the last interest rate decision until the current one, the shekel appreciated by 0.6
percent against the dollar, and depreciated by about 1.9 percent against the euro, while
other currencies strengthened against the dollar by more than 2 percent. The negative
interest rate differential between the shekel and the dollar in the last month was again a
contributing factor to the export of short-term capital by the business sector. Despite
these developments, the basic forces acting in support of the shekel––deriving from the
current account surplus and nonresidents’ investments in the economy––are still
evident.

_The share market_
The leading share indices on the Tel Aviv Stock Exchange rose in the last month,
further to considerable rises since the beginning of the year. In the month since the
previous interest rate decision, the share indices rose by 3.2 percent, while the stock
exchanges in most advanced economies remained steady, and those of emerging
markets rose by more than 2 percent. Nonetheless, the level of P/E ratios on the Tel
Aviv Stock Exchange is not higher than it was in the past.

**5. Israel’s financial risk, the sovereign risk premium, and foreign investment**
**house surveys**

Israel’s risk premium as measured by the five-year CDS spread continued to maintain
its stability in June, at around 17 basis points. The foreign investment houses continue
to describe Israel’s economy in a positive light. They consider that Israel’s
macroeconomic fundamentals remain strong. Moody’s point out that Israel’s
macroeconomic data are stronger than they have been for many years, and emphasize
the importance of lowering the debt/GDP ratio.

POB 780, 91007 Jerusalem Tel: 972–2–6552713

www.bankisrael.gov.il


-----

**6. Global economic developments**

Global economic activity remains strong, against the background of rapid economic
growth in markets around the world. The emerging Asian markets continue to
constitute an important source of momentum to the global economy, while the effect of
the relative slowdown in the US economy remains relatively muted. Global inflation
stayed relatively moderate, but the rise in oil and basic food prices, together with the
reduction of the output gap in the advanced economies, increases the chances of a
higher rate of global inflation. Against this background it is more probable that the
upward trend of interest rates will continue in many central banks throughout the
world. (See Appendix for more details.)

B. THE NARROW-FORUM DISCUSSION––THE INTEREST RATE DECISION
FOR AUGUST 2007

In the light of the developments since the previous interest rate decision (25/6/07), the
discussion focused on two possibilities: raising the interest rate by 25 basis points or
leaving it unchanged.
The major arguments for raising the interest rate by 25 basis points to 3.75 percent
were:

  - The expected rapid growth this year and next, and with it the further
contraction in the output gap (the difference between the actual output of the
economy and the output it could reach at full capacity) are reflected in inflation
in local prices, as estimated by the Bank of Israel's econometric models, which
continue to rise by a rate of more than 3 percent. Until the middle of May this
year, this rise in local prices was moderated by the fall in the prices of imported
goods and products whose prices are directly affected by the exchange rate,
mostly as a result of the strengthening of the shekel. In the absence of this
moderating factor, the consumer price index is rising at a far higher rate.

  - Factors acting to push up inflation in recent months are expected to bring
inflation back to within its target range during 2007, and to raise it close to the
upper boundary of the range in 2008. These factors strengthen the need to raise
the interest rate, given the time lags inherent in the effects of interest rate
policy.

  - Recently, the probability of a rise in the global inflation rate has increased
following a sharp rise in the prices of oil and basic foods. These are likely to
raise import prices and this will constitute an additional factor in pushing up
prices in the economy.

  - Given the trend of raising interest rates in the world against a background of an
increasing probability of a rise in the global inflation rate, the positive interest
rate gap between other countries and Israel is likely to rise, and to affect the
movement of short-term capital. This tends to weaken the shekel and thus
contributes to higher inflation, and in addition could be a factor leading to
financial instability.

POB 780, 91007 Jerusalem Tel: 972–2–6552713

www.bankisrael.gov.il


-----

In the discussion, the following points were raised in favor of leaving the interest rate
unchanged:

  - Assuming that the exchange rate were to remain around its level at the time of
the discussion, inflation would be likely to stay within its target range, even
without an increase in the interest rate. Furthermore, underlying factors that act
to strengthen the shekel, such as the surplus in the current account of the
balance of payments, continue to operate. Therefore it was not viewed as
necessary to raise the interest rate at this juncture.

Participants discussed the need for continued financial stability in the economy, and in
this context stressed the importance of maintaining budgetary discipline.

Three department directors recommended raising the interest rate by 25 basis points
while two recommended leaving the interest rate unchanged. The Governor decided to
raise the interest rate for August 2007 by 25 basis points to 3.75 percent.

The decision was made and published on July 23, 2007.

**Those present at the narrow-forum discussion:**
Prof. Stanley Fischer, Governor of the Bank of Israel
Prof. Zvi Eckstein, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Israel
Dr. Karnit Flug, Director of the Research Department
Dr. Edward Offenbacher, Director of the Monetary Department
Mr. Barry Topf, Director of the Foreign Currency Department
Mr. Balfour Ozer, Director of the Foreign Exchange Activity Department
Mr. Yossi Saadon, Bank of Israel Spokesperson

**Appendix: Major Global Economic Developments**

_U.S._
Recent macroeconomic data indicate accelerated economic activity in the US in the
second quarter, and according to assessments of the investment houses, growth is
expected to reach an annual rate of 2.9 percent, close to the US economy's potential
rate assessed at 3 percent a year. The Purchasing Managers Indices in the
manufacturing and services sectors reached their highest levels in a year. The
manufacturing sector is supported by the growth registered in export orders against a
background of a strong global economy and the depreciation of the dollar in the past
year. Retail sales data for June show that private consumption, which began to
moderate in the first quarter, continues to slow down. Orders for durable goods also
fell relatively sharply. The Consumer Confidence Index for July saw a relatively sharp
rise which is likely to signal a future recovery in private consumption. Various
indicators of activity in the housing market show a continuation in the weakening trend

POB 780, 91007 Jerusalem Tel: 972–2–6552713

www.bankisrael.gov.il


-----

and most investment houses believe that the slowdown in the housing market will
continue.
In contrast, labor market data for June point to a continuation in the positive trend of
recent months. The unemployment rate remains at 4.5 percent, and at the same time
both the number of employed and the level of wages increased.
In recent months the core inflation rate has moderated although it remains close to
the upper limit of the range that the Fed seems comfortable with, which puts the risks
to the inflation outlook on the upside, particularly in light of the high manufacturing
capacity utilization, pressures from the labor market, and the rise in energy prices. As
expected, the Fed left its federal funds interest rate unchanged this month at 5.25
percent. The investment houses and capital markets estimate that the Fed rate will
remain unchanged until the end of the year. Yields on 10-year US bonds stood, prior to
the interest rate discussion, on 22/7/07 at 4.95 percent.

_Europe_
Recent economic data for Europe indicate that the growth rate remained high in the
second quarter too. Purchasing Managers Indices for the services and manufacturing
sectors show that activity is strong in the euro zone in general and in the three major
economies in particular. European consumer confidence data remain positive and are
expected to continue supporting private consumption, currently in a positive trend,
against a background of further improvement in the labor market and further reduction
in the unemployment rate this month to 7 percent, the lowest level in 25 years. Strong
global growth continues to support European exports and corporate investment is
expected to remain high in the light of positive financial conditions, continued high
profitability, structural changes in balance sheets and increased corporate efficiency.
The investment houses expect, on average, that rapid growth will continue in the
second half of the year, and estimate that growth for 2007 will reach 2.7 percent.
Inflation over the previous twelve months remained at 1.9 percent in June. (The
inflation target ceiling is 2 percent). The ECB noted the threat to price stability in the
medium term in the light of a further rise in manufacturing capacity utilization, an
improvement in the labor market, the probability of upward pressures on wages, and
the rise in oil prices. The investment houses expect 2007 will end with high inflation,
close to the target boundary. As expected, the ECB decided to leave the interest rate
unchanged at 4 percent, while signaling that it intended to raise the interest rate at its
September meeting.

_Japan_
The rate of growth of the Japanese economy is expected to weaken in the second
quarter of 2007 after reaching the rate of 3.3 percent in the first quarter, in annual
terms. However, the Japanese economy is expected to continue growing moderately,
boosted mainly by the activity of the companies sector and continued growth in
exports. Household income continued to rise moderately, supporting private
consumption. Data on industrial production is expected to show improvement, against
a background of growth in demand, both domestic and abroad, supported by the strong
global economy. The investment houses on average expect growth in 2007 to reach 2.6
percent.

POB 780, 91007 Jerusalem Tel: 972–2–6552713

www.bankisrael.gov.il


-----

The underlying inflation rate over the past 12 months in Japan fell in May by 0.1
percent, further to similar falls in the three preceding months. According to the Bank
of Japan, CPI inflation is expected to stay at around zero in the short term, but to
switch to a positive trend in the long run. As was expected, the Bank of Japan did not
change the interest rate this month, leaving it at 0.5 percent. The Governor of the Bank
said that the Bank prefers to be more confident regarding the growth forecast before
raising the interest rate. The investment houses and financial markets expect that the
central bank will raise the interest rate by 25 basis points by the end of the year.

_The emerging markets_
In the last month too the emerging markets continued to present a positive picture,
against positive domestic data which indicate continued firming of domestic demand,
the positive global environment, the increase in world trade, as well as the high level
of liquidity in those markets. The greater-than-expected deceleration in the US
economy, developments in prices of energy and commodities, the geopolitical risks
and the large positions held by investors in the emerging markets, remained the major
risk factors in future global developments.
In China, growth for 2006 was revised upward from 10.7 percent to 11.1 percent.
Growth remained at 11.1 percent for the first quarter of the current year. In addition,
since the beginning of the year, foreign currency reserves grew at the central bank by
$266 billion, and now total about $1.3 trillion. This increase was registered following a
sharp expansion in the trade account surplus since the beginning of the year, and an
increase in nonresidents' direct investments. As a result, the rate of appreciation of the
yuan accelerated and the daily fluctuation band of the currency against the dollar may
be widened. Against the background of all these developments, there is growing
expectation of a rise in the interest rate in China.

POB 780, 91007 Jerusalem Tel: 972–2–6552713

www.bankisrael.gov.il


-----

