Bank of Israel

**Report to the public of the Bank of Israel’s discussions prior to setting the**
**interest rate for March 2007**

**The discussions took place on February 25 and 26, 2007**

March 2007

**General**

Before the Governor makes the monthly interest rate decision, discussions are held at
two levels. The first discussion takes place in a broad forum, in which the relevant
background economic conditions are presented, including real and monetary
developments in Israel’s economy and developments in the global economy.
Participants in this discussion include the Governor, the Deputy Governor, the
directors of the various economic departments of the Bank (the Research, Monetary,
Foreign Currency, and Foreign Exchange Activity departments) and economists from
various departments who prepare and present the material for discussion.
In the narrow forum, the directors of the economic departments present their
recommendations regarding the interest rate, and following a discussion, the Governor
makes his decision.

A. THE BROAD-FORUM DISCUSSION—THE STATE OF THE ECONOMY

**1. Developments on the real side**

_General_
Data on economic activity indicate the continuation of rapid growth. This data include
the National Accounts figures published in February, the composite state-of-theeconomy index, foreign trade data, tax revenues, and discussions with members of the
business and financial communities.

_National Accounts data_
National Accounts data show that the growth rate in the last quarter of 2006 was very
high: GDP surged by 8 percent, and business sector product by 12.8 percent. These
figures demonstrate the economy’s rapid recovery after the war in the north in the
third quarter of 2006. Housing investment rose by a healthy 18.9 percent in the fourth
quarter of 2006, and it appears that the recovery in the construction industry is
becoming more firmly based. Investors’ positive assessments of the state of the
economy are reflected by the 7.6 percent increase in investment in the principal
industries in 2006.
The National Accounts data from 2006 also highlight the 8.9 percent increase in
exports (excluding diamonds). Private consumption rose by 4.8 percent in 2006.

_Indices of real activity_


-----

Another indicator of the rapid expansion of economic activity is provided by the stateof-the-economy index, which was 0.9 percent higher in January 2007 than in
December 2006. The indices for November and December 2006 were adjusted
upwards by one-tenth of a percentage point each, to 0.5 percent and 0.7 percent
respectively. The rise in the index reflects an acceleration in activity compared with
previous months.
The index of manufacturing production rose by about 9 percent (in annual terms) in
the months October to December 2006, and the total sales revenue index rose by
about 11 percent in the same period.
Foreign trade data also indicate the continued expansion of economic activity.
Receipts for goods exports, excluding diamonds, were 8.6 percent higher in January
2007 than in December 2006 (in current dollars, monthly terms). Dollar payments for
good imports (excluding diamonds) were 3.5 percent higher in January than in
December.

_The current account of the balance of payments_
The current account surplus is expected to reach about $ 7 billion in 2006 (5 percent
of GDP), and the staff estimates that the surplus in 2007 will be larger.

_The labor market_
The rate of unemployment was 8.3 percent of the civilian labor force in November.
This followed a drop from 8.8 percent in the second quarter of 2006 to 8.3 percent in
the third quarter. The nominal wage per employee post in the business sector was
about 4 percent higher in January–October 2006 than in the equivalent period in 2005.
According to the employers' survey of the Ministry of Industry, Trade and Labor for
the fourth quarter of 2006, the time required to recruit new employees rose. This was
apparently affected by the low unemployment rate among those with a high level of
education; that rate has now reached the low levels of the mid-1990s.
Negotiations are currently in process on public sector wage agreements covering
the period from July 2005 onwards.

**2. Budget data**

Total government activity in January (excluding credit granted) resulted in a
budgetary surplus of about NIS 4.3 billion. This reflected tax revenues exceeding and
expenditure falling short of their seasonal paths. Tax revenues in January were 7.1
percent higher, in real terms, than in January 2006. Government expenditure in
January (excluding credit granted) was NIS 0.3 billion lower than the level consistent
with the budget proposal. The privatization of the Oil Refineries (“Bazan”) will
contribute to the continued reduction of the public-debt/GDP ratio in 2007.

**3. Developments on the nominal side**

_Inflation_
The Consumer Price Index (CPI) declined by 0.1 percent in January. This was in line
with forecasters’ predictions, and it is in the upper part of the seasonal path that is


-----

consistent with the inflation target. Adjusting for the seasonal factors, the index rose
by 0.3 percent.
In the previous twelve months the CPI has risen by 0.1 percent, so that the 12month retrospective inflation rate was below the target. The sharp drop in inflation in
the last year occurred against the background of the strengthening of the shekel
against the dollar.
If the components of the CPI are divided into those directly affected by the
exchange rate and the price-of-energy component (“imported” items), on the one
hand, and “domestic” components not affected by them, on the other, a marked
difference between the paths followed by the two groups is evident. The prices of the
domestic components of the index rose in 2006 by more than 2 percent, while prices
of the imported components of the index fell. Initial estimates regarding the first
quarter of 2007 suggest that prices of the domestic components continued to rise, and
of the imported elements continued to fall.

_Expectations and forecasts of inflation and of the Bank of Israel interest rate_
Inflation expectations to one year ahead derived from the capital market––break-even
inflation––rose in February to about 1.4 percent, after standing at about 1 percent in
January, and 1.3 percent in December. Some of the reduction in January may have
been due to technical factors. From January to September 2006 these expectations
were close to the midpoint of the inflation target range, and since October they have
been below the midpoint.
Israeli forecasters’ assessments of one-year inflation are close to the midpoint of
the target range, and this month the average of their forecasts is 1.8 percent. On
average they forecast that the February index will show a decline of 0.3 percent, and
that the March index will rise by 0.1 percent. In addition, inflation measured over the
previous twelve months is expected to be negative until the last quarter of 2007.
Most of the private forecasters’ predict that the Bank of Israel interest rate will
decline in March by 25 basis points, but on average they forecast that the rate in a
year’s time will be 4.4 percent.
Prior to the interest rate decision for March, the _makam curve reflected_
expectations in the financial markets that the Bank of Israel interest rate a year hence
will be at about the same level as at present.

_The makam and bond markets_
In the month prior to the interest rate decision, the five-year CPI-indexed interest rate
fell by 0.3 of a percentage point to 3.1 percent, and the 10-year indexed rate fell from
3.4 percent to 3.2 percent. The nominal yield on unindexed 5-year _Shahar_ bonds
declined from 5.2 percent to 5.0 percent, and on 10-year bonds it declined by 0.2 of a
percentage point, to 5.3 percent. The makam yield for one year remained steady last
month at 4.5 percent.

_The interest rate differential and the yield gap between Israel and abroad_
Before the current interest rate decision, the Bank of Israel interest rate was one
percentage point lower than the Federal Reserve rate. US capital market data indicate
a strong probability of no change in the US federal funds rate in the coming months.


-----

The gap between the yields on 10-year unindexed shekel bonds and US bonds of
the same term contracted during the last month from about 69 basis points to 62 basis
points.

_The expected real interest rate_
As a result of the cut in the Bank of Israel interest rate for February and the rise in
inflation expectations, the expected real interest rate for one year forward fell in
February from a level of 3.6 percent to about 2.9 percent, its lowest level in the last
year.

_The money supply_
The (M1) money supply has increased by 4.4 percent since the beginning of 2007,
after expanding by 7.5 percent in the whole of 2006.

_The econometric models[1]_
The various scenarios that were examined using one of the Bank of Israel’s
econometric models showed that in the scenario that included a 25-basis-point cut in
the interest rate (prior to the proposed reduction for March) and a certain depreciation
of the shekel, inflation would return to within the target range in the last quarter of
2007. In another scenario, rapid growth leading to activity in excess of potential
would return inflation to within the range towards the end of the year. In the scenarios
of a nominal strengthening of the shekel in the foreign currency markets, inflation
would remain below the target range throughout 2007.

**4. Capital flows, the foreign currency market, and the share market**

_Capital flows_
In the month since the last interest rate decision, the shekel strengthened against the
dollar, reflecting the weakening of the dollar world wide. The underlying conditions
of the large current account surplus and nonresidents’ investments in the economy
constitute basic forces for real appreciation.
Notable economic events in February include the IPO by Cellcom and the
privatization of the Oil Refineries (Bazan). The improvement of Israel’s rating
outlook by the S&P rating agency to “positive” also contributed to the strengthening
of the shekel.

_The foreign-currency market and the share market_
During the last month the shekel strengthened against the dollar from around NIS 4.25
to the dollar at the time of the previous interest rate decision to around NIS 4.19 in the
days prior to the current decision. The shekel strengthened slightly against the euro in
the last month, from NIS 5.49 to the euro at the time of the previous interest rate
decision, to NIS 5.47 in the days before the current decision.

1 The Bank of Israel uses econometric models to test various scenarios. Due to their nature, including the fact that
their results naturally depend on certain assumptions about relevant variables, the scenarios should be viewed as
one input among several in the discussions on the interest rate.


-----

The share price index continued to rise, and from the beginning of the year to 25
February the Tel Aviv 25 index rose by about 7.5 percent.

**5. Israel’s financial risk, the risk premium, and foreign investment house surveys**

Israel’s risk premium as measured by the five-year CDS spread went down a little
from 20 basis points at the time of the last interest rate decision to 18 basis points
currently. The yield gap between 10-year Shahar bonds and US government bonds of
the same term contracted from the time of the previous interest rate decision to date
by about 10 basis points.
The foreign investment houses continue to describe Israel’s economy in a
positive light, and commend its strong macroeconomic performance.
Most of the investment houses expect the shekel to continue its strong
performance. Nevertheless, a possible deterioration in the geopolitical situation in the
region, or a greater-than-expected slowdown of growth in the US economy that would
affect emerging markets in general and Israel in particular, still constitute risk factors.
The S&P rating agency raised Israel’s foreign- and local-currency credit rating
outlook from stable to positive, thus coming into line with the ratings of the other two
rating agencies that raised Israel’s rating to positive in the course of 2006. In its
announcement, S&P noted that the change in the outlook reflects Israel’s resilience to
geopolitical shocks. It also noted Israel’s forecast 4.5–5 percent growth for 2007, and
its positive macroeconomic conditions. S&P emphasized the risks related to the
outlook––the geopolitical situation and Israel’s high debt ratio.

**6. Global economic developments (full details in the Appendix)**

Most investment houses expect global growth of about 5 percent in 2007.
Economic data indicate that the expected slowdown in the US is having a limited
effect. Growth in Europe is becoming more firmly based, and the emerging markets
are continuing to show a positive picture.
The Fed is not expected to change the interest rate before the middle of the year.
The ECB is expected to raise its interest rates further in the next few months.

B. THE NARROW-FORUM DISCUSSION––THE INTEREST RATE DECISION
FOR FEBRUARY 2007

The inflation rate in the last twelve months was significantly below the target range,
and stands at 0.1 percent. The inflation estimates one year forward are below the
midpoint of the target range. Inflation expectations for one year forward derived from
the capital market stand at about 1.4 percent, and the average of the forecasts of
private economic forecasters is about 1.8 percent.
Most of the private forecasters expect a reduction of 25 basis points in the interest
rate for March, but the average of their forecasts for the Bank of Israel interest rate a
year hence, at 4.4 percent, is higher than the current rate. The expectation derived


-----

from the capital market via the makam yield curve is that the interest rate a year hence
will be at about the current level.
On average, the Israeli forecasters assess that the February CPI will fall by 0.3
percent, and that the March index will rise by 0.1 percent. Given the cumulative
negative indices from September to November 2006, inflation viewed retrospectively
over twelve months is expected to be below the target range for most of 2007.
In scenarios examined using the econometric models prior to the current interest
rate decision, a cut in the interest rate would result in inflation returning to within the
range in the last quarter of 2007. Likewise, rapid growth leading to the narrowing of
the output gap would act to bring inflation back within the target range. The return to
the target range of inflation and the interest rate required to achieve it depend to a not
inconsiderable degree on future exchange rate developments.
In the month preceding the current interest rate decision the financial indicators
in Israel continued to point to the strength of the economy. In the international
financial markets Israel’s sovereign risk premium, as measured in the 5-year CDS
market, continued to decline, and the yield gap between 10-year _Shahar bonds and_
US government bonds of the same term continued to narrow.
Israel’s economy is enjoying the benefits of several positive developments
reflecting the reduction in Israel's sovereign risk premium. Among the most
prominent features in 2006 were the growth in the current-account surplus and
impressive fiscal discipline. In January 2007 tax revenues were 7.1 percent higher
than in January 2006, and data on the budget performance in January shows tax
revenues exceeding and expenditure falling short of their expected seasonal paths.
These developments help bolster foreign investors’ faith in Israel’s economy, which is
reflected by the extent of foreign investments in Israel.
Changes in the exchange rate have relatively strong and rapid effects (to other
countries) on inflation in Israel. Last month the shekel strengthened against the dollar,
reflecting the global weakness of the dollar.
The data on real activity continue to indicate that the economy is still enjoying a
high rate of growth. National Accounts figures published in February show that GDP
increased by 8 percent in the last quarter of 2006 (annual rate), with part of the rapid
increase in activity making up for GDP lost due to the war in the north in the summer
of that year, which led to a decline of 0.7 percent in GDP in the third quarter. The rate
of unemployment was 8.3 percent in November. No inflationary pressures from the
labor market are evident as yet, due to the rapid rise in productivity that caused a
reduction in unit labor costs. The rate of reduction in unit labor costs has moderated,
however.
Some of the department directors who participated in the discussion
recommended leaving the interest rate for March unchanged. They drew attention to
the indicators that show the high rate of growth and the expected effect on inflation of
the narrowing of the output gap. In this context it was noted that activity had actually
accelerated in the last few months, as reflected in the recent rises in the composite
state-of-the-economy indices. It was noted further that surveys of expectations and
discussions with active players in the market also point to continued rapid growth
during 2007. The fact that stronger growth was becoming evident in the construction
industry after a long period of stagnation, was taken as another indication of increased


-----

demand. Those recommending no change in the interest rate observed that a
persistently rapid rate of growth was likely to lead to a situation in which economic
growth would exceed the rise in production inputs (labor and capital) plus the
expected rise in productivity, so that inflationary pressures were likely to emerge
during the year. They also noted the wage increases in the business sector, the low
unemployment rate among those with higher education, and the longer period of time
required to find workers to fill vacancies as early signs of possible future inflationary
pressures deriving from the labor market. Against this background, and in the wake of
the four consecutive cuts in the interest rate in the last four months, several of the
participants advised against a further cut in the interest rate this month, to allow more
time to examine the effect of the previous cuts in the rate.
It was also noted that a 25 basis points cut in the interest rate for March, taken
with the cumulative reductions made since November 2006, would bring the
cumulative reduction since then to 1.5 percentage points, and would make the Bank of
Israel’s rate 1.25 percentage points lower than the Fed rate.
Other participants in the discussion favored a reduction of 25 basis points in the
interest rate for March. In addition to the starting point of inflation being lower than
the target, and inflation expectations being lower than the midpoint of the target
range, they noted the further reduction in Israel’s sovereign risk premium. This,
together with the surplus in the current account and nonresidents’ investments in
Israel, serves to strengthen the shekel. Moreover, responsible fiscal policy was
mentioned as acting to reduce inflationary pressures, and attention was also drawn to
the downward trend in the public-debt/GDP ratio. These participants noted that as yet
there were no evident signs of inflationary pressures on the price indices, not even on
the indices of domestic prices (such as GDP prices) published by the Central Bureau
of Statistics. The participants who favored cutting the interest rate for March argued
that the proposed reduction was intended to increase the chances of a more rapid
return to a rate of inflation consistent with the target.
After considering the alternative recommendations, the Governor decided to
reduce the interest rate for March by 25 basis points, to 4 percent, mainly to
strengthen the probability that the inflation rate would return to within the target range
by the end of the year.

The decision was made and published on February 26, 2007.

**Those present at the discussion:**
Prof. Stanley Fischer, Governor of the Bank of Israel
Prof. Zvi Eckstein, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Israel
Dr. Karnit Flug, Director of the Research Department
Dr. Edward Offenbacher, Director of the Monetary Department
Mr. Barry Topf, Director of the Foreign Currency Department
Mr. Balfour Ozer, Director of the Foreign Exchange Activity Department
Dr. Ohad Bar-Efrat, Advisor to the Governor and Head of International Affairs
Mr. Gaby Fiszman, Chief of Staff to the Governor


-----

**Appendix: Major Global Economic Developments**

_U.S._
The rate of growth in the fourth quarter of 2006 was higher than expected, at 3.5
percent (annual rate). Nevertheless, this figure was expected to be adjusted downward
when the next figure was published, following the weak data for December published
after the announcement of the growth rate. In addition, macroeconomic data released
this month indicate a slowdown in activity and in inflation. The main scenario still
predicts a “soft landing.” This was expressed by the Chairman of the Fed in his
evidence to Congress and in the Fed’s forecast published in February. The Fed cut
back its growth forecast for 2007 from half a year ago, but the growth rates for this
year and next are still close to the rate considered to be the potential growth rate.
Private consumption, which constitutes about two-thirds of total demand, appears to
have barely been affected by the slowdown in the housing market.
The investment houses expect that the growth rate will fall in 2007 and 2008 and
will be close to the lower limit of the Fed forecast, at 2.5 percent and 2.8 percent
respectively, compared with 3.4 percent in 2006.
The Fed expects inflationary pressures to moderate, against the background of the
expected fall in energy prices and the expected slowdown in the growth rate. The
investment houses, on average, also expect a decline in inflation, to a level of 2
percent at the end of the first quarter of 2007, and to 1.5 percent thereafter.
The investment houses on average expect the Fed to lower the interest rate once
during the second half of the year. Futures contracts on the Fed interest rate reflect a
100 percent probability of a cut of 25 basis points in the rate by the end of the year.

_Europe_
Economic data from Europe continue to surprise on the upside. The growth rate for
the last quarter of 2006 was higher than expected, at 3.6 percent (annual rate). The
ECB believes growth will continue at close to its potential rate also in 2007. European
consumer confidence surveys continue to indicate that confidence is at a high level.
That will support increased private consumption, which is on a path of recovery
against the background of the further decline in unemployment and the ongoing
improvement in the labor market. The business sector is expected to continue
benefiting from advantageous financing conditions, structural changes in companies’
balance sheets, and from businesses’ increased profits and efficiency.
In the light of the above, the investment houses revised their growth forecasts
upwards.
The ECB expects inflation to fall in the next few months to below 2 percent, but
that it will rise again towards the end of the year.
As expected, the ECB left its interest rate unchanged in February at 3.5 percent.
Nevertheless, in its announcement the ECB clearly indicated its intention to raise the
rate at its next meeting, in March. The market factors in a certain rise of 25 basis
points in March, followed by a further rise by the end of the year. The investment
houses also expect the same development in the central bank’s interest rate.

_Japan_


-----

The growth rate in the last quarter of 2006 published this month, an annual rate of 4.8
percent, was higher than expected, and brought the growth rate for 2006 to 2.2
percent. The investment houses expect that growth will be at a similar level also in
2007.
Japan’s growth is led mainly by the business sector, which is enjoying high
profits. The rate of price rises of domestic goods slowed, against the background of
the worldwide fall in oil and goods prices. However the core inflation rate is still
tending upwards.
The Bank of Japan raised the interest rate in February by 25 basis points, to 0.5
percent.

_The emerging markets_
The emerging markets maintained their momentum. The high level of global liquidity
and the low yields in the advanced economies continued to spur investors to seek
excess yield in the emerging markets.
Rapid growth continued in India and China, and with it there was a rise in
inflation. In China the negative real rate of interest resulted in inflation of asset prices.
The central bank, attempting to deal with the rise in asset prices, has already raised
the liquidity requirement twice since the beginning of the year, so far without much
evident impact.
Economists assess that if the emerging markets use their current account
surpluses prudently to invest in their infrastructures, their rates of growth are expected
to continue rising, which will support global growth also in the next few years.


-----

