**Bank of Israel**

**Report to the public of the Bank of Israel’s discussions prior to setting the**
**interest rate for February 2007**

**The discussions took place on January 28 and 29, 2006**

February 2007

**General**

Before the Governor makes the monthly interest rate decision, discussions are held at
two levels. The first discussion takes place in a broad forum, in which the relevant
background economic conditions are presented, including real and monetary
developments in Israel’s economy and developments in the global economy.
Participants in this discussion include the Governor, the Deputy Governor, the
directors of the various economic departments of the Bank (the Research, Monetary,
Foreign Currency, and Foreign Exchange Activity departments) and economists from
various departments who prepare and present the material for discussion.
In the narrow forum, the directors of the economic departments present their
recommendations regarding the interest rate, and following a discussion, the Governor
makes his decision.

A. THE BROAD-FORUM DISCUSSION—THE STATE OF THE ECONOMY

**1. Developments on the real side**

_General_
Economic activity continued to increase at the fast rate evident in the first half of
2006. Assessments in the Bank of Israel are that growth in 2007 will persist at close to
5 percent. The outstanding feature of the balance of payments is the significant
current account surplus, which is expected to be almost 5 percent of GDP in 2006,
with its positive trend predicted to continue in 2007.

_Indices of real activity_
The Bank of Israel Companies Survey for the last quarter of 2006 indicates that
business activity continued to expand rapidly, and that companies’ financial managers
expect fast growth in the next few months. The Survey reports a rise in activity in the
last quarter of 2006 in the manufacturing, construction, and trade and service
industries, and a more moderate increase in transport and communications. Activity in


-----

the tourist industry remained at a modest level. The Survey reported expectations of a
further rapid increase in activity in most industries in the first quarter of 2007
Another indicator that pointed to a rapid rise in activity was provided by the
composite state-of-the-economy index, which rose from November to December by
0.6 percent. The indices for October and November––whose low rates of increase
when initially reported were one of the few signals of slowing growth in the
economy––were revised upwards, to a rise of 0.4 percent in each, following a rise of
about 0.5 percent each month from July to September.

_Goods imports and exports_
Manufactured goods exports (excluding diamonds, ships and planes) rose in dollar
terms by 14.4 percent in 2006 compared to 2005, and totaled $ 30.1 billion. Goods
imports (excluding diamonds, ships, planes and energy products) amounted to
$ 31 billion in 2006, an increase of almost 10 percent over the level in 2005.

_The current account of the balance of payments_
The current account surplus is expected to reach about $ 7 billion (5 percent of GDP)
in 2006, and it is assessed that its positive trend will persist in 2007, with the
improvement in the deficit in the goods account making a significant contribution.

_The labor market_
The rate of unemployment was 8.3 percent of the civilian labor force in October and
November. This followed a drop from 8.8 percent in the second quarter of 2006 to 8.3
percent in the third quarter. The nominal wage per employee post in the business
sector was about 4 percent higher in January–October 2006 than in the equivalent
period in 2005, a rise of 1.3 percent in real terms. The rise in the real wage was lower
than the rise in productivity, so that unit labor costs posted a decline.

Negotiations started recently on public sector wage agreements covering the period
from July 2005 onwards.

**2. Budget data**

The total government deficit in 2006, excluding net credit granted, was 0.9 percent of
GDP. Most of the drop in the deficit derived from revenues exceeding the original
budget estimates by about NIS 12 billion (2 percent of GDP), with about half of the
increase in revenues coming from non-recurring sources. The implementation of
expenditure was in accordance with the original budget, despite the costs of the war.

The Knesset approved the budget framework for 2007 determined by the government.
The budget deficit in 2007 is expected to be below the ceiling set by the government
of 2.9 percent of GDP.


-----

**3. Developments on the nominal side**

_Inflation_
The Consumer Price Index (CPI) did not change in December, following its
cumulative drop of 1.7 percent in September–November. The unchanged CPI in
December was slightly higher than the average of the forecasts, and was in line with
the seasonal path consistent with the inflation target.
In the last twelve months the CPI fell by 0.1 percent, so that inflation in 2006 was
lower than the target. The sharp drop in inflation is to be seen against the background
of the strengthening of the shekel against the dollar by 8.2 percent in 2006 and the
rapid and heavy impact of changes in the exchange rate on inflation in Israel.
If the components of the CPI are divided into those directly affected by the
exchange rate and the price-of-energy component, on the one hand, and “domestic”
components not affected by them, on the other, it can be seen that the “domestic”
components of the price index rose in 2006 by more than 2 percent, while prices of
the “imported” components of the index fell.

_Expectations and forecasts of inflation and of the Bank of Israel interest rate_
Inflation expectations to one year ahead derived from the capital market––break-even
inflation––continued along their downward path, and in January stood at an average
of about 1 percent, after falling to about 1.3 percent in December from 1.5 percent in
November. From January to September 2006 these expectations were close to the
midpoint of the inflation target range, and since October they have been below the
midpoint.
Israeli forecasters’ assessments of one-year inflation are close to the midpoint of
the target range, and this month the average of their forecasts rose to 1.9 percent.
The average of their forecasts of the Bank of Israel’s interest rate in a year’s time
is 4.5 percent.
Prior to the interest rate decision for February, the _makam curve was negative,_
reflecting expectations of a further decline in the interest rate.

_The makam and bond markets_
In the month prior to the interest rate decision, the five-year CPI-indexed interest rate
fell by 0.2 of a percentage point to 3.4 percent, and the 10-year indexed rate fell from
3.6 percent to 3.5 percent. The nominal yield on unindexed 5-year _Shahar_ bonds
declined from 5.4 percent to 5.3 percent, and on 10-year bonds it declined by 0.1 of a
percentage point, to 5.6 percent. The makam yield for one year went down in the last
month from 5 percent to 4.6 percent.

_The interest rate differential and the yield gap between Israel and abroad_
Before the current interest rate decision, the Bank of Israel interest rate was 75 basis
points lower than the Federal Reserve rate. US capital market data indicate a strong
probability of no change in the US federal funds rate in the coming months.
The gap between the yields on 10-year unindexed shekel bonds and US bonds of
the same term contracted significantly during the last month from 104 basis points to
73 basis points.


-----

_The expected real interest rate_
As the previous cut in the Bank of Israel interest rate, for January, was greater than
the drop in inflation expectations, the expected real interest rate for one year forward
fell in January from a level of 3.9 percent to about 3.6 percent.

_The money supply_
The money supply (M1) increased by 7.3 percent in 2006. This is a modest rise
compared with the rates in previous years. In 2005 the money supply increased by 24
percent.

_The econometric models[1]_
The various scenarios that were examined using one of the Bank of Israel’s
econometric models showed that in the scenario that included a cut in the interest rate
and the consequent nominal depreciation of the shekel, inflation would return to
within the target range in the last quarter of 2007. The elements in the model acting to
lower the interest rate derive from the appreciation of the shekel against the dollar in
the last three quarters, and the low rate of inflation in the last quarter of 2006.
According to the model, these factors are conducive to low rates of price increases
also in the first quarter of 2007.

**4. Capital flows, the foreign-currency market, and the share market**

_Capital flows_
In the month since the last interest rate decision, the downward trend of the NIS/$
exchange rate (i.e., the strengthening of the shekel against the dollar) halted.
Nevertheless, the underlying conditions of the current account surplus and
nonresidents’ investments in the economy constitute basic forces for real appreciation.
As mentioned above, the positive trend in the current account surplus is expected
to continue in 2007, and to rise to more than 5 percent of GDP.

_The foreign-currency market and the share market_
During the last month the shekel weakened a little against the dollar. At the time of
the previous interest rate decision the exchange rate was around NIS 4.22 to the
dollar, and in the days prior to the current decision, around NIS 4.24. The shekel
strengthened against the euro in the last month, from NIS 5.55 to the euro at the time
of the previous interest rate decision, to NIS 5.48 in the days prior to the current
decision.
The Tel Aviv 100 share price index rose by about 4 percent in the period from the
beginning of the year to 28 January.

**5. Israel’s financial risk, the risk premium, and foreign investment house surveys**

1 The Bank of Israel uses econometric models to test various scenarios. Due to their nature, including the fact that
their results naturally depend on certain assumptions about relevant variables, the scenarios should be viewed as
one input among several in the discussions on the interest rate.


-----

Israel’s risk premium as measured by the five-year CDS spread went down from 23
basis points at the time of the last interest rate decision to 20 basis points currently,
similar to the reduction in CDS spreads in other emerging-market economies. The
yield gap between 10-year Shahar bonds and US government bonds of the same term
contracted from the time of the previous interest rate decision to date by about 30
basis points.
The foreign investment houses continue to describe Israel’s economy in a
positive light, and commend its strong macroeconomic performance. Specifically,
they emphasize the buoyant rate of growth, the current account surplus, and the extent
of direct investment, all of which are expected to continue along the positive trend in
2007. They also note in their reviews that since Israel is less exposed to speculative
activity than are other emerging markets, it is less vulnerable to a possible rise in risk
aversion among foreign investors.
Most of the investment houses expect the shekel to continue its strong
performance, although a possible deterioration in the geopolitical situation in the
region or a greater-than-expected slowdown of growth in the US economy that would
affect emerging markets in general and Israel in particular still constitute risk factors.

**6. Global economic developments (full details in the Appendix)**

Global growth is expected to remain high in 2007, and according to the IMF forecast
is expected to reach 5 percent, compared with 5.1 percent in 2006. The latest figures
of the US economy indicate a “soft landing” (a moderate slowing of economic
growth).
Economic data from other regions of the world show limited reaction to the
expected US slowdown. Growth in Europe has been sustained and is becoming more
robust, the emerging markets are continuing to show a favorable picture, while China
and India are maintaining their impressively rapid growth. Japanese growth remains
moderate.
Most of the world’s leading central banks are expected to have a tightening bias.
The path of the interest rate in the US depends on growth and inflation there, and the
Fed is not expected to change the interest rate in the near future. The Bank of England
raised the interest rate at its meeting in January. The ECB and the Bank of Japan are
expected to further raise their interest rates in the next few months.

B. THE NARROW-FORUM DISCUSSION––THE INTEREST RATE DECISION
FOR FEBRUARY 2007

The inflation rate in the last twelve months was significantly below the target range,
and stands at –0.1 percent. The inflation estimates and expectations to twelve months
ahead are lower than the midpoint of the target range. Inflation expectations derived
from the capital market stand at about 1.0 percent, and the average of the forecasts of
private economic forecasters are about 1.9 percent.


-----

In the three months from September to November 2006 the CPI fell by a total of
almost 2 percent, and the index for December remained unchanged. The participants
in the discussion stressed that the low rate of inflation was expected to continue in the
first quarter. The assessment was that the rate of inflation viewed retrospectively over
twelve months for the first quarter would be negative, and only in the second quarter
would the monthly CPI inflation figures rise to rates in line with the target inflation
path. Given the negative rate of inflation, viewed over the previous twelve months, in
recent months, inflation is expected to remain below the target range for most of
2007. The aim of achieving the inflation target for 2007 was stressed in the
discussion, as well as the Bank of Israel's equal treatment of a deviation from the
target, whether it had undershot or overshot it.
Prior to the interest rate decision for February, the expectation derived from the
capital market was of a reduction in the interest rates during the coming year
following the recent drop in inflation. Private forecasters expected the Bank of Israel
interest rate to be around 4.5 percent at the end of 2007.
According to the scenarios derived from the econometric models, subject to a
reduction in the interest rate, there is a relatively high probability that inflation would
revert to the target range in the last quarter of 2007. The return to within the target
inflation range and the rate of interest required for this depend to no small degree on
the future changes in the exchange rate.
In the month prior to the current interest rate decision the financial indicators in
Israel continued to strengthen. In the international financial markets Israel’s country
risk premium, as measured in the 5-year CDS market, continued to decline. The yield
gap between 10-year _Shahar bonds and US government bonds of the same term_
continued to narrow, and in the past month narrowed considerably.
The strengthening of the shekel, which acted to push inflation down, expresses
several positive developments reflecting the reduction in Israel's country risk
premium. In 2006, the growth in the current-account surplus stood out, and this is
expected to grow further in 2007. Fiscal discipline was also impressive. Despite the
hostilities in the north and the associated government expenditure, the budget deficit
for 2006 totaled about 0.9 percent of GDP, lower than the budget ceiling. In 2007 too
the budget deficit is expected to be lower than the ceiling approved by the Knesset of
2.9 percent of GDP. These developments contribute to the growing confidence of
foreign investors in Israel’s economy, reflected by the amount of foreign investment.
As in the past, the participants stressed the relatively strong and rapid effect that
the exchange rate has on inflation in Israel. The shekel's strengthening against the
dollar in previous months had contributed significantly to the low inflation figures.
However in contrast to recent months when the shekel had strengthened against the
dollar, the shekel/dollar exchange rate at the time of the discussion was similar to the
rate at the time of the previous month's interest rate discussion.
The data on real activity continue to indicate that the economy is still enjoying a
high rate of growth. Assessments presented in the discussion pointed to growth of 5.0
percent in 2006 and a similar rate in 2007. The rate of unemployment stabilized in
recent months and stands at 8.3 percent. No inflationary pressures from the labor
market are evident at this stage, and the real wage has edged up by only a moderate


-----

amount, lower than the rise in productivity such that unit labor costs remain on the
downward trend of the past two years.
All the participants favored a reduction of 25 basis points in the interest rate for
February. Referring to the factors allowing a reduction in interest rate for February, in
addition to the starting point of inflation being lower than the target, the further drop
in Israel's country risk premium was noted. This reduction in risk premium, together
with the current-account surplus and the foreign investment in the economy,
constitute a factor acting to strengthen the shekel. Furthermore, the responsible budget
policy was also noted as a factor that reduced inflationary pressures, as the low budget
deficits reduce the (net) pressure of government demand for funds in the economy.
In considering forces that could tend to increase inflation, participants focused on
the rapid growth rate of the economy and the associated narrowing of the output gap.
These act over time to increase pressure on prices, and it was noted that there were
already indicators reflecting this pressure on domestic prices. However, recent data
show no inflationary pressures from rising unit labor costs.
It was also noted that a reduction in the interest rate for February would add to
the cumulative interest rate reduction of 1 percentage point in the three months prior
to this decision. After a cut in the interest rate of 25 basis points for February, the
Bank of Israel interest rate would be 1 percentage point below the US Federal Reserve
rate, and this at a time when the indications from most leading central banks
worldwide are for a rise in short-term interest rates.
Some participants noted that after a 25 basis point reduction in the interest rate
for February, they thought it likely that the process of interest rate reductions would
be coming to a close. Most of the participants were of the opinion that it was
preferable at this stage to give no indication regarding interest rate decisions for the
coming months.
In conclusion, in light of the highly favorable background conditions, in terms of
falling country risk premium, levels of current-account surplus in the balance of
payments, and the inflow of foreign investment into Israel, the departmental directors
participating in the discussion considered a reduction in the interest rate of 25 basis
points for February was consistent with achieving the inflation target for 2007. The
participants emphasized the importance that the Bank of Israel attaches to the inflation
target, and stressed that the reduction in this month's interest rate was a step intended
to increase the probability that price rises return quickly to a rate consistent with the
target inflation.
All the departmental directors participating in the discussion recommended
reducing the interest rate for February by 25 basis points, and after considering their
recommendations, the Governor decided to reduce the interest rate by 25 basis points.
The Bank of Israel interest rate for February will therefore be 4.25 percent.

The decision was made and published on January 29, 2007.

**Those present at the discussion:**
Prof. Stanley Fischer, Governor of the Bank of Israel
Prof. Zvi Eckstein, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Israel
Dr. Karnit Flug, Director of the Research Department


-----

Dr. Edward Offenbacher, Director of the Monetary Department
Mr. Barry Topf, Director of the Foreign Currency Department
Mr. Balfour Ozer, Director of the Foreign Exchange Activity Department
Dr. Ben Z. Schreiber, Deputy Director of the Foreign Exchange Activity Department
Dr. Ohad Bar-Efrat, Advisor to the Governor and Head of International Affairs
Mr. Gaby Fiszman, Chief of Staff to the Governor


-----

**Appendix: Major Global Economic Developments**

_U.S._
The macroeconomic date published this month were generally positive and attested to
stronger than expected economic activity in the fourth quarter of 2006. The
investment houses revised their growth forecasts upward for the fourth quarter from
2.1 percent to 3 percent, regarded as the US potential growth rate.
Private consumption remained strong despite the fear of a moderating effect of
the slowdown seen in recent months in the housing market. Retail sales were
surprisingly good and at the same time the consumer confidence index remained high.
The growth outlook for the first quarter of 2007 remains subject to upside risks
mainly due to the background of the positive momentum already established so far
this year. The investment houses expect growth in 2007 to slow down during the year
to below the US potential growth rate.
The risks of continued inflationary pressures, particularly from the labor market,
remain against a background of continued increases in average hourly earnings and an
unemployment rate that stands at 4.5 percent. However, the Fed expects inflationary
pressures to moderate over time, against a background of falling energy prices and the
expected decline in the growth rate to below its potential. Investment houses also
expect, on average, that inflation will fall to 2 percent at the end of the last quarter of
2006 and to below 2 percent in the second quarter of 2007.
The positive data on US economic activity led the investment houses to change
their forecasts for when the Fed will begin cutting its discount rate. Until now they
had estimated that the Fed would reduce its rate by 25 basis points by the first quarter
of 2007 but they now believe this will occur only in the third quarter. At the same
time, in the past month we have witnessed the convergence of the market regarding its
forecast for the Fed; Fed funds futures price in a 25 basis point cut in the Fed rate only
by the end of the year, compared to a 50 basis point cut, seen in last month's futures.

_Europe_
Economic data published recently point to self-sustaining and broadening growth in
the euro area, with domestic demand still the main driver of growth. Various
confidence surveys remain at very high levels and point to robust growth. At the same
time, data on European consumer confidence continue to show private consumption
on a recovery path against a background of a continuously falling unemployment rate
and further improvement in the labor market. The global economy remains strong and
continues to provide support to the European export sector.
Germany stands out as particularly strong compared to the other countries in the
euro area, and is expected to continue leading growth in Europe in 2007. The
investment houses expect growth in Europe to ease to 1.4 percent in the first quarter
of 2007, and then to accelerate again to a rate of 1.9 percent as early as in the second
quarter.
The rate of inflation remained unchanged in December at 1.9 percent in annual
terms. Developments in oil prices and the effect of rising indirect taxation will
continue to play an important role in setting the inflation path at the beginning of
2007. The European Central Bank expects inflation to hover both this year and next


-----

around 2 percent, the bank's inflation target. The investment houses expect similar
movements. The outlook for price developments remains subject to upside risks,
stemming in particular from a stronger than anticipated pass-through of oil price
increases in 2006. At the same time the continued rapid growth in money supply and
in private sector credit constitute a factor of risk for price stability in the medium and
long term.
As expected the ECB left its interest rate unchanged at 3.5 percent this month.
However the bank did signal to the market its intention to raise rates at its meeting in
March and not in February as the market had factored in. As a result, the market now
prices in a certain rise of 25 basis points in March and a further rise after that by the
end of the year. The investment houses expected similar developments in the ECB
interest rates.

_Japan_
Japan's central bank expects the economy to continue growing at a moderate pace.
Exports are expected to grow further, supported by the favorable global environment,
and domestic demand is expected to expand supported by increased company profits
and a modest rise in household income. The investment houses expect, on average,
growth of 2.3 percent in the fourth quarter of 2006, to be followed by further growth
in the first half of 2007.
The rate of price increases on domestic products slowed down against a
background of falling prices of oil and commodities globally. However the rate of rise
in core inflation remains on a positive trend.
Against a background of moderate growth figures and low inflation, the Bank of
Japan left its interest rate unchanged this month at 0.25 percent. For the first time
since March 2006, its interest rate decision was not unanimous, and opinions of the
central bank board were divided principally over the strength of private consumption.
The governor of the Bank pointed out that he required more data on consumer
expenditure and inflation in order to decide the correct time to act. Nevertheless, the
Bank still tends towards tighter money. The investment houses expect a rise of 25
basis points in the interest rate in the first quarter of 2007.

_The emerging markets_
The economies of the emerging markets continued to exhibit buoyancy, with further
improvement in the last month. The background to this improvement was provided by
their positive domestic data and the more positive global environment, as well as the
high level of market liquidity. The growth process in the emerging markets, which has
benefited from the inflow of foreign investments and the increase in world trade, is
likely to become based more on domestic demand. Economists are of the opinion that
if the emerging market economies make good use of their current account surpluses to
invest in development and their infrastructures, their rate of growth is likely to
increase further and thus continue to contribute to the global economy in the next few
years.


-----

