Bank of Israel

**Report to the public of the Bank of Israel’s discussions prior to setting the**
**interest rate for April 2007**

**The discussions took place on March 25 and 26, 2007**

April 2007

**General**

Before the Governor makes the monthly interest rate decision, discussions are held at
two levels. The first discussion takes place in a broad forum, in which the relevant
background economic conditions are presented, including real and monetary
developments in Israel’s economy and developments in the global economy.
Participants in this discussion include the Governor, the Deputy Governor, the
directors of the various economic departments of the Bank (the Research, Monetary,
Foreign Currency, and Foreign Exchange Activity departments) and economists from
various departments who prepare and present the material for discussion.

In the narrow forum, the directors of the economic departments present their
recommendations regarding the interest rate, and following a discussion, the Governor
makes his decision.

A. THE BROAD-FORUM DISCUSSION—THE STATE OF THE ECONOMY

**1. Developments on the real side**

_General and Bank of Israel forecast for 2007_
Data on economic activity indicate continued rapid growth. In March, the Central
Bureau of Statistics revised the National Accounts data for 2006. According to the
revised data, GDP grew in 2006 by 5.1 percent, private consumption by 4.8 percent,
fixed asset investment by 6.4 percent and exports (excluding diamonds) by 9.3
percent. Due to the rapid growth, the unemployment rate fell during 2006 from 8.8
percent in the first quarter of the year to 7.7 percent in the fourth quarter.

The Bank of Israel's latest forecast for 2007 shows expected GDP growth of 5.1
percent and business sector growth of 6.2 percent. In comparison to the previous
forecast of last December, the Bank of Israel has raised its forecast for growth by half
a percentage point. In 2007, unemployment is expected to reach on average 7.5
percent, compared to an average of 8.4 percent in 2006.

In the Bank of Israel's revised forecast for 2007, private consumption is expected to
grow by 4.4 percent, compared to 4 percent in the previous forecast in December
2006.


-----

_Indices of real activity_
In February, the combined state-of-the-economy index rose slightly less than
expected, by 0.3 percent. Furthermore, the combined index for recent months was
revised downward from 0.9 percent to 0.5 percent for January and from 0.7 percent to
0.5 percent for last December.

The latest data point to an expansion in the general productivity index as a factor in
the rise in the state-of-the-economy index, while the decline in the manufacturing
production index moderated the rate of expansion.

The seasonally-adjusted monthly foreign trade figures show that in February hightech exports declined by about 17 percent and manufacturing exports fell by about 14
percent. Total imports of goods (seasonally adjusted) were 2.2 percent higher in
February than in January.

_The labor market_
The rate of unemployment fell to 7.7 percent of the civilian labor force in the last
quarter of 2006, compared to 8.3 percent in the preceding quarter. The rate of
employment rose by 0.3 percentage points, reaching 51.3 percent of the population of
working age. The rate of participation in the labor force was stable relative to its level
in the third quarter.

The nominal wage per employee post in the business sector rose in the last quarter
of 2006 by about 3.8 percent compared to the same quarter of 2005.

**2. Budget data**

The domestic government budget surplus in the first months of the year totaled about
NIS 6.5 billion (about 1 percent of annual GDP), which was NIS 5 billion higher than
the seasonal path consistent with meeting the budget target. The source of the surplus
is mainly the additional collection of income taxes. Total tax revenues (adjusted for
legislative changes) in January-February were some 10 percent higher than in the
same period of last year. Expenditure in January-February was about NIS 0.5 billion
lower than the budgeted levels.

**3. Developments on the nominal side**

_Inflation_
The Consumer Price Index (CPI) declined by 0.3 percent in February, in line with
forecasters’ predictions. Adjusting for seasonal factors, the index fell by 0.4 percent.
With the decline in the CPI in February, the seasonal path of inflation is below that
consistent with the inflation target.

Over the past twelve months the CPI has fallen by 0.8 percent, significantly
below the target. Excluding housing, the CPI has fallen by 0.4 percent over the past
twelve months.


-----

If the components of the CPI are divided into those directly affected by the
exchange rate and the price-of-energy component (“imported” items) on the one hand,
and “domestic” components not affected by them on the other, a marked difference
between the paths followed by the two groups is evident in the past year. The prices
of the domestic components of the index continued to rise in the first quarter of 2007.
In contrast, the prices of the imported components of the index continued to fall in the
first quarter of 2007 further to the decline over the past year.

_Expectations and forecasts of inflation and of the Bank of Israel interest rate_
Inflation expectations for one year ahead derived from the capital market––breakeven inflation––remained unchanged in March at about 1.4 percent, below the
midpoint of the target range. Since October 2006, these expectations have been below
the midpoint.

Israeli forecasters’ assessments of one-year inflation are close to the midpoint of
the target range, and this month the average of their forecasts is 2.3 percent, an
increase of 0.4 percentage points relative to the previous month. On average they
forecast that the March index will rise by 0.2 percent, and that the April index will
rise by 0.7 percent. Over the next three months––March to May––the forecasters
expect the CPI to rise in total by between 1 and 1.5 percent. However, inflation
measured over the previous twelve months is expected to remain negative until the
last quarter of 2007.

Most of the private forecasters predict that the Bank of Israel interest rate will
remain unchanged in April and May, but on average they forecast that the rate in a
year’s time will be 4.2 percent.

Prior to the interest rate decision for April, the _makam curve reflected_
expectations in the financial markets that the Bank of Israel interest rate a year hence
will be at about the same level as at present.

_The makam and bond markets_
In the month prior to the interest rate decision, the five-year CPI-indexed interest rate
rose by 0.1 of a percentage point to 3.2 percent, and the 10-year indexed rate rose by
0.1 of a percentage point from 3.2 percent to 3.3 percent. The nominal yield on
unindexed 5-year Shahar bonds remained stable at 5.1 percent, and on 10-year bonds
it declined by 0.1 of a percentage point, to 5.3 percent. The makam yield for one year
declined last month from 4.5 percent to 4.4 percent.

_The interest rate differential and the yield gap between Israel and abroad_
Before the current interest rate decision, the Bank of Israel interest rate was 1.25
percentage points lower than the Federal Reserve rate. US capital market data indicate
a strong probability of no change in the US federal funds rate in the coming months.

The gap between the yields on 10-year unindexed shekel bonds and US bonds of
the same term increased during the last month from about 66 basis points to 72 basis
points.


-----

_The expected real interest rate_
The expected real interest rate for one year forward fell in March from a level of 2.9
percent to 2.7 percent––its lowest level in the past year––following the sharp decline
in February from 3.6 percent to about 2.9 percent.

_The money supply_
The (M1) money supply has increased by 8.9 percent since the beginning of 2007,
after expanding by 8.2 percent in the whole of 2006.

_The econometric models[1]_

Various scenarios were examined using the Bank of Israel’s econometric models.
According to the Research Department's model, in the scenario with the interest rate
remaining fixed and assuming relative stability in the exchange rate, inflation would
return to within the target range in the last quarter of 2007, following the drop in the
unemployment rate and the decline in the short-term real interest rates that have
already occurred. According to the Monetary Department's model, some depreciation
of the shekel would return inflation to within the range. The results of the models are
sensitive to changes in the exchange rate.

**4. Capital flows, the foreign currency market, and the share market**

_Capital flows_
In the month since the last interest rate decision, the shekel traded at about the same
level against the dollar, and weakened by about 1 percent against the euro.

The negative interest rate gap between the shekel and the dollar was a factor in
the last month contributing to the export of short-term capital by the business sector
and nonresidents. In contrast, an inflow of capital was registered in the past month as
a result of nonresidents' investments in Israel, Israelis' redemptions of mutual funds in
foreign currency, and the sale of investments abroad by institutional investors.

_The foreign-currency market and the share market_
As mentioned above, in the month since the last interest rate decision, until a few days
before the current discussion, the shekel remained stable against the dollar, at around
NIS 4.20 to the dollar, while during the past month the dollar weakened against other
currencies. The shekel weakened against the euro in the last month by about 1
percent, from NIS 5.53 to the euro at the time of the previous interest rate decision, to
NIS 5.58 in the days before the current decision.

In the first week of March, the leading share indices on the Tel Aviv Stock
Exchange fell by about 5 percent. At the same time, the leading share indices fell
sharply in many developed and developing markets. During the past month, the
volatility of the Tel Aviv stock exchange rose, similarly to developments in the main
stock markets around the world.

1 The Bank of Israel uses econometric models to test various scenarios. Due to their nature, including the fact that
their results naturally depend on certain assumptions about relevant variables, the scenarios should be viewed as
one input among several in the discussions on the interest rate.


-----

**5. Israel’s financial risk, the risk premium, and foreign investment house surveys**

Israel’s risk premium as measured by the five-year CDS spread remained stable in
March at around 18 basis points. The yield gap between 10-year _Shahar bonds and_
US government bonds of the same term increased from the time of the previous
interest rate decision to date by about 6 basis points.

The foreign investment houses continue to describe Israel’s economy in a
positive light, and commend its strong macroeconomic performance.

**6. Global economic developments (full details in the Appendix)**

Most investment houses expect global growth of more than 5 percent in 2007. Growth
in the US is expected to slow from a pace of 3.4 percent in 2006 to around
2.6 percent in 2007, while growth in Europe is expected to slow from 2.8 percent in
2006 to 2.3 percent in the current year. China's economy is expected to grow by about
10 percent, and India's by 8.3 percent.

The Fed is not expected to change the interest rate before the middle of the year.
The ECB raised its interest rate in the past month to 3.75 percent, and is expected to
raise its interest rates by a further 0.25 percentage points before the end of the year.

B. THE NARROW-FORUM DISCUSSION––THE INTEREST RATE DECISION
FOR APRIL 2007

The inflation rate in the last twelve months, minus 0.8 percent, was significantly
below the target range. Inflation expectations for one year forward derived from the
capital market stand at 1.4 percent, and the average of the forecasts of Israeli
economic forecasters is about 2.3 percent.

Prior to this current interest rate decision, most of the private forecasters expected
that the Bank of Israel would not change the interest rate for April, but the average of
the assessments of the Israeli forecasters is that in a year’s time the Bank’s interest
rate will be higher than the current level, at 4.2 percent. The expectation derived from
the capital market via the makam yield curve is that the interest rate a year hence will
be at about its current level.

On average, the Israeli forecasters assess that the March CPI will rise by 0.2
percent, and that the April index will rise by 0.7 percent. Given the cumulative
negative indices from September to November 2006, inflation viewed retrospectively
over twelve months is expected to be below the target range for most of 2007. The
CPI over the next three months, i.e., from March to May, is expected to rise by a total
of between 1 percent and 1.5 percent.

The scenarios examined using the econometric models show that in addition to
the reduction in the short-term real interest rate, the decline in unemployment would
act to return inflation to within the target range. The interest rate required to attain the
inflation target depends to a considerable degree on future exchange rate
developments.


-----

In the month preceding the current interest rate decision the international
financial markets became more volatile. Nonetheless, Israel’s sovereign risk premium,
as measured in the 5-year CDS market, remained steady. The yield gap between 10year Shahar bonds and US government bonds of the same term widened by less than
10 basis points in the last month.

Israel’s economy is enjoying the benefits of several positive developments, the
most notable of which is the current account surplus, which in 2006 reached about 5
percent of GDP. Fiscal discipline too was notable. In January and February 2007 tax
revenues exceeded and expenditure fell short of their expected seasonal paths. These
developments help bolster foreign investors’ faith in Israel’s economy, which is
reflected by the extent of foreign investments in Israel. In the discussion the point was
made that the expected surplus in the current account tends to strengthen the shekel.

The data on real activity continue to indicate a high rate of growth. No
inflationary pressures from the labor market are evident as yet, due to the rapid rise in
productivity that caused a reduction in unit labor costs. However, the rate at which
unit labor costs are falling has slowed.

Changes in the exchange rate affect inflation in Israel relatively strongly and
quickly. In the last month the shekel weakened by about 1 percent against the euro,
while it remained steady against the dollar. In the discussion it was noted that hitherto,
over the last year, the strengthening of the shekel––including its effect on housing
prices––has been a key cause of negative inflation.

All the departmental directors participating in the discussion recommended
leaving the interest rate unchanged for April. They expressed the view that rapid
economic growth in the year ahead together with the narrowing of the output gap
would create inflationary pressures that would help to return inflation to within the
target range. They noted that the fall in the rate of unemployment to 7.7 percent in the
last quarter of 2006 strengthens the assessment that the process of closing the output
gap is proceeding faster than could have been assumed previously, and increases the
probability that inflationary pressures will develop in the course of the year ahead.

It was also noted in the discussion that the five consecutive monthly cuts in the
interest rate since November 2006 totaled 1.5 percentage points. These cuts, against
the background of the relatively stable inflation expectations for one year forward,
had reduced the short term real interest rate to a low level, thus encouraging economic
activity. With regard to developments abroad, the international financial markets had
become more volatile in the last month, and this had been reflected to only a small
degree in Israel’s domestic markets. Currently, following the cuts in the interest rate
by the Bank of Israel, the Bank’s interest rate was 1.25 percentage points lower than
the Fed rate.

In the light of the above considerations, the participants in the discussion
recommended that more time be allowed to assess the effects of the previous interest
rate reductions on inflation, and that the interest rate be left unchanged for April.

Following the discussion, the Governor decided to leave the interest rate for April
unchanged, at 4 percent.

The decision was made and published on March 26, 2007.


-----

**Those present at the discussion:**
Prof. Stanley Fischer, Governor of the Bank of Israel
Prof. Zvi Eckstein, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Israel
Dr. Karnit Flug, Director of the Research Department
Dr. Edward Offenbacher, Director of the Monetary Department
Mr. Barry Topf, Director of the Foreign Currency Department
Mr. Balfour Ozer, Director of the Foreign Exchange Activity Department
Dr. Ohad Bar-Efrat, Advisor to the Governor and Head of International Affairs
Mr. Gaby Fiszman, Chief of Staff to the Governor


-----

**Appendix: Major Global Economic Developments**

_U.S._
The rate of growth in 2007 was expected to be about 2.6 percent. The investment
houses expect that in the first quarter of 2007 growth will be 2.1 percent. The
investment houses and the Fed predict that the rate of growth will rise in the second
half of the year.

Data relating to the housing market were at the top of the list of figures published
this month indicating the weak performance of the economy, showing relatively sharp
reductions in building starts and sales of new houses. The investment houses consider
that the marked weakness of the housing market may be affected by the recent cold
weather, and that it does not necessarily reflect a further real deterioration in the
activity of this sector.

Private consumption has so far remained fairly solid and appears to have barely
been affected by the slowdown in the housing market. However, recently published
indicators of consumer behavior such as the consumer confidence index and the retail
sales index were relatively weak, and it is not clear if this can be attributed to the cold
weather or if it indicates a trend change.

On the positive side, labor market data for February were notable, indicating that
the positive trend of the last few months was persisting. Manufacturing production
produced a positive surprise, with a greater than expected increase. The
manufacturing sector was helped by the increase in exports this month that led to a
further improvement in the trade balance, against the background of the strength of
the global economy and the depreciation of the dollar over the last year.

Despite the easing of the inflation rate in the last few months, core inflation
remains high, and the Fed still considers that there is an upside risk of inflation. The
probability of continued inflationary pressure, particularly from the labor market, still
exists, against the background of the continued rise in the average hourly wage and
the low rate of unemployment that stands at 4.5 percent. The Fed anticipates,
however, that inflationary pressures will ease, with the decline in energy prices and
the slowing of growth to below its potential level. The investment houses also expect,
on average, a fall in inflation to a level of 2 percent at the end of the first half of the
year, but they expect a rise to above 2 percent in the last quarter of 2007.

The investment houses on average expect the Fed to lower the interest rate once
during the second half of the year. On the other hand, futures contracts on the Fed
interest rate reflect a 100 percent probability of a cut of 50 basis points in the rate by
the end of the year.

_Europe_
The European economy is expected to grow by 2.3 percent in 2007. European
consumer confidence surveys remain positive, and are expected to continue to support
private consumption, which is on a path of recovery against the background of the
further decline in unemployment and the ongoing improvement in the labor market.
The strong global economy is expected to support the European export sector. The
business sector is expected to continue benefiting from advantageous financing


-----

conditions, structural changes in companies’ balance sheets, and from businesses’
increased profits and efficiency.

Inflation remained unchanged in February at an annual rate of 1.8 percent. The
decline in the inflation rate since last August was due mainly to the fall in oil prices.
The ECB expects inflation to remain around its target level of 2 percent over the next
two years. The risk of this forecast remains on the upside, due to concern over
renewed rises in oil prices and the probability that strong growth could lead to
pressure for wage hikes. At the same time, the continued rapid rise in the money
supply and credit to the private sector also presents a threat to price stability in the
medium and long term.

As expected, the ECB raised the interest rate in March by 25 basis points to 3.75
percent. The market factors in a rise of a further 25 basis points by the end of the year
with a probability of 70 percent. The investment houses also expect the same
development in the central bank’s interest rate.

_Japan_
The growth rate in the last quarter of 2006 was revised upwards to an annual rate of
5.6 percent, compared to the original figure of 4.8 percent. This brings growth in
Japan’s economy in 2006 to 2.3 percent. The Bank of Japan and the investment
houses expect that growth will be at a similar level in 2007.

Japan’s growth is led mainly by the companies sector and the continued increase
in exports. Business sector investment continues to rise, with high rates of company
profits and business confidence. In addition, manufacturing production is expected to
continue rising in the light of the rise in both domestic and foreign demand. Data on
private consumption, however, indicate only a modest rise in the light of the slow rise
in households’ income. Public investment is expected to continue on its downward
trend.

Prices of domestic goods rose more slowly as world oil and commodities prices
fell.

The Bank of Japan kept its interest rate unchanged at 0.5 percent. The statement
accompanying the announcement transmitted a calm message and it seems that any
rise in the interest rate will be very small.

_The emerging markets_
At the end of February the Chinese stock exchange indices recorded sharp falls of 9
percent, against the background of rumors that the authorities were planning to act
against speculative activity in that market. Furthermore, the publication of weak data
on the US economy, the comments by the previous chairman of the Federal Reserve
Board Alan Greenspan that the US economy could go into recession this year, and
concern over instability in the US mortgage market, boosted the rise in global risk
adversity among investors. This led to a process of closing positions in assets
considered risky, with a relatively steep increase in volatility. As a result, share
indices in the developed and emerging markets posted drops, with the steeper falls
occurring in the emerging markets, such as Russia and Brazil, which posted declines
of about 12 percent and 11 percent respectively. The yield gaps between US bonds
and those of the emerging markets widened to more than 20 basis points, as measured
by the EMBI+ index.


-----

-----

