**BANK OF ISRAEL**
Office of the Spokesperson and Economic Information

Bank of Israel

**Report to the public of the Bank of Israel’s discussions prior to setting the interest**
**rate for December 2007**

**The discussions took place on November 25 and 26, 2007**

December 2007

**General**

Before the Governor makes the monthly interest rate decision, discussions are held at
two levels. The first discussion takes place in a broad forum, in which the relevant
background economic conditions are presented, including real and monetary
developments in Israel’s economy and developments in the global economy.
Participants in this discussion include the Governor, the Deputy Governor, the
directors of the economic departments of the Bank (the Research, Monetary, Foreign
Currency, and Foreign Exchange Activity departments) and economists from various
departments who prepare and present the material for discussion. The data, estimates
and assessments in these minutes are those that were available at the time of the
discussions.
In the narrow forum, the directors of the economic departments present their
recommendations regarding the interest rate and, following a discussion, the Governor
makes his decision.

A. THE BROAD-FORUM DISCUSSION—THE STATE OF THE ECONOMY

**1. Developments on the real side**

_General assessment_
The rapid growth trend of the last few years continued in the third quarter of 2007. The
Bank of Israel’s assessment is that growth for the year 2007 will be at the high level of
5.4 percent. The Bank of Israel expects growth in 2008 to slow to 4.4 percent, mainly
because of the contraction of the output gap and the economy’s convergence to full
employment. However, during the last month concern over a slowdown in growth in
the advanced economies, especially the US, intensified, and such a slowdown would
probably affect economic activity in Israel too. According to a scenario in which the
US economy suffers a significant slowdown, leading to a slowdown in world trade, the
fall in demand could reduce Israel’s growth rate in 2008 to 3.6 percent

POB 780, 91007 Jerusalem Tel: 972–2–6552713

www.bankisrael.gov.il


-----

_National Accounts data_
Central Bureau of Statistics (CBS) data published last month indicate rapid GDP
growth in 2007:Q3––at an annual rate of 6.1 percent, following growth rates of 5.5
percent in 2007:Q2 and 5.9 percent in 2007:Q1. The data show that private per capita
consumption rose in the third quarter at an annual rate of 8 percent, after rising by 4.7
percent in the second quarter; goods and services exports increased by 17.8 percent,
after rising by 13.1 percent in the second quarter.

_The composite state-of-the-economy index_
The composite state-of-the-economy index rose by 0.6 percent in October, faster than
in August and September, reverting to its rapid growth in the first half of the year. The
rise in October was mainly due to an increase in imports and exports.
The index of manufacturing production indicates a 4.2 percent rise in the months
July to September from the level in the previous three months, and data on trade and
services revenue show an increase of 5.2 percent in July to September from the level in
April to June (both annual rates, seasonally adjusted).

_The labor market_
The average real wage per employee post in the business sector was 3.2 percent higher
in June–August than in the equivalent period in 2006.
The number of employee posts in the economy increased by 4.3 percent (June–
August 2007 compared with June–August 2006).

_Foreign trade_
Goods exports (excluding diamonds) increased by 12.7 percent in August–October
relative to the same months in 2006 (in dollar terms, annual rate of change). In October
these exports expanded rapidly, at an annual rate of 11 percent, but compared with the
previous three months, May–July, goods exports in August–October fell by 5.8 percent
(annual rate, seasonally adjusted, in dollar terms).
Goods imports (excluding energy products, diamonds, ships and planes) increased
by 20.4 percent in August–October compared with August–October 2006 (annual rate
of change, in dollar terms). In August–October imports rose by 8.7 percent (annual
rate, seasonally adjusted) relative to their level in May–July.

**2. Budget data**

Budget performance so far this year is consistent with convergence close to a balanced
budget in 2007. This is mainly due to tax revenues in excess of the forecast path and
government expenditures that are lower than the level consistent with full execution of
budget expenditures. The budget deficit ceiling set by the government for 2007 is 2.9
percent of GDP.
The proposed budget for 2008 passed its first reading in the Knesset in October,
after being approved by the government in August. The budget sets the deficit ceiling
at 1.6 percent of GDP, and the real increase in government expenditure at 1.7 percent.

POB 780, 91007 Jerusalem Tel: 972–2–6552713

www.bankisrael.gov.il


-----

**3. Developments on the nominal side**

_Inflation_
The Consumer Price Index (CPI) rose by 0.1 percent in October, slightly above
forecasters’ predictions prior to its publication, and below the seasonal path consistent
with the inflation target. In the last twelve months the index rose by a total of 2.2
percent, and in the ten months since the beginning of 2007 the CPI has risen by a
cumulative 2.4 percent.
If the elements of the CPI (excluding housing, fuel, and fruit and vegetables) are
divided into a domestic and an imported component, it is expected (based on October
and November indicators) that in the fourth quarter of 2007 domestic prices will
continue to rise relatively steeply, and that this will be offset by price reductions in the
imported component.[1] The fall in prices of goods imported into Israel, despite the rise
in their dollar prices, is attributable mainly to the strengthening of the shekel against
the dollar. For 2007 as a whole domestic prices are expected to rise 4.3 percent, and the
imported price component to decline by 2.3 percent.

_Expectations and forecasts of inflation and of the Bank of Israel interest rate_
Inflation expectations for the next year derived from the capital market (break-even
inflation) did not change in November and remained at an average of 1.2 percent.
Following the publication of the October CPI, predictions of Israeli forecasters for
inflation one year forward are on average around 2.2 percent. On average, local
forecasters expect the change in the CPI in November and December 2007 to be close
to zero, and inflation for the year to reach 2.4 percent, and 2.3 percent in 2008.
On average, local forecasters expect that the Bank of Israel interest rate will not
change before the end of the year, and that it will reach 4.5 percent by the end of 2008.
Before the interest rate decision for December, the slope of the makam curve also
reflected expectations in the financial markets that the Bank of Israel interest rate will
not change in the next few months.

_The makam and bond markets_
The interest on 10-year CPI-indexed bonds rose from an average of 3.4 percent in
October to 3.5 percent in November. The nominal yield on 10-year unindexed
government bonds dipped by 0.1 percentage points over the past month, and in
November averaged 5.6 percent. The yield on one-year _makam went up from an_
average of 4.4 percent in October to an average of 4.5 percent in November.

_The interest rate differential and the yield gap between Israel and abroad_
Before the current interest rate decision, the Bank of Israel interest rate was 0.5
percentage points lower than the US federal funds rate, and the same as the ECB rate.
The gap between the yields on unindexed shekel bonds and US 10-year bonds
widened during the last month from about 113 basis points on October 29 to about 162
basis points on November 22, due mainly to the fall in yields in the US.

1 For a fuller discussion of the issue of the domestic and import components of inflation, see the Bank
of Israel Annual Report for 2006, pp. 105–107 and Box 3.2 on pp. 128–131, and Box 1 on pp. 35–37 in
the Bank’s Inflation Report No. 20, January–June 2007.

POB 780, 91007 Jerusalem Tel: 972–2–6552713

www.bankisrael.gov.il


-----

_The expected real interest rate_
The expected real interest rate (the Bank of Israel interest rate _minus inflation_
expectations) for one year forward was about 2.8 percent in November, similar to its
rate in October.

_The money supply_
The rate of increase of the (M1) money supply is on a rising trend, and in November it
reached 25 percent (the increase over the previous twelve months).

_The econometric models[2]_
Various scenarios were examined using the Bank of Israel’s econometric models.
According to the Research Department’s quarterly model, in which the contraction of
the output gap constitutes a dominant inflationary element, under the assumption that
the exchange rate remains steady at around NIS 3.95 to the dollar and that the Bank of
Israel’s interest rate rises gently to 4.75 percent by the end of 2008, inflation in 2008
would be 2.5 percent. According to the Monetary Department's quarterly model, in the
scenario with the Bank of Israel interest rate at 4 percent in 2007:IV (and 4.2 percent at
the end of 2008) and with an average exchange rate of NIS 3.97 to the dollar in
2007:IV (reaching NIS 4.02 to the dollar in 2008:Q4), inflation would reach 2.4
percent in 2007 and 1.2 percent in 2008. The results of both models are very sensitive
to changes in the exchange rate.

**4. The foreign currency market and the share market**

_The foreign-currency market_
Since the date of the last interest rate decision (29 October) until 22 November, a few
days before the current decision, the shekel appreciated against the dollar, from
NIS 3.99 to the dollar to NIS 3.89, a 2.6 percent change. This reflects the dollar’s
continued weakening around the world. The shekel weakened a little against the euro,
from NIS 5.75 to the euro on October 29 to NIS 5.77 on November 22.

_The share market_
The TA-25 index declined between the previous interest rate decision (October 29) and
November 22 by about 5.2 percent; nonetheless it has risen since the beginning of the
year by a total of about 26 percent.

**5. Israel’s financial risk, the sovereign risk premium**

Israel’s risk premium as measured by the five-year CDS spread increased this month
from around 22 basis points to 27 basis points. In most emerging markets the CDS
spread increased at similar rates.

2 The Bank of Israel uses econometric models to test various scenarios. Due to their nature, including the fact
that their results naturally depend on certain assumptions about relevant variables, the scenarios should be viewed
as one input among several in the discussions on the interest rate.

POB 780, 91007 Jerusalem Tel: 972–2–6552713

www.bankisrael.gov.il


-----

**6. Global economic developments (see Appendix for greater detail)**

In the last month concern among investors in the financial markets mounted over the
expected losses arising from the crisis that erupted in July. Heightened uncertainty
regarding the extent of these losses and apprehension that the crisis would significantly
reduce the volume of credit, principally in the US, raised the risk of a slowdown of
growth in the US. There is greater-than-usual uncertainty regarding forecasts of
economic activity in 2008 in the US and world wide.
In October the IMF revised its forecasts of global growth downwards. According to
those forecasts, the crisis in the international financial markets is likely to slow the
pace of global growth in 2008 to 4.8 percent, compared with the previous forecast of
5.2 percent in July 2007.
At the time of the current discussions on the Bank of Israel’s interest rate for
December (November 25 and 26), the financial markets expect the Federal Open
Market Committee (FOMC) to cut the interest rate at its next meeting (December 11),
with further reductions expected during 2008. The European Central Bank (ECB) is
expected to leave its rates of interest unchanged till the middle of 2008.

B. THE NARROW-FORUM DISCUSSION––THE INTEREST RATE DECISION
FOR DECEMBER 2007

Against the background of developments since the previous interest rate decision on 29
October 2007, the discussion focused on participants’ assessments of inflation
developments, including an analysis of the factors affecting the shekel exchange rate,
and on economic growth and its effect on inflation. The participants discussed the
effect of the increase in the last month in uncertainty about global growth, and
particularly about growth in the US, and the implications of these developments on the
Israeli economy.
All the department directors participating in the discussion recommended leaving
the interest rate unchanged this month at 4.0 percent. They gave the following as the
main reasons for their recommendation:

- At the current level of the interest rate, the weakening of the dollar vis-à-vis the
shekel offsets the inflationary pressures in the economy. Increased uncertainty in
the last month about developments in the US economy strengthened the
expectations of another cut in the Fed interest rate, serving to further weaken the
dollar world wide. The weakening of the dollar against the shekel has a moderating
effect on prices in Israel.
On the other hand, the rapid growth in 2007 and the attendant contraction of
the output gap creates upward pressure on prices. This month there were further
rises in world energy prices, over and above the steep increases in energy prices
since the beginning of the year, as well as increases in world food prices.

- This month too the assessment of the Bank of Israel is that maintaining the interest
rate at its current level is consistent with achieving the target of price stability in the
next 12 months, based on, inter alia, expectations derived from the capital market,
private forecasters’ predictions, and judgments regarding various scenarios

POB 780, 91007 Jerusalem Tel: 972–2–6552713

www.bankisrael.gov.il


-----

examined using the Bank of Israel's models. Increases in the CPI in the coming
months are expected to be low as a result of the weakening of the dollar, and the
inflation rate for 2007 is expected to be within the inflation target range. The
financial markets expect no change in the interest rate in the next few months, and
a moderate rise in the course of 2008.

- With regard to the possibility of the US economy slowing down more severely than
expected, the point was made in the discussion that if this occurs in the first half of
2008, it is likely to have a moderating effect on demand and prices in Israel. The
financial effect of the crisis in the US mortgage market is already reflected in lower
interest rates in the US, which in itself weakens the dollar world wide. It would
take longer for the possible real effects of the crisis to extend to the Israeli
economy, and there is a higher degree of uncertainty relating to them. In this
context it was observed that given the uncertainty about developments in the global
economy and their possible implications for Israel’s economy, it is of even greater
importance that the budget be passed in accordance with the guidelines set, so as to
increase the chances of maintaining the growth trend in 2008 and beyond.

The participants in the discussion analyzed the progress of the exchange rate. Attention
was drawn to the weakening of the dollar around the world. Assessments were
presented predicting an easing of the pressures for the strengthening of the shekel in
2008, deriving mainly from the expected contraction of the surplus in the current
account of the balance of payments. In addition to the expected reduction of the current
account surplus, it was noted that in 2008 long-term capital imports may decline
somewhat, with institutional investors still exporting capital at a rate similar to that in
2007.
The strong pass-through mechanism in the short run between changes in the
exchange rate and changes in inflation was also discussed. The significant decline in
the last year in the share of new rental contracts linked to the dollar was noted––these
dropped from about 85 percent of all contracts in January 2007 to about 68 percent in
October. This trend, boosted by the weakening of the dollar, has some effect in
loosening the strong pass-through mechanism between changes in the exchange rate
and house rental costs.
Taking into consideration all of the above, and as the weakening dollar against the
shekel offsets the inflationary pressures associated with the closing of the output gap,
the Governor decided to leave the interest rate for December 2007 at its current level of
4.0 percent.
The Bank of Israel will continue to monitor economic developments closely with
the intention of achieving the price-stability target. Subject to this, the Bank will
continue to support the attainment of a range of objectives of macroeconomic policy, in
particular the encouragement of employment and growth. In addition, the Bank will
continue to support the stability of the financial system.

The decision was made and published on November 26, 2007.

**Those present at the narrow-forum discussion:**
Prof. Stanley Fischer, Governor of the Bank of Israel

POB 780, 91007 Jerusalem Tel: 972–2–6552713

www.bankisrael.gov.il


-----

Prof. Zvi Eckstein, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Israel
Dr. Karnit Flug, Director of the Research Department
Dr. Edward Offenbacher, Director of the Monetary Department
Mr. Barry Topf, Director of the Foreign Currency Department
Mr. Balfour Ozer, Member of Management
Dr. Ohad Bar-Efrat, Advisor to the Governor and Head of International Affairs
Mr. Gaby Fiszman, Chief of Staff to the Governor
Dr. Yossi Saadon, Bank of Israel Spokesperson

**Appendix: Major Global Economic Developments**

_U.S._
US economic growth is expected to slow markedly in the last quarter of 2007 to a level
of 1.3 percent, annual rate (according to assessments by investment houses). In its
quarterly update issued this week, the Federal Reserve lowered its forecast growth for
2008 from a range of 2.25–2.75 percent to a range of 1.8–2.5 percent.
The expectation regarding the US housing market suggests that the situation has
deteriorated, and the assessments are that the stock of houses available for sale, which
is at a very high level, will not drop in the near future. This, because of the fall in house
prices, the rise in mortgage costs, and more stringent credit terms. The deterioration in
the housing market together with the increase in energy prices and the tightening of
credit conditions present a downside risk to households’ and companies’ costs. In
addition, the latest survey also showed a sharp decline in consumer confidence.
The figure published this month showed growth in the third quarter of 3.9 percent
(annual rate), which was higher than expected. This can be explained by the steady
level of private consumption and the marked increase in exports, the latter helped by
the weakening of the dollar.
Despite the deterioration evident in certain sectors, the labor market continues to
show strength. Data for October indicate the maintenance of the positive trends
observed in the last few months, with the unemployment rate remaining at 4.7 percent
and the number of employed persons rising.
The October CPI showed a 3.5 percent rise over the previous twelve months. Core
inflation figures, however, are significantly lower, and are at a level of 2.2 percent
(over the previous twelve months), within the Fed range of comfort. Nevertheless,
against the background of the rise in the prices of energy, raw materials and food, and
the depreciation of the dollar that resulted in a rise in import prices, the Fed is
concerned over inflation risks. On the other hand, a slowdown in the rate of growth is
expected to ease the inflationary pressures.
At its last meeting, at the end of October, the Federal Reserve cut its funds rate by
25 basis points to 4.5 percent. Investors expect a 25-basis point reduction in the interest
rate at the next FOMC meeting on 11 December with a high degree of probability, and
assess that the interest rate will continue downwards during 2008.

_Europe_

POB 780, 91007 Jerusalem Tel: 972–2–6552713

www.bankisrael.gov.il


-----

Growth in the euro bloc accelerated in the third quarter of the year and based on
assessments of the investment houses it seems that the effect of the turbulence in the
financial markets on growth is expected to remain limited. The IMF gives a similar
assessment in its half-yearly regional economic outlook for Europe published in
November. However, as noted by the ECB, the level of uncertainty remains high, due
to the crisis in the financial markets. The risks of a slowdown in growth in Europe arise
from the strengthening of the euro, the rise in oil prices, more stringent credit
conditions, and the expected slowdown in the US economy.
In October the rate of inflation (measured over the previous twelve months) rose
notably, to 2.6 percent, against the background of the rise in energy and food prices.
The ECB expects inflation to remain above the upper limit of the target in 2007, before
easing back in 2008.
In November the ECB left its interest rate unchanged at 4.0 percent. Based on
investment houses’ assessments and interest rate futures the interest rate is expected to
remain unchanged at least till the second half of 2008.

_Japan_
Growth in Japan increased in the third quarter, reaching 2.6 percent (annual rate), after
slowing down considerably in the second quarter, with exports providing the major
impetus. However, domestic demand is not increasing, and consumer confidence has
been dropping sharply since May, against the background of the standstill in wages. In
addition, the slowdown in the global economy, the rise in energy and commodity
prices, and the recent steep decline in building starts are expected to restrain future
growth. The Bank of Japan cut its growth forecast for 2007 this month from 2.1
percent to 1.8 percent, but kept its forecast for 2008 unchanged at 2.1 percent. In the
revised forecast, inflation is expected to remain at zero in 2007, and to become positive
in 2008.
As expected, the central bank kept the interest rate unchanged at 0.5 percent this
month. Based on investment houses assessments and interest rate futures, on average a
rise in the interest rate is expected only in 2008.

_The emerging markets_
Global growth is supported by strong growth in the emerging markets, particularly the
impressive growth in China and India. It is apposite in this context to note that in its
half-yearly economic outlook the IMF revised its forecasts of growth in East Asia
upwards to 8.4 percent in 2007 and 8.2 percent in 2008. The IMF also predicted that
economic activity in South America would remain robust in 2008, although growth
would be dampened by the expected slowdown in the US economy. However, foreign
direct investment in the emerging markets, which have hitherto been unaffected, may
suffer from the consequences of the increased severity of financial conditions in the
advanced economies.

POB 780, 91007 Jerusalem Tel: 972–2–6552713

www.bankisrael.gov.il


-----

