**Press release**

**Communications**

P.O. Box, CH-8022 Zurich
Telephone +41 44 631 31 11
[communications@snb.ch](mailto:communications@snb.ch)

Zurich, 20 March 2014

# Monetary policy assessment of 20 March 2014 Swiss National Bank reaffirms minimum exchange rate

The Swiss National Bank (SNB) is maintaining its minimum exchange rate of CHF 1.20 per
euro. The Swiss franc is still high. The SNB stands ready to enforce the minimum exchange
rate, if necessary, by buying foreign currency in unlimited quantities, and to take further
measures as required. With the three-month Libor close to zero, the minimum exchange rate
continues to be the right tool to avoid an undesirable tightening of monetary conditions in the
event of renewed upward pressure on the Swiss franc. The SNB is leaving the target range for
the three-month Libor unchanged at 0.0–0.25%.

In March, the SNB’s conditional inflation forecast was adjusted downwards once again.
Inflation in Switzerland was close to 0% for January and February. Internationally declining
inflation rates and the slightly stronger Swiss franc are delaying the rise of inflation into
positive territory. As in the previous quarter, the forecast is based on a three-month Libor of
0.0% over the next three years and assumes that the Swiss franc will weaken over the forecast
period. The SNB is now expecting the inflation rate to be 0.2 percentage points lower for both
2014 and 2015, at 0% and 0.4% respectively. In 2016, inflation should increase to 1.0%.
Consequently, no inflation risks can be identified for Switzerland in the foreseeable future.

The moderate recovery of the global economy continued in the fourth quarter. In Europe,
growth was, geographically, broader-based than in previous quarters. By contrast, euro area
inflation was low, in part reflecting the persistent weakness of demand within the euro area.

Nevertheless, there are still substantial risks attached to the global economic recovery.
Concerns over the state of the euro area financial system are likely to remain high until the
assessment of banks’ balance sheets has been completed. The decline in inflation in the
advanced economies has increased uncertainty regarding the future path of monetary policy in
the major currency areas. In addition, bringing about a sustained improvement in public
finances poses a considerable challenge for a number of advanced economies. Likewise,


-----

**Press release**

structural weaknesses in key emerging markets and political tensions in various regions could
weigh on the global economic recovery.

In Switzerland, as expected, the fourth quarter of 2013 saw a weakening of growth
momentum, largely as a result of a decline in exports, which led to a corresponding decrease
in value added in the manufacturing industry. Economic activity should pick up again from
the first quarter of 2014. For 2014 as a whole, the SNB is still anticipating GDP growth of
around 2%.

In January, at the proposal of the SNB, the Federal Council increased the sectoral
countercyclical capital buffer (CCB), which will result in a temporary rise, as of 30 June
2014, in capital requirements for mortgage loans on residential property in Switzerland. This
will increase banks’ resilience to a possible correction of imbalances on the mortgage and real
estate markets, and will counteract a further build-up of these imbalances. The SNB continues
to monitor the situation on the mortgage and real estate markets closely, and regularly
reassesses the need for an adjustment of the CCB.


-----

**Press release**


-----

