**BANK OF ISRAEL**
Office of the Spokesperson and Economic Information

November 12, 2012

**Report to the public on the Bank of Israel’s discussions prior to setting the**
**interest rate for November 2012**

**The discussions took place on October 28 and 29, 2012**

**General**

In the process of making the monthly interest rate decision by the Monetary
Committee, discussions are held at two levels––the first in a broad forum, and the
second in a narrower one.

In the broad-forum discussion, the relevant background economic conditions are
presented, including real, monetary and financial developments in Israel’s economy,
and developments in the global economy. Participants in this discussion include the
three members of the Monetary Committee from the Bank—the Governor, the Deputy
Governor and the Senior Advisor to the Governor—and the three members of the
Monetary Committee from the public. Other participants in the discussion are the
Directors of the Research and Market Operations Departments, and economists from
various departments who prepare and present the material for discussion. The data,
estimates and assessments in this report are those that were available at the time of the
discussions.

In the narrow forum, which consists of the Monetary Committee and the Directors of
the Research and Market Operations Departments, the two Departmental Directors
present their recommendations regarding the interest rate. An open discussion
follows, which ends with a vote on the level of the interest rate. According to the
Bank of Israel Law, 5770-2010, (section 18(c)), the decision on the interest rate is
reached by majority vote of the members of the Monetary Committee who participate
in the voting. If the vote is tied, the chairperson (the Governor) has an additional vote.


-----

A. THE BROAD-FORUM DISCUSSION—THE STATE OF THE ECONOMY

**1. Developments on the real side**

_General assessment_

Indicators of real economic activity that became available this month support the
assessment of a moderate growth rate of about 3 percent. These indicators are in line
with the Research Department forecast of 3.3 percent GDP growth in 2012. At the
same time, expectations from various surveys continue to reflect pessimism regarding
the level of activity in the next few months.

_Monthly indices of the economic situation_

Data on revenue by industry in August indicate an increase in trade and services
revenue, which was likely affected by the purchases brought forward ahead of the
increase in the VAT rate. The Composite State of the Economy Index for September
increased by 0.2 percent, reflecting an increase in nearly all the components of the
index, excluding exports of services. Following the Central Bureau of Statistics
upward correction of goods exports data for August, the Composite Index data for
August were also revised upward. The Industrial Production Index for June-August
rose by 14.2 percent in annual terms. Survey figures remained pessimistic with regard
to future developments—the Purchasing Managers Index increased slightly this
month, but remained at a level indicating sharp contraction in manufacturing activity,
and expectations seen in the Bank Hapoalim and the Central Bureau of Statistics
consumer confidence indices registered further deterioration, especially in the
employment component.

_The labor market_

Labor market data which became available this month indicate continued moderate
growth in employment, though in recent months there has been some stabilization in
business sector employment. Employment data for July and August indicate an
increase of 1.5 percent (seasonally adjusted) in the number of employed persons,
compared with the second quarter, with an increase in the rate of part time positions
compared with full time positions. This growth occurred through a continued increase
in the employment rate in those months, from 59.1 percent to 59.9 percent, together
with a decline in the unemployment rate from 7 percent in the second quarter to 6.9
percent in August. Both the nominal wage and real wage increased by 1 percent in
May–July compared with the preceding 3 months, based on seasonally adjusted
figures. Health tax receipts indicate continued growth of total nominal wage payments
in August and September, at a rate of more than 6 percent, compared with the
corresponding period of the previous year.


-----

_Foreign trade_

Goods exports (in dollar terms, excluding ships, aircraft and diamonds) increased 5.7
percent in the third quarter, following a sharp decline in June. Goods imports
(excluding ships, aircraft, diamonds and fuel) registered a slight decline of 2 percent
in the third quarter. Goods import and export data continued to maintain stability over
time, similar to the trend since the beginning of 2011.

_Budget data_

Tax receipts for the year to date through September are about NIS 4.5 billion lower
than the figure derived from the revised seasonal path. In the past four months there
was an improvement in tax collection, and a reduction of the average deviation from
the seasonal path. Assuming that government expenditure does not surpass the
original amount in the budget, the deficit this year, based on developments to date, is
projected to be about 4 percent of GDP. The framework of expenditures expected
during the remainder of the year raises some concern of a higher deficit, but it is likely
that technical delays due to the bringing forward of elections, will slow or halt the
increase in spending. Likewise, bringing the elections forward is expected to have a
restraining effect on fiscal developments in the beginning of 2013, primarily in the
first quarter, due to the limitation of monthly expenditure to one-twelfth of the
previous year's budget until a new budget is passed.

**2. Developments on the nominal side**

_Inflation_

The Consumer Price Index (CPI) for September was unchanged. Forecasts projected
an increase of 0.5 percent, on average. The main reason for the surprise compared
with the forecasts was the decline in the pre-primary education component, which
derived from the application of the law mandating free education to 3–4 year olds.
This is a one-time factor resulting from policy. The effect was known in advance, but
was not accounted for in most forecasts. The development of actual prices indicates
the moderation of the inflation environment in the past six months, alongside the
continued moderation in the increase in the housing index. The rate of inflation over
the previous twelve months was 2.1 percent.

_Expectations and forecasts of inflation and of the Bank of Israel interest rate_

Forecasts of the inflation rate over the next twelve months based on the average of
forecasters' inflation predictions, and inflation expectations based on over-the-counter
CPI futures contracts offered by banks, declined after the publication of the CPI for
September, from around 2.5 percent to around 2.1 percent. In contrast, expectations
calculated from the capital markets (break-even inflation) remained high throughout
the month, at 2.5 percent, although it is likely that those expectations are biased


-----

upward this month. According to forecasters, prices are expected to increase by 0.3
percent over the next three months. This is against the background of, in the short
term, expectations of imminent food price increases, and, in contrast, the recent
declines in commodity prices worldwide. Inflation expectations for two years and
longer remained stable at around 2.5 percent. Expectations for the Bank of Israel
interest rate one year from now derived from the Telbor (Tel Aviv Inter-Bank Offered
Rate) market as well as expectations based on the average projection of forecasters,
are for an interest rate of 2.1 percent. Most forecasters who provide projections to the
Bank of Israel predict that the Bank will keep the interest rate for November
unchanged.

_The makam and bond markets_

Yields declined on government bonds—both unindexed and CPI-indexed—by up to
30 basis points, in contrast to government bond markets in advanced economies,
which traded with only minor changes. Makam yields also declined along most of the
curve, by up to 10 basis points, with one-year yields declining to 2.15 percent during
the period.

_The interest and yield spreads between Israel and abroad_

The yield gap between 10-year Israeli government bonds and equivalent 10-year US
Treasury securities decreased by about 30 basis points, to about 250 basis points.
Israel's sovereign risk premium as measured by the five-year CDS spread increased
slightly this month to 150 basis points, in contrast to CDS spread declines in most
countries.

_The monetary aggregates_

In the twelve months ending in September, the M1 monetary aggregate (cash held by
the public and demand deposits) increased by 14.2 percent, and the M2 aggregate (M1
plus unindexed deposits of up to one year) increased by 7.4 percent.

_The credit market_

The outstanding debt of the business sector was stable in August at NIS 792.7 billion;
since the beginning of the year the debt has increased by 1.6 percent. Total
outstanding credit to households increased in August by 0.8 percent, to NIS 381
billion. The total volume of new mortgages granted in September was NIS 3.2 billion,
compared with NIS 5.8 billion in August. Part of the decline in new mortgage volume
can be attributed to there having been fewer business days in the month due to the
Jewish holidays, and to the fact that some transactions were brought forward ahead of
the VAT increase which came into effect in September. The balance of housing debt
was NIS 272 billion at the end of August, an increase of 6.9 percent since August of
2011. Mortgage interest rates on new CPI-indexed mortgages granted in September
remained essentially unchanged, while interest rates in the unindexed variable rate


-----

segment again increased by about 0.1 percentage points, following a similar increase
in August.

_The housing market_

The housing component of the CPI (representing rents) declined by 0.1 percent in
September. In the twelve months ending in September it increased by 2.8 percent,
compared with an increase of 3.8 percent in the twelve months to August. Home
prices, which are published in the Central Bureau of Statistics survey of home prices
but are not included in the CPI, increased in July–August by 0.6 percent, after
increasing by 0.8 percent in June–July. In the past 6 months, home prices have risen
by 2.9 percent, and in the twelve months ending in August, home prices increased by
1.4 percent, compared with an increase of 1 percent in the twelve months to July.

Activity in the construction industry is strong compared with its levels in the past
decade. The number of building starts remains high and is expected to continue to be
reflected in an increased stock of homes. At the same time, the level of building starts
remains below the record level of mid–2011, and there is a decline in the rate of
properties marketed by the Israel Land Administration. There were 40,554 building
starts in the twelve months to July, compared with 42,462 in the twelve months to
June.

_The Bank of Israel Research Department assessment (staff forecast)_

The Bank of Israel Research Department's macroeconomic forecast for 2012 and 2013
was updated last month. The forecast (which was published as a separate press release
together with the previous interest rate notice) projected GDP growth of 3.3 percent in
2012 and 3 percent in 2013. According to the forecast, the Bank of Israel interest rate
is expected to remain unchanged until the end of 2013, and the inflation rate over the
four quarters ending with the third quarter of 2013 is expected to be 2.6 percent. With
an upward revision in the number of building starts and building completions, the
Research Department projects that the increase in the housing component of the CPI
(representing rents) will moderate from an annual rate of 3.5 percent in 2012 to 0
percent in 2013, and by the middle of 2014 will reach negative 1.5 percent, which
should contribute to the moderation in the increase of general price levels.

**3. The foreign currency and stock markets**

_The foreign currency market_

From the previous monetary policy discussion held on September 23, 2012, through
October 26, 2012, the shekel appreciated against the dollar by 1.1 percent, in contrast
with most major currencies, which weakened against the dollar. The shekel
appreciated by 0.8 percent against the euro. In terms of the nominal effective
exchange rate the shekel appreciated by about 1.2 percent.


-----

_The capital market_

From the previous monetary policy discussion held on September 23, 2012, through
October 26, 2012, the Tel Aviv 25 Index increased by about 5.3 percent, in contrast to
the declines in stock markets worldwide, primarily in advanced economy countries.
With that, the Tel Aviv Stock Exchange (TASE) closed the gap which had opened this
year between its return and global stock market returns. The Tel-Bond 20 Index and
the Tel-Bond 40 Index increased by 1.4 percent and 1.5 percent, respectively.

**4. Global economic developments**

The debt crisis in Europe continues to be the main risk to the global economy. Macro
data released this month in the US and in Europe were mixed, but for the most part
included positive surprises (compared with already low forecasts). This month, the
IMF lowered its global growth forecast for 2012 and 2013 to 3.3 percent and 3.6
percent, respectively, compared to 3.5 percent and 3.9 percent in the previous
forecast. In its announcement, the IMF wrote that this forecast relies on optimistic
assumptions—that the eurozone would succeed in solving the problems of the
countries in crisis within a reasonable amount of time, and that the United States
would succeed in dealing with its budget problems (the "fiscal cliff") and would
outline a credible policy for returning to a path of sustainable debt. In addition, the
IMF estimated that the banks in Europe would need to markedly lower their leverage,
which is liable to harm credit and growth. This month, global financial markets
continued the relatively optimistic behavior that has characterized them since the ECB
and the Fed declared new programs of large scale asset purchases. The yields and
CDS spreads of the countries at the heart of the crisis continued to decline. In contrast,
central banks and governments around the world continued to lower growth and
inflation forecasts. Inflation remains low worldwide, and it continued to moderate in
emerging economies. Commodity prices, which declined this month—and based on
market assessments are expected to continue to decline—will also support this trend.
A number of central banks lowered their interest rates this month. Disappointing
corporate results were reported recently in the US, particularly in the high tech sector,
and the sentiment among companies and analysts has deteriorated significantly in the
past month.


-----

B. THE NARROW-FORUM DISCUSSION––THE INTEREST RATE DECISION
FOR NOVEMBER 2012

**Main points of discussion**

The six members of the Monetary Committee participating in the discussion decide on
the appropriate rate of interest for the economy. After the discussion on the interest
rate for November 2012, four of the Committee members voted in favor of lowering
the interest rate by 0.25 percentage points to 2 percent, while two Committee
members voted in favor of keeping the interest rate unchanged.

The discussion focused on three main issues: (1) developments in the domestic
economy; (2) developments in the global economy; and (3) developments in the
housing market and the decision by the Supervisor of Banks.

Committee members were divided in their assessment of developments in the Israeli
economy, with some identifying a further slight decline in the rate of growth in recent
months. The pessimism seen in the various surveys (such as the Business Tendency
Survey, the Purchasing Managers Index, and the Consumer Confidence Index) raises
concerns of a further slowdown. At the same time, the effect of the fiscal restraint
expected until the State Budget is approved is liable to have a negative impact on
growth rates during the next few months. Other Committee members assess that
following the slowing of the growth rates that took place a year ago, there has not
been further slowing, despite the negative developments in the global economy. In
their assessment, looking at the whole of 2013, they do not expect significant fiscal
restraint.

The Committee members discussed developments in the global economy. In their
assessment, the risk of financial crisis, primarily in the eurozone, has recently
diminished. However, growth forecasts by the IMF, among others, regarding most
countries, were lowered. At the same time, some of the Committee members noted
that developments in the global financial markets did not indicate further worsening.
In order to support their growth, various countries have reduced their interest rates,
and other countries have adopted quantitative easing measures. The effective interest
rate gap has therefore widened, which supports exchange rate appreciation. However,
it was noted that in the past week, the shekel's appreciation has been halted.

In light of the increase in home prices in recent months and the increase in the number
of transactions and volume of new mortgages against the background of the low
interest rates in the mortgage market, the Committee members expressed their
concern over a renewed upward trend in home prices, and discussed possible steps. In
this framework, the Bank of Israel's Supervisor of Banks notified the members of the
Monetary Committee of his decision to issue a directive limiting the loan-to-value
(LTV) ratio in order to support the stability of the banking system. The Monetary
Committee assessment is that the Supervisor of Banks' directive will serve to
moderate the effects of lower interest rates on the home prices.


-----

The main argument in favor of lowering the interest rate for November is that this
could serve to encourage growth in the economy, and to help the economy deal with
any further growth rate moderation in the future, as shown by various surveys, taking
into account the delayed influence of monetary policy. Furthermore, since actual
inflation as well as inflation expectations for the next year are near the midpoint of the
inflation target range, lowering the interest rate would not endanger price stability.

The main argument in favor of leaving the interest rate unchanged is that since there
has been no significant change in the economy's growth rate over the past few
months, and primarily in light of the weakness of the global economy, the interest
rate, after having been reduced by half a percentage point since the beginning of the
year, appears appropriate for the economy. Those in support of leaving the interest
rate unchanged believe that no evidence of a further slowdown in economic activity
has accumulated thus far, and noted the negative effects that may develop in the
economy from a low interest rate over an extended period.

Following the discussion, the six members of the Monetary Committee voted on the
Bank of Israel's interest rate for November 2012. Four of the Committee members
voted in favor of lowering the interest rate by 0.25 percentage points, and two
Committee members voted in favor of leaving the interest rate unchanged.

In its announcement, the Bank highlighted the following main considerations
underlying the decision to lower the interest rate for November by 0.25 percentage
points to 2 percent:

- Indicators which became available this month continue to strengthen the
assessment that there has been some moderation in the growth rate to about 3
percent. These indicators are consistent with the Research Department's forecast
which was published last month. Expectations seen in consumer surveys and the
Business Tendency Survey are pessimistic and indicate predictions of further
moderation in activity. Economic activity in the first few months of 2013 is
expected to be affected by the fiscal restraint inherent in the monthly expenditure
limitation until a new budget is approved.

- The inflation environment moderated in the past six months, with the continued
slowing of the increase in the housing index (primarily representing rents). The
rate of inflation over the previous twelve months was at the midpoint of the
inflation target range. Most inflation expectations for the coming year are also at
the midpoint of the target range, against the background of the decline in
commodity prices and, in contrast, the expected increases in food prices.

- Against the background of the debt crisis in Europe, the level of economic risk
from around the world remains high, and with it the concerns over negative effects
on the local economy. Macro data published this month in the US and in Europe
were mixed, and for the most part surprised to the upside, but this was relative to
already low forecasts. This month the IMF reduced its global growth forecast for
2012 and 2013. Inflation worldwide continues to be low, and it continued to


-----

moderate in emerging market economies. Commodity prices, which declined this
month, are also expected to support this trend. Central banks in major economies
are continuing with quantitative easing programs, and several central banks
reduced their interest rate this month.

- Home prices, as measured over the past 12 months, increased by 1.4 percent.
However, home prices increased by 0.6 percent in the past month, and by 2.9
percent over the past 6 months. The increases in home prices in recent months and
the continued growth in housing credit raise concerns of a continued increase in
home prices.

Against the background of the necessity to provide further support for economic
activity and in the absence of inflationary pressure, the Monetary Committee decided
to lower the interest rate by 0.25 percentage points.

In light of the increases in housing prices in recent months and the continued growth
in housing credit against the backdrop of low interest rates in the mortgage market,
the Supervisor of Banks decided to issue a directive limiting the loan-to-value ration
in order to support the stability of the banking system.

The Bank of Israel will continue to monitor developments in the Israeli and global
economies and in financial markets, particularly in light of the continuing high level
of uncertainty in the global economy. The Bank will use the tools available to it to
achieve its objectives of price stability, the encouragement of employment and
growth, and support for the stability of the financial system, and in this regard will
keep a close watch on developments in the asset markets, including the housing
market.

The decision was reached and announced on October 29, 2012.

**Participants in the narrow-forum discussion:**

**Members of the Monetary Committee**
Prof. Stanley Fischer, Governor of the Bank of Israel, Chairperson
Prof. Reuben Gronau, Member of the Monetary Committee
Mr. Barry Topf, Senior Advisor to the Governor on Monetary Policy Issues
Prof. Rafi Melnick, Member of the Monetary Committee
Dr. Karnit Flug, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Israel
Prof. Alex Cukierman, Member of the Monetary Committee

**Other participants in the narrow-forum discussion:**
Mr. Andrew Abir, Director of the Market Operations Department
Prof. Nathan Sussman, Director of the Research Department
Mr. David Zaken, Supervisor of Banks
Mr. Eddy Azoulay, Chief of Staff to the Governor
Dr. Yossi Saadon, Advisor to the Governor and Bank of Israel Spokesperson


-----

Adv. Tida Shamir, General Counsel
Ms. Ziv Naor, Economist in the Research Department
Ms. Esti Schwartz, Monetary Committee Secretary


-----

