**BANK OF ISRAEL**
Office of the Spokesperson and Economic Information

August 6, 2012

**Report to the public on the Bank of Israel’s discussions prior to setting the**
**interest rate for August 2012**

**The discussions took place on July 22 and 23, 2012**

**General**

In the process of making the monthly interest rate decision by the Monetary
Committee, discussions are held at two levels––the first in a broad forum, and the
second in a narrower one.

In the broad-forum discussion, the relevant background economic conditions are
presented, including real, monetary and financial developments in Israel’s economy,
and developments in the global economy. Participants in this discussion include the
three members of the Monetary Committee from the Bank—the Governor, the Deputy
Governor and the Senior Advisor to the Governor—and the three members of the
Monetary Committee from the public. Other participants in the discussion are the
Directors of the Research and Market Operations Departments, and economists from
various departments who prepare and present the material for discussion. The data,
estimates and assessments in this report are those that were available at the time of the
discussions.

In the narrow forum, which consists of the Monetary Committee and the Directors of
the Research and Monetary Operations Departments, the two Departmental Directors
present their recommendations regarding the interest rate. An open discussion
follows, which ends with a vote on the level of the interest rate. According to the
Bank of Israel Law, 5770-2010, (section 18(c)), the decision on the interest rate is
reached by majority vote of the members of the Monetary Committee who participate
in the voting. If the vote is tied, the chairperson (the Governor) has an additional vote.


-----

A. THE BROAD-FORUM DISCUSSION—THE STATE OF THE ECONOMY

**1. Developments on the real side**

_General assessment_
Indicators of real economic activity that became available this month raise concerns
of a decline in the growth rate, which was already relatively moderate in recent
months. These concerns are based on particularly weak export data for June. In
contrast, the combined monthly indicators in the Composite State of the Economy
Index, and expectations reported in surveys, indicate a growth rate which is similar to
that of recent months.

_Monthly indices of the economic situation_

Manufacturing exports (excluding diamonds) declined in June by 13 percent
compared with May and compared with the monthly average in January–May.
Atypically, the decline in exports encompasses a large number of industries. While it
is possible that this is an exceptional monthly figure which reflects unusual volatility,
the possibility also exists that a decline in such a wide range of export industries is a
result of a sharp decline in global demand. In contrast, the Composite State of the
Economy Index, which increased by 0.2 percent in June, indicates that the economy
continues to expand, with stabilization of the growth rate in the second quarter at a
similar pace to that of the first quarter of the year. A similar picture arises from the
Business Tendency Survey conducted by the Central Bureau of Statistics, the Bank of
Israel's index based on Google searches which serves as an indicator of demand in the
economy, and the Purchasing Managers Index. Against this background, the Research
Department's Nowcasting estimate for GDP growth in the second quarter, based on
current economic data, is for 2.8 percent, a pace of growth which is similar to that of
recent months.

_The labor market_

Labor market data which became available after the last monetary policy discussion
raise the possibility that the improvement in this area has halted. The unemployment
rate in May was 7.1 percent, compared with 6.8 percent in April; however, the
increase in unemployment came alongside increases in the employment rate and in the
rate of participation in the labor force. In January–April, there was a slowdown in the
rate of growth of employee posts, reflecting a slowdown in a wide range of industries.
At the same time, the ratio of job vacancies to total employee posts increased to 3.1
percent in June, compared with 2.7 percent in May, and data on the numbers of
employed persons in April and May, based on the new Labour Force Survey, are
slightly more positive—the number of employed persons increased by 0.4 percent in
May, compared with April. Health tax receipts, which provide an indication of total
wage payments, were 6.7 percent higher in June in nominal terms than in June 2011
(excluding the effect of legislative changes); in contrast, May receipts were 5.1
percent higher than in May 2011. Nominal wages increased by 1 percent in February–


-----

April compared with the preceding three months, and real wages increased by 0.2
percent.

_Budget data_

Actual budget expenditure figures indicate a domestic deficit excluding net credit
granted in the first half of the year of NIS 7.6 billion, compared with a deficit of NIS
3.4 billion in the corresponding period of 2011. In accordance with the revised growth
forecast, the deficit in 2012 is projected to be greater than the Ministry of Finance's
revised deficit forecast of 3.4 percent of GDP—primarily due to lower than expected
revenues for the first half of the year. After the publication of the previous interest
rate decision, the government decided to increase the deficit target for 2013 to 3
percent of GDP, compared with its previous target of 1.5 percent of GDP. To date,
decisions have not been reached regarding how the government intends to meet this
target. Given the growth forecast, and assuming that steps required to maintain the
expenditure rule will be taken, the deficit for 2013 is expected to be above 4 percent
of GDP. In order to meet the deficit target, tax rates will have to be raised. The
decision to increase the deficit target to 3 percent of GDP and the uncertainty of
meeting the target raise the concern that the credibility of fiscal policy—which was a
central component of the economy's success in dealing with the previous crisis—will
erode.

**2. Developments on the nominal side**

_Inflation_

The Consumer Price Index (CPI) declined by 0.3 percent in June, below forecasts
which ranged from a decline of 0.1 percent to an increase of 0.3 percent, and below
the seasonal path consistent with achieving the inflation target. The main factors
which stood out this month were the declines in the transport and communication
component and in energy prices, and the more moderate than expected increase in the
housing component and in seasonal components—clothing and footwear and fruit and
vegetables. The rate of inflation over the previous twelve months declined this month
to 1 percent, the lower bound of the inflation target range (of 1–3 percent), compared
with 1.6 percent in the previous month.

_Expectations and forecasts of inflation and of the Bank of Israel interest rate_

Forecasts of the inflation rate over the next twelve months based on the average of
forecasters' inflation predictions, on expectations calculated from the capital markets
(break-even inflation), and on inflation expectations based on over-the-counter CPI
futures contracts offered by banks, continued to decline this month as well, and range
from 1.6 percent to 2 percent, compared with 1.8–2.2 percent the previous month.


-----

Inflation expectations for two years and longer range between 2.3 percent and 2.4
percent, compared with a range of 2.4–2.5 percent in the previous quarter.
Expectations for the Bank of Israel interest rate in one year from now, derived from
the Telbor (Tel Aviv Inter-Bank Offered Rate) market, calculated from the _makam_
yield curve, and based on the average projection of forecasters, range between 2.1–2.2
percent. Most forecasters predict that the Bank of Israel interest rate for August will
be unchanged, and that the interest rate will be reduced by 0.25 percentage points in
the next three months.

_The housing market_

The housing component of the CPI (representing rents) increased in June by 0.1
percent. In the twelve months ending in June it increased by 3.4 percent, compared
with an increase of 3.8 percent in the twelve months to May. Home prices, which are
published in the Central Bureau of Statistics survey of home prices but are not
included in the CPI, increased in April–May by 0.7 percent, after increasing by 1.3
percent in March–April. In the twelve months ending in June, home prices increased
by 2.1 percent, slightly above the rate (2.0 percent) in the twelve months to May.
Activity in the construction industry is strong compared with its levels in the past
decade. Although building starts are below the record level of the middle of 2011,
they remain high and are expected to continue to be reflected in an increased supply
of homes. There were 43,952 building starts in the twelve months to April, compared
with 44,411 in the twelve months to March. In May, the stock of vacant homes
available for sale remained stable at 21,000, after a trend of increase in the past year.

_The makam and bond markets_

Yields on government bonds, both CPI-indexed and unindexed, declined 20–30 basis
points along most of the curve, due, among other reasons, to nonresident investors
purchasing over $600 million of those securities during July. Makam yields declined
by about 25–35 basis points along the entire curve, with one year yields at only 1.96
percent during the period.

_The yield spread and differential between Israel and abroad_

The yield differential between Israeli 10-year government bonds and equivalent 10year US Treasury securities declined by 16 basis points, to 262 basis points.

_The monetary aggregates_

In the twelve months ending in June, the M1 monetary aggregate (cash held by the
public and demand deposits) increased by 2 percent, and the M2 aggregate (M1 plus
unindexed deposits of up to one year) increased by 8 percent.


-----

_The credit market_

The outstanding debt of the business sector increased in May by 0.9 percent, to NIS
791 billion. The increase in the debt derived primarily from the depreciation of the
shekel, which increased the shekel value of foreign currency denominated debt.
Company responses to the Central Bureau of Statistics Business Tendency Survey
indicate that companies sense that financing constraints are becoming more severe for
non-bank credit, while they sense an easing in obtaining bank credit. Total
outstanding credit to households increased in May by 1.1 percent, to NIS 373 billion,
within which the balance of outstanding housing credit was NIS 265 billion. Total
mortgages granted in the twelve months ending in June were stable compared with
those advanced in the twelve months to May, as the decline from the peak level in
May 2011 ended. Unindexed floating rate mortgages granted in June constituted 28
percent of total new mortgages, remaining around the same level as the previous
month. Interest rates on indexed mortgage tracks declined by 0.04 percent this month
on average, and interest rates on unindexed mortgages declined by around 0.1 percent,
continuing their decline of recent months.

_The Bank of Israel Research Department assessment (staff forecast)_

The Bank of Israel Research Department's macroeconomic forecast was updated in
June. GDP growth in 2012 was projected to be 3.1 percent, and the forecast for 2013
was 3.4 percent. The inflation rate over the 4 quarters ending in the second quarter of
2013 is expected to be 2.4 percent. The Research Department noted that the main
risks to the forecast derive from worldwide developments and their effects on the
demand for Israeli exports and on domestic demand, as well as from the effects of the
fiscal challenges which the economy faces.

**3. The foreign currency and stock markets**

_The foreign currency market_

From the previous monetary policy discussion held on June 24, 2012, through July 20,
2012, the shekel depreciated against the dollar by 2.6 percent, and strengthened by 0.5
percent against the euro. The shekel's weakness against the dollar stood out compared
with the trend of most currencies against the dollar. In terms of the nominal effective
exchange rate the shekel depreciated by about 2 percent.

_The capital market_

From the previous monetary policy discussion held on June 24, 2012, through July 20,
2012, the Tel Aviv 25 Index increased by 0.5 percent, a small increase compared with
the trend in developed markets. Israel's sovereign risk premium as measured by the
five year CDS spread declined by about 18 basis points this month to 157 basis points,
similar to developments in many other economies around the world. The Tel-Bond 20
Index increased by about 2.2 percent, and the Tel-Bond 40 Index increased by about


-----

2.7 percent, against the background of progress in debt restructuring proceedings for
several large companies.

**4. Global economic developments**

There was an additional deterioration in economic developments in Europe this
month, along with further signs of a slowdown in the global economy's growth rate.
Finance ministers of eurozone countries approved an aid package to Spanish banks,
and announced measures that they intend to adopt in the future in order to support
countries and banks in crisis, though it is still not clear if these steps will in fact be
implemented. Against this background, yields on Spain's government bonds rose to
record levels. Macro figures indicate continued deterioration in the state of the global
economy, including in the major emerging economies. The IMF revised downward its
global growth forecast for 2012 to 3.5 percent, from 3.6 percent, and for 2013 to 3.9
percent from 4.1 percent. Inflation over the previous 12 months remained unchanged
in the US, at 1.7 percent, and in Europe, at 2.4 percent. In China, there was a
continued trend of decline in the inflation rate, which reached 2.2 percent. At the same
time, in contrast to declines of recent months, agricultural commodity prices increased
by 30 percent this month, and energy prices increased by 7.5 percent. The ECB
reduced its interest rate by 0.25 percentage points to a record low of 0.75 percent,
without taking additional easing steps, and China's central bank reduced its interest
rate by 0.25 percentage points, for the second time this month. The central banks of
the UK and Japan announced increases in the scope of their bond purchases.

B. THE NARROW-FORUM DISCUSSION––THE INTEREST RATE DECISION
FOR AUGUST 2012

**Main points of discussion**

The six members of the Monetary Committee participating in the discussion decide on
the appropriate rate of interest for the economy. After the discussion on the interest
rate for August 2012, the Committee members voted unanimously in favor of keeping
the interest rate unchanged at 2.25 percentage points.

The discussion focused on three main issues which served as the background to the
interest rate decision for August: (1) the uncertainty regarding the state of the real
economy, including uncertainty about fiscal policy; (2) the rate of inflation; (3) and
the housing market.

The Committee noted the lack of clarity regarding the rate of economic growth in
recent months. Export data indicating a sharp decline of 13 percent in June are
extraordinary in their scope, and it is not clear if this marks a change in trend or is a


-----

one-time figure. National Accounts figures present a mixed picture as well, while
various indices and survey responses indicate continued expansion. As a result,
uncertainty increased as to whether the growth rate of slightly below 3 percent was
maintained in the second quarter, or whether it declined in recent months. Uncertainty
also increased with regard to developments in the global economy, particularly in
Europe.
The discussion dealt extensively with the lack of clarity concerning the government's
future steps regarding fiscal policy. Committee members expressed concern about the
consequences of not raising tax rates on economic stability, though they decided that
at this point fiscal conduct is not a factor influencing monetary policy, since it is not
yet clear how government measures to reduce the expected deficit, or the lack of such
measures, will impact the two main issues concerning monetary policy—the
development of inflation and of the growth rate. It was emphasized that missing the
deficit target may have a negative impact on the government's credibility.

Committee members agreed that the two low CPI readings in May and June indicate
that there has been a decline in the inflation rate. However, recent price increases of
fuel and agricultural commodities abroad may have a future effect of increasing
domestic inflation.

The discussion covered the increase in home prices in March–May, and data
indicating some decline in building starts. The Committee agreed that the current rate
of increase in prices does not indicate a renewed trend of price increases, but the risk
inherent in a future renewal of such a trend cannot be ignored. It was likewise noted
that the housing market has an important role in motivating economic growth,
especially in light of moderate demand in other sectors.

Committee members pointed to the connection between low alternative returns in
other asset markets and the recent growth in the share of homes purchased for
investment purposes. This, against the background of the cancellation of the initiative
to extend the betterment tax exemption period. It was noted that although investors
have a role in raising housing prices, they contribute as well to increasing the supply
of homes for rent, and they moderate price increases in the rentals market. It was
emphasized that it is important that the government take steps in order to provide a
comprehensive solution to the issue.

Against the background of the interest rate reduction in the previous month and the
recent depreciation of the shekel, together with worldwide economic figures
indicating continued slowdown in advanced and emerging economies, and after taking
into account the factors noted above, those supporting an interest rate reduction and
those supporting a decision to leave it unchanged, the Committee members agreed not
to change the interest rate this month. The notice of the interest rate decision for
August stated that the decision to leave the interest rate unchanged is consistent with
the Bank of Israel's interest rate policy which is intended to entrench the inflation rate
within the price stability target of 1–3 percent over the next twelve months, and to
support growth while maintaining financial stability. The notice also stated that the


-----

path of the interest rate in the future depends on developments in the inflation
environment, growth in Israel, the global economy, monetary policies of major central
banks, and developments in the exchange rate of the shekel.

In its announcement, the Bank highlighted the following main considerations
underlying the decision:

- Inflation over the previous 12 months was 1 percent. One year forward inflation
expectations, both those derived from the capital market and those of forecasters,
are near the midpoint of the inflation target range. In contrast, the increase in
commodity and energy prices is expected to have an effect on the inflation rate in
the near term and draw it near the center of the target range.

- Over the previous 12 months, there has been a moderation in, and even a halt to,
the increase in the housing component of the CPI (based primarily on rents) and in
home prices. With that, according to Central Bureau of Statistics survey data,
home prices increased in March–May, though it is premature to determine if there
has been a change in trend.

- This month there was an increase in the level of uncertainty regarding the staying
power of the growth rate of real activity in the recent period. Indicators which
became available this month continue to support the assessment that the rate of
growth in the first half of the year stabilized at slightly below 3 percent. In
contrast, June export figures, which registered a sharp decline encompassing most
industries, raise the concern that the economy is in an additional process of
moderation in the rate of growth. Uncertainty regarding developments in the
economy is affected by, among other things, the uncertainty in fiscal policy.

- There was an additional deterioration in economic developments in Europe this
month, along with further signs of a slowdown in the global economy's growth
rate. IMF forecasts of global growth, including the growth in both advanced and
emerging economy countries, and of trade volumes, were revised downward. The
level of economic risks from the world following developments in Europe
remained high, and with it the concern of negative effects on the domestic
economy.

- Several central banks reduced interest rates this month. Finance ministers of
eurozone countries approved an aid package to Spanish banks, and announced
measures that they intend to adopt in the future in order to support countries and
banks in crisis, though it is still not clear if these steps will in fact be implemented.
The central banks of the UK and Japan announced an increase in the scope of their
bond purchases. Interest rates in the major economies remained low, and markets
are not pricing in any increases in interest rates this year by any of the leading
advanced economies' central banks.

The Bank of Israel will continue to monitor developments in the Israeli and global
economies and in financial markets, particularly in light of the increasing uncertainty
in the global economy. The Bank will use the tools available to it to achieve its
objectives of price stability, the encouragement of employment and growth, and


-----

support for the stability of the financial system, and in this regard will keep a close
watch on developments in the asset markets, including the housing market.

The decision was reached and announced on July 23, 2012.

**Participants in the narrow-forum discussion:**

**Members of the Monetary Committee**
Prof. Stanley Fischer, Governor of the Bank of Israel, Chairperson
Prof. Alex Cukierman
Dr. Karnit Flug, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Israel
Prof. Reuben Gronau
Prof. Rafi Melnick
Mr. Barry Topf, Senior Advisor to the Governor on Monetary Policy Issues

**Other participants in the narrow-forum discussion:**
Mr. Andrew Abir, Director of the Market Operations Department
Prof. Nathan Sussman, Director of the Research Department
Mr. Eddy Azoulay, Chief of Staff to the Governor
Dr. Yossi Saadon, Advisor to the Governor and Bank of Israel Spokesperson
Ms. Ana Brodesky, Economist in Research Department
Ms. Esti Schwartz, Monetary Committee Secretary


-----

