Not to be released until 8:50 a.m.
Japan Standard Time on Monday,
January 27, 2014.

January 27, 2014

Bank of Japan

# Minutes of the
 Monetary Policy Meeting

## on December 19 and 20, 2013

(English translation prepared by the Bank's staff based on the Japanese original)


-----

Please contact the Bank of Japan at the address below in advance to request permission

when reproducing or copying the content of this document for commercial purposes.

Secretariat of the Policy Board, Bank of Japan

P.O. Box 30, Nihonbashi, Tokyo 103-8660, Japan

Please credit the source when quoting, reproducing, or copying the content of this

document.


-----

A Monetary Policy Meeting of the Bank of Japan Policy Board was held in the

Head Office of the Bank of Japan in Tokyo on Thursday, December 19, 2013, from 2:00

p.m. to 4:50 p.m., and on Friday, December 20, from 8:59 a.m. to 11:52 a.m.[1]

**Policy Board Members Present**

**Mr. H. Kuroda, Chairman, Governor of the Bank of Japan**

**Mr. K. Iwata, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Japan**

**Mr. H. Nakaso, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Japan**

**Mr. R. Miyao**

**Mr. Y. Morimoto**

**Ms. S. Shirai**

**Mr. K. Ishida**

**Mr. T. Sato**

**Mr. T. Kiuchi**

Government Representatives Present

Mr. M. Asakawa, Deputy Vice Minister for Policy Planning and Coordination, Ministry

of Finance

Mr. S. Koizumi, Parliamentary Secretary of Cabinet Office, Cabinet Office[2]

Mr. K. Umetani, Vice Minister for Policy Coordination, Cabinet Office[3]

Reporting Staff

Mr. M. Amamiya, Executive Director

Mr. N. Kinoshita, Executive Director[4]

Mr. K. Momma, Executive Director (Assistant Governor)

Mr. S. Uchida, Director-General, Monetary Affairs Department

1 The minutes of this meeting were approved by the Policy Board at the Monetary Policy Meeting
held on January 21 and 22, 2014 as "a document describing an outline of the discussion at the
meeting" stipulated in Article 20, paragraph 1 of the Bank of Japan Act of 1997. Those present are
referred to by their titles at the time of the meeting.
2 Mr. S. Koizumi was present on December 20.
3 Mr. K. Umetani was present on December 19.
4 Mr. N. Kinoshita was present on December 19 for the whole of the session, and on December 20
from 8:59 a.m. to 10:20 a.m.

1


-----

Mr. K. Masaki, Head of Policy Planning Division, Monetary Affairs Department

Mr. H. Yamaoka, Director-General, Financial Markets Department

Mr. E. Maeda, Director-General, Research and Statistics Department

Mr. S. Kameda, Head of Economic Research Division, Research and Statistics

Department

Mr. H. Toyama, Director-General, International Department

Secretariat of the Monetary Policy Meeting

Mr. N. Yoshioka, Director-General, Secretariat of the Policy Board

Mr. N. Fukunaga, Director, Deputy Head of Planning and Coordination Division,

Secretariat of the Policy Board

Mr. R. Hattori, Senior Economist, Monetary Affairs Department

Mr. M. Higashi, Senior Economist, Monetary Affairs Department

2


-----

**I. Summary of Staff Reports on Economic and Financial Developments[5]**

**A. Money Market Operations in the Intermeeting Period**

The Bank, in accordance with the guideline decided at the previous meeting on

November 20 and 21, 2013, had been providing funds through purchases of Japanese

government bonds (JGBs) and other measures.[6] In this situation, the amount outstanding

of the monetary base had been in the range of 186-193 trillion yen.

**B. Recent Developments in Financial Markets**

Money market rates, including longer-term ones, had been at low levels. The

uncollateralized overnight call rate had been at a level below 0.1 percent. General

collateral (GC) repo rates had been more or less flat at around 0.1 percent. As for interest

rates on term instruments, yields on treasury discount bills (T-Bills) had been below the 0.1

percent level for all maturities. Rates on longer-term interbank instruments had been flat.

Long-term interest rates in Japan had recently been in the range of 0.65-0.70

percent as the Bank proceeded with its JGB purchases, although they had risen somewhat,

mainly against the background of a slight rise in U.S. long-term interest rates. The Nikkei

225 Stock Average had risen mainly as a positive response to the depreciation of the yen

following the rise in U.S. stock prices, which had marked their highest levels, and had

recently been in the range of 15,500-16,000 yen. Yield spreads between corporate bonds

and JGBs had been narrowing very moderately on the whole, reflecting solid demand from

investors, despite a widening in some corporate bond spreads. In the foreign exchange

market, the yen had depreciated against the U.S. dollar, mainly reflecting firm U.S.

economic indicators and the decision by the Federal Reserve to begin reducing the pace of

its asset purchases. The U.S. dollar/yen rate had recently been at around 104 yen.

**C. Overseas Economic and Financial Developments**

Overseas economies as a whole were picking up moderately, although a lackluster

performance was partly seen.

5 Reports were made based on information available at the time of the meeting.
6 The guideline was as follows:

The Bank of Japan will conduct money market operations so that the monetary base will
increase at an annual pace of about 60-70 trillion yen.

3


-----

The U.S. economy had been recovering moderately against the backdrop of steady

private demand. Housing investment continued to generally pick up, although the pace

had become somewhat moderate. Private consumption had been firm as asset prices

continued to rise and the employment situation improved steadily. Exports were also

increasing moderately. Reflecting these developments in demand, business sentiment

continued to improve, and production as well as business fixed investment were heading

toward a pick-up, although the pace remained slow. As for prices, the year-on-year rate of

increase in the consumer price index (CPI) for all items less food and energy, or the core

CPI, had been more or less flat. In this situation, the year-on-year rate of increase in the

CPI for all items had declined, mainly as a result of the drop in energy prices.

Economic activity in Europe was gradually turning toward a pick-up. Private

consumption had been picking up, albeit moderately, with consumer sentiment being on an

improving trend, although the employment and income situation remained severe.

Business fixed investment had bottomed out. In addition, exports were heading toward a

pick-up. Reflecting these developments in demand, production had bottomed out. As for

prices, slack in supply and demand conditions had been exerting downward pressure on

prices, and the year-on-year rate of increase in the Harmonized Index of Consumer Prices

(HICP) for all items excluding energy and unprocessed food had been on a declining trend.

On the other hand, annual HICP inflation for all items had risen somewhat, partly reflecting

the moderation in the year-on-year rate of decline in energy prices. Meanwhile, economic

activity in the United Kingdom was recovering, particularly in domestic demand.

With regard to Asia, the Chinese economy continued to see stable growth on the

back of firm domestic demand. Stable growth in private consumption continued against

the background of a favorable employment and income situation, although effects of the

government's frugality campaign continued to be observed in some areas. Fixed asset

investment also remained firm. Moreover, exports had been picking up, particularly those

to Europe and the United States. With these developments in demand, production had

continued to mark relatively high growth, particularly in the machinery industry, including

motor vehicles. As for prices, the year-on-year rate of increase in the CPI had been

somewhat low as a trend. Regarding the NIEs and the ASEAN countries, while economic

developments in the NIEs were picking up somewhat -- driven by growth in exports -- due

in part to the improvement in advanced economies, growth momentum in the ASEAN

4


-----

countries had weakened, reflecting the slowdown in domestic demand, and thus

developments toward a pick-up in the NIEs and the ASEAN countries had been slow on the

whole. As for prices, the year-on-year rates of increase in the CPI generally continued to

be at somewhat low levels, although there were differences by country and region. In

India, the economy remained in a state of deceleration, particularly in domestic demand.

In global financial markets, developments continued to show no clear direction

because, while favorable U.S. economic indicators continued to be released, these aroused

speculation among market participants that the Federal Reserve would move forward the

timing of a reduction in the pace of its asset purchases. After the Federal Reserve made its

decision to begin reducing the pace of its asset purchases, however, market participants -
particularly in advanced economies -- strengthened their risk-taking stance somewhat,

partly because the Federal Reserve had presented its intention to maintain accommodative

financial conditions to the market. Meanwhile, in emerging markets, foreign exchange

rates as well as stock and bond prices had declined, but these drops were marginal.

International commodity prices continued to be weak from a relatively longer-term

perspective in a situation where recovery in emerging economies lacked momentum, but

had recently been rising somewhat on the whole, partly reflecting favorable U.S. and

Chinese economic indicators.

**D. Economic and Financial Developments in Japan**

1. Economic developments

Exports had generally been picking up. Real exports had fallen marginally in the

July-September quarter of 2013 on a quarter-on-quarter basis, but rose again in the

October-November period relative to that quarter. Exports were expected to increase

moderately, mainly against the background of the pick-up in overseas economies.

Public investment continued to increase. It was expected to trend upward for the

time being and then become more or less flat at a high level.

Improvement in business sentiment continued and became widespread. In the

December 2013 _Tankan (Short-Term Economic Survey of Enterprises in Japan), the_

diffusion index for business conditions for all industries and enterprises (the proportion of

firms responding that business conditions were "favorable" minus the proportion of those

responding that they were "unfavorable") improved for the fourth straight term, reaching the

5


-----

level of the peak in the previous phase of economic expansion. With regard to the

diffusion index by industry and size, all categories (large, medium-sized, and small

manufacturing and nonmanufacturing firms) were in "favorable" territory. Business fixed

investment had been picking up as corporate profits had improved. According to the

_Financial Statements Statistics of Corporations by Industry, Quarterly, business fixed_

investment in nominal terms fell marginally in the July-September quarter of 2013 on a

quarter-on-quarter basis, after having increased markedly in the April-June quarter. On the

other hand, the aggregate supply of capital goods -- a coincident indicator of machinery

investment -- on a basis excluding transport equipment was more or less flat in the

July-September quarter, but rose noticeably in October compared with that quarter.

Machinery orders (private sector, excluding orders for ships and those from electric power

companies) -- a leading indicator of machinery investment -- kept moving upward in

October relative to the July-September quarter, after having increased markedly in that

quarter from the previous quarter. Business fixed investment was projected to follow a

moderate increasing trend as corporate profits continued to improve. For all industries and

enterprises, business fixed investment plans (excluding software investment and including

land purchasing expenses) for fiscal 2013 in the December _Tankan had been revised_

somewhat upward in comparison to the September Tankan.

As for the employment and income situation, supply and demand conditions in the

labor market continued to improve steadily, albeit at a moderate pace, and employee income

had also shown a pick-up.

Private consumption remained resilient, with improvement in the employment and

income situation. As for durable consumer goods, the number of new passenger-car

registrations had turned upward since around summer 2013 with the introduction of new

models, and had recently shown somewhat strong movements. In addition, sales of

household electrical appliances had been steady, albeit with fluctuations. Such movements

in durable consumer goods might partly reflect that the front-loaded increase in demand

prior to the consumption tax hike, including the ripple effects of an increase in housing

investment, had started to become evident. Meanwhile, indicators related to consumer

confidence had continued on an improving trend, albeit with fluctuations, after rising at a

rapid pace since the start of 2013. Recently, however, they had fallen somewhat

significantly in October and bounced back only marginally in November. Private

6


-----

consumption was expected to remain resilient as a trend, supported mainly by improvement

in the employment and income situation, albeit with some fluctuations caused by the

front-loaded increase and subsequent decline in demand prior to and after the consumption

tax hike.

Housing investment had increased, aided partly by the front-loaded increase in

demand prior to the consumption tax hike. It was expected to remain resilient as a trend,

albeit with some fluctuations caused by the hike.

Reflecting these developments in demand both at home and abroad, industrial

production had been increasing moderately. It was expected to continue on such a trend,

mainly reflecting developments in demand at home and abroad, albeit with some

fluctuations caused by the effects of the consumption tax hike. Judging from interviews

with firms and other relevant information, production in the October-December quarter of

2013 was expected to continue to increase, and it was considered that production for the

January-March quarter of 2014 would continue increasing in a wide range of industries,

with the ongoing moderate recovery in demand both at home and abroad.

As for prices, domestic corporate goods prices were rising moderately relative to

three months earlier, mainly against the backdrop of movements in international commodity

prices and foreign exchange rates. They were expected to continue to do so for the time

being. The year-on-year rate of increase in the CPI (all items less fresh food) was at

around 1 percent, and was likely to rise for the time being. Meanwhile, inflation

expectations appeared to be rising on the whole, considering the results of various surveys.

2. Financial environment

Financial conditions were accommodative.

The monetary base had increased significantly as asset purchases by the Bank had

progressed, and the year-on-year rate of growth had been in the range of 50-55 percent.

Firms' funding costs had been hovering at low levels. With regard to credit

supply, firms continued to see financial institutions' lending attitudes as being on an

improving trend. Issuing conditions for CP continued to be favorable. Those for

corporate bonds also remained favorable on the whole. Firms' credit demand had been

increasing moderately, mainly for working capital and funds related to mergers and

acquisitions. Against this backdrop, the year-on-year rate of increase in the amount

7


-----

outstanding of bank lending had been at around 2.5 percent. The amount outstanding of

CP and corporate bonds had been more or less around the year-ago level. Firms retained

their recovered financial positions. Meanwhile, the year-on-year rate of growth in the

money stock had been in the range of 4.0-4.5 percent, mainly due to the increase in bank

lending.

3. The fund-provisioning measure to support strengthening the foundations for economic

growth and the fund-provisioning measure to stimulate bank lending

On December 6, 2013, the Bank carried out a new loan disbursement, amounting

to 223.7 billion yen, under the main rules for the fund-provisioning measure to support

strengthening the foundations for economic growth. The outstanding balance of loans

disbursed by the Bank under these rules amounted to 3,239.3 billion yen after the new loan

disbursement, and thus exceeded 3 trillion yen, as in the previous loan disbursement. The

outstanding balance of loans disbursed by the Bank under the special rules for equity

investments and asset-based lending (ABL) came to 103.6 billion yen, and that under the

special rules for small-lot investments and loans amounted to 7.477 billion yen. As for the

special rules for the U.S. dollar lending arrangement, the Bank implemented its new loan

disbursement of 0.864 billion dollars, bringing the outstanding balance of loans to 7.369

billion dollars.

On December 16, 2013, the Bank carried out a new loan disbursement, amounting

to 1,052.8 billion yen, under the fund-provisioning measure to stimulate bank lending.

The outstanding balance of loans disbursed by the Bank amounted to 5,084.3 billion yen

after the new loan disbursement, thus exceeding 5 trillion yen.

**II. Summary of Discussions by the Policy Board on Economic and Financial**

**Developments**

**A. Economic Developments**

With regard to global financial markets, members shared the recognition that,

although developments continued to show no clear direction since the previous meeting due

to speculation about the direction of U.S. monetary policy, market participants -
particularly in advanced economies -- had strengthened their risk-taking stance somewhat

following the Federal Reserve's decision to begin reducing the pace of its asset purchases.

8


-----

Some members pointed out that the market response to the Federal Reserve's decision was

generally positive, mainly because (1) it was made on the back of continued recovery in the

U.S. economy and (2) the Federal Reserve's intention to maintain accommodative financial

conditions had been permeating the markets. These members added that attention should

continue to be paid to the effects of this decision on emerging economies facing structural

problems such as current account deficits. Based on this discussion, members concurred

that it was necessary to continue to carefully monitor future developments in global

financial markets, including the effects on emerging markets.

Members concurred that, although a lackluster performance was partly seen,

overseas economies as a whole were picking up moderately as (1) the U.S. economy had

been on a moderate recovery trend, (2) economic activity in Europe was gradually turning

toward a pick-up, and (3) the Chinese economy continued to see stable growth on the back

of firm domestic demand. As for the outlook, they shared the recognition that overseas

economies -- particularly advanced economies -- would continue to pick up. Many

members expressed the view that uncertainty concerning overseas economies had declined,

mainly reflecting a decrease in uncertainty about the debt ceiling issue and monetary policy

in the United States. A few members noted that it had become more likely that the U.S.

economy would become the driving force of global economic growth in 2014. In response

to this view, one member pointed out that attention needed to be paid to the possibility that

the growth in the U.S. economy would not fully offset the adverse effects stemming from

the deceleration in emerging economies.

With regard to developments in overseas economies by region, members agreed

that the U.S. economy had been recovering moderately against the backdrop of steady

private demand. Many members pointed to the improvement in the employment situation,

as well as in consumer confidence, which had worsened at one point. As for the outlook,

members shared the view that the pace of economic recovery would gradually rise, mainly

as accommodative financial conditions would be maintained and the fiscal drag would

gradually fade. Furthermore, they shared the recognition that uncertainty surrounding

future developments had declined since (1) the U.S. Congress had reached agreement on

matters such as the size of fiscal expenditures and (2) the Federal Reserve had decided to

begin reducing the pace of its asset purchases. One member, noting that there was

uncertainty regarding the extent to which households would increase their debts in order to

9


-----

finance their spending, expressed the view that this might be restraining firms' fixed

investment. A few members noted that it seemed unlikely at the moment that households

would increase their debts to the levels seen prior to the financial crisis and thereby

invigorate consumption. Meanwhile, a few members -- while pointing to the high degree

of innovation capacity, as seen in the development of shale gas, and to the continued

vigorous investment in research and development -- expressed the view that these factors

would underpin the medium- to long-term growth potential of the U.S. economy.

Members shared the recognition that economic activity in the euro area was

gradually turning toward a pick-up. Many members expressed the view that, in a situation

where business and household sentiment continued to improve, private consumption had

been picking up, albeit moderately, and production had bottomed out. As for the outlook,

members concurred that, although uncertainty remained concerning the prospects for the

European debt problem, the economy was likely to continue picking up on the back of

anticipated improvement in external demand in addition to the pick-up in domestic demand.

A few members, however, pointed out that attention should be paid to the possibility that

elevated real interest rates and appreciation of the currency during the disinflationary trend

could lead to a self-fulfilling intensification of downward pressure on prices.

Members agreed that the Chinese economy continued to see stable growth on the

back of firm domestic demand. As for the outlook, most members concurred that the

economy would maintain stable growth at around the current pace as authorities would

likely continue to pay consideration to economic activity while progressing with structural

reforms, and on the back of expectations that external demand would continue improving

moderately. On the other hand, one member noted that the growth rate could decline

moderately, due to the government's stance of restraining infrastructure investment and to

corrections to accommodative financial conditions.

Regarding the NIEs and the ASEAN countries, members concurred that

developments toward a pick-up had been slow on the whole. Some members, while

pointing out that exports from South Korea and Taiwan showed signs of picking up,

reflecting the improvement in the U.S. and European economies as well as the stable

growth in the Chinese economy, noted that economic growth was slow in the ASEAN

countries as domestic demand was restrained due to the tightening of financial conditions.

As for the outlook, members shared the recognition that the pace of economic growth in the

10


-----

NIEs and the ASEAN countries would likely remain relatively slow for the time being, but

thereafter would rise again as growth in advanced economies was expected to gain

momentum over time.

Based on the above deliberations on economic and financial conditions abroad,

members discussed the state of Japan's economy.

With regard to economic activity, members shared the view that the economy had

been recovering moderately. They agreed that a virtuous cycle among production, income,

and spending continued to operate, as evidenced by the fact that (1) in the household sector,

private consumption and housing investment remained firm as the employment and income

situation had been improving; and (2) in the corporate sector, business fixed investment had

been picking up as business sentiment had improved. Many members expressed the

recognition that the effects of the front-loaded increase in demand prior to the consumption

tax hike had already been observed in some parts of the economy. Some members said

that it was necessary to carefully examine the extent of the front-loaded increase in demand

while acknowledging the difficulty of capturing it on a real-time basis. As for the outlook

for the economy, members confirmed the view that, while it would be affected by the

front-loaded increase and subsequent decline in demand prior to and after the consumption

tax hike, the economy was likely to continue its moderate recovery as a trend as the virtuous

cycle among production, income, and spending would continue to operate. One member -
while pointing out that, at the time of the consumption tax hike in 1997, the effects of

excesses in production capacity, employment, and debt stemming from the bursting of the

bubble had started to fully take hold and concerns about financial system stability had been

increasing gradually -- expressed the view that the current economic phase differed from

that in 1997. A few members said that the effects of the consumption tax hike -- including

those on business and consumer sentiment -- should be examined without making any

prejudgment, considering that the economy had experienced a prolonged period of

deflation.

Members shared the recognition that, as overseas economies as a whole were

picking up moderately, Japan's exports had generally been picking up as well -- albeit with

fluctuations -- although the weak momentum remained a matter of concern. A few

members expressed the view that exports continued to generally pick up, given that real

exports for the October-November period of 2013 had increased relative to the

11


-----

July-September quarter. As for the outlook, members agreed that exports were likely to

increase moderately, mainly against the background of the improvement in overseas

economies. They shared the view that the lack of momentum in exports, despite the earlier

depreciation of the yen, basically reflected developments in overseas economies. On this

basis, some members pointed to the possibility that this lack of momentum might also be

affected by structural factors such as the trend progress in Japanese firms' development of

overseas business, as well as the decline in their competitiveness.

Members concurred that, although the downward revision in manufacturers'

business fixed investment plans in the December 2013 _Tankan was a matter of concern,_

business fixed investment had been picking up on the whole, as corporate profits had

improved, and was projected to follow a moderate increasing trend. A few members

pointed out that business fixed investment was highly likely to follow an increasing trend,

albeit moderately, taking into account the following: (1) there was room for a further

increase in corporate profits since firms' projected value of the yen against the U.S. dollar in

the December Tankan was higher than the current level; (2) business fixed investment plans

for the second half of fiscal 2013 in the December Tankan had been revised upward on the

whole; and (3) various policy measures such as tax breaks for business fixed investment

would underpin firms' fixed investment. One of these members added that investment to

prevent disasters and upgrade obsolete facilities was also expected. One member

expressed the view that, while firms' transfer of production to overseas could weigh on

domestic business fixed investment in manufacturing and on exports, an increase in firms'

profits earned overseas could support Japan's economic growth through an improvement in

the balance of income. Meanwhile, with regard to medium- to long-term developments in

business fixed investment, one member expressed the opinion that it was important to

achieve a heightening in medium- to long-term growth expectations through efforts by both

the public and private sectors to strengthen the growth potential of Japan's economy.

As for the employment and income situation, members shared the recognition that

supply and demand conditions in the labor market continued to improve steadily, albeit at a

moderate pace, and employee income had also shown a pick-up. They agreed that a

pick-up in employee income was likely to gradually become clearer as the recovery in

economic activity and business performance became evident. One member pointed out

that employment conditions were becoming increasingly tight, as evidenced by the fact that

12


-----

(1) the active job openings-to-applicants ratio had risen and (2) in the December _Tankan,_

the diffusion index for employment conditions (the proportion of firms responding that

employment was "excessive" minus the proportion of those responding that employment

was "insufficient") had registered its largest negative figure since November 1992 for

nonmanufacturing and improved for manufacturing, reaching approximately zero. This

member then expressed the view that, as for the outlook, positive effects on employee

income -- including on scheduled cash earnings -- would spread on the back of the

tightening in employment conditions and an improvement in corporate profits, as evidenced

by the expected increase in winter bonus payments.

Members shared the recognition that private consumption remained resilient, with

improvement in the employment and income situation. They shared the view that the

front-loaded increase in demand prior to the consumption tax hike had started to play a role

in consumption of durable consumer goods such as motor vehicles. Members concurred

that private consumption was likely to remain resilient, supported mainly by improvement

in the employment and income situation. One member expressed the opinion that, in

addition to the improvement in the income situation, such as the increases in non-scheduled

cash earnings and winter bonus payments, the pick-up in consumer sentiment reflecting the

recent rise in stock prices would underpin future consumption. A few members pointed

out that confidence remained relatively weak, although it had bounced back marginally in

November 2013 after falling significantly in October. These members then said that this

might be attributable to consumers' awareness of the consumption tax hike, and future

developments warranted attention. One of these members pointed out that the rate of

inflation -- including the effects of the consumption tax hike -- was likely to be higher than

that of wage increases.

Members agreed that industrial production had been increasing moderately,

reflecting these developments in demand both at home and abroad, and was likely to

continue to do so.

Regarding prices, members shared the view that the year-on-year rate of increase

in the CPI (all items less fresh food) was at around 1 percent and likely to rise for the time

being, as seen in the CPI for the Tokyo metropolitan area for November, reaching slightly

over 1 percent by the end of 2013. Many members pointed to the fact that the

year-on-year rate of increase in the CPI (all items less food and energy) for October 2013

13


-----

had risen to 0.3 percent and that the number of items for which prices had risen had

exceeded those for which prices had declined. Based on this evidence, these members said

that price rises had been observed not only in energy-related goods but also across a wide

range of items. One of these members expressed the view that price indices based on the

point-of-sale (POS) data released by private institutions also suggested price rises across a

wide range of items other than energy-related goods. Some members said that prices

would continue to increase moderately, partly reflecting the rise in medium- to long-term

inflation expectations. Meanwhile, a few members expressed the recognition that,

although the recent depreciation of the yen was likely to boost prices for the time being, the

pace of the rise in the year-on-year rate of increase in the CPI would gradually lessen

thereafter. Members shared the recognition that inflation expectations appeared to be

rising on the whole, considering the results of various surveys and other information.

Regarding medium- to long-term inflation expectations, a few members expressed the view

that, although an increasing number of indicators recently suggested that such expectations

were more or less unchanged, these expectations were clearly at an increased level from a

relatively longer-term perspective and the rising trend was being maintained.

**B. Financial Developments**

Members concurred that financial conditions in Japan were accommodative.

They shared the view that the monetary base had increased significantly, reflecting the

progress in asset purchases by the Bank, and that firms' funding costs had been hovering at

low levels. Members shared the recognition that firms continued to see financial

institutions' lending attitudes as being on an improving trend, issuing conditions for CP

continued to be favorable, and those for corporate bonds also remained favorable on the

whole. As for firms' credit demand, they concurred that the amount outstanding of bank

lending had been increasing moderately and that, in this situation, the year-on-year rate of

growth in the money stock had been rising. Many members pointed out that the December

2013 _Tankan indicated that the diffusion index of financial positions of firms had been_

improving on the whole, with that of small firms' positions notably reaching a level last

seen in August 1991, and then expressed the recognition that such survey results

reconfirmed that financial conditions were accommodative.

14


-----

**III. Summary of Discussions on Monetary Policy for the Immediate Future**

Based on the above assessment of economic and financial developments, members

discussed monetary policy for the immediate future.

Regarding the guideline for money market operations for the intermeeting period

ahead, members agreed that it was appropriate to maintain the current guideline that the

Bank would conduct money market operations so that the monetary base would increase at

an annual pace of about 60-70 trillion yen.

With regard to the asset purchases, members concurred that it was appropriate for

the Bank to continue with the guidelines decided when it introduced quantitative and

qualitative monetary easing at the meeting on April 3 and 4, 2013. Specifically, they

confirmed the following. First, the Bank would purchase JGBs so that their amount

outstanding would increase at an annual pace of about 50 trillion yen, and the average

remaining maturity of the Bank's JGB purchases would be about seven years. Second, it

would purchase exchange-traded funds (ETFs) and Japan real estate investment trusts

(J-REITs) so that their amounts outstanding would increase at an annual pace of about 1

trillion yen and about 30 billion yen, respectively. And third, for CP and corporate bonds,

the Bank would continue with these asset purchases until their amounts outstanding reached

2.2 trillion yen and 3.2 trillion yen, respectively, by end-2013; thereafter, it would maintain

these amounts outstanding.

With respect to the Bank's thinking behind its conduct of monetary policy, most

members shared the recognition that the Bank would continue with quantitative and

qualitative monetary easing, aiming to achieve the price stability target of 2 percent, as long

as it was necessary for maintaining this target in a stable manner. These members

continued that, in doing so, it would examine both upside and downside risks to economic

activity and prices, and make adjustments as appropriate. Members expressed the view

that it was appropriate for the Bank to continue to steadily pursue quantitative and

qualitative monetary easing in accordance with the current guidelines, taking into account

that Japan's economic and price developments had been broadly in line with the forecasts

presented in October 2013 and that risks -- particularly those surrounding overseas

economies -- had decreased.

On the other hand, one member said that, if a rise were to occur in markets'

anticipation that quantitative and qualitative monetary easing would continue for a

15


-----

protracted period or extreme additional measures would be implemented in a situation

where it was unlikely that the price stability target would be achieved in about two years,

this could lead to economic instability in the medium to long term, such as through a

buildup of financial imbalances. On this basis, the member said that it was appropriate to

change the expression representing the Bank's commitment by stating that the time frame

for continuing quantitative and qualitative monetary easing should be restricted to about

two years, and that thereafter the Bank would review the monetary easing measures in a

flexible manner.

With regard to the effects of quantitative and qualitative monetary easing,

members shared the recognition that these continued to firmly take hold, and financial

conditions were easing steadily to underpin firms' and households' spending. Regarding

how much of an effect could be exerted on longer-term interest rates, they agreed that

long-term interest rates in Japan had been stable at low levels under the Bank's massive

JGB purchases. Members shared the recognition that, in a situation where nominal interest

rates had been stable, real interest rates were declining on the back of a rise in inflation

expectations. Meanwhile, a few members, while pointing out that the year-on-year rate of

growth in broadly-defined liquidity was rising due, for example, to an increase in

investment trusts, expressed the view that portfolio rebalancing, mainly by households, was

proceeding steadily.

With regard to mechanisms in which inflation expectations would rise, some

members expressed the view that both of the following would operate: (1) a

forward-looking mechanism in which fundamental changes in people's expectations would

be encouraged mainly through quantitative and qualitative monetary easing; and (2) a

backward-looking mechanism in which inflation expectations would rise in adapting to an

actual increase in prices. On this basis, these members expressed the recognition that, if

the observed inflation rate exceeded 1 percent on a year-on-year basis in the future, the

backward-looking mechanism would operate more effectively, and so would the

forward-looking mechanism as the price stability target of 2 percent gained more

confidence. A different member pointed to the possibility that the simultaneous price

increases associated with the consumption tax hikes would contribute to an increase in

people's medium- to long-term inflation expectations.

16


-----

Regarding the Bank's communication to the public, some members said that it was

necessary for the Bank to provide a more thorough explanation to the public regarding the

path to achieving the price stability target of 2 percent, since there was some skepticism in

this regard, particularly in the market. In relation to this issue, a few members noted that,

if the Bank facilitated a better understanding of the guideline -- namely, that it "will

continue with quantitative and qualitative monetary easing, aiming to achieve the price

stability target of 2 percent, as long as it is necessary for maintaining that target in a stable

manner" -- this would lead to the smoother transmission of various effects of quantitative

and qualitative monetary easing. One member pointed to the need to increase recognition

that the expression "as long as it is necessary" in the guideline indicated that the Bank

would make judgments based on future prospects. Some members pointed out that the

Bank should provide a clearer explanation to the public that the following was already

factored into the Policy Board members' baseline scenario of the economic outlook -- that is,

that the growth rate for the January-March quarter of 2014 would be elevated due to the

front-loaded increase in demand prior to the consumption tax hike, and that the rate for the

April-June quarter would temporarily drop as demand subsequently declined.

**IV. Remarks by Government Representatives**

The representative from the Cabinet Office made the following remarks.

(1) The Japanese economy was on its way to recovery at a moderate pace. As for the

outlook, the recovery was expected to take hold as household income and business

investment continued to be on upward trends while exports moved toward a pick-up

and the effects of a range of policies developed. The government had been working

toward accelerating and strengthening the implementation of the growth strategy. It

would further work on strengthening the growth potential of the economy by steadily

formulating measures based on growth strategy-related acts, such as the Industrial

Competitiveness Enhancement Act and the Act on National Strategic Special Zones,

both of which had been passed in the extraordinary session of the Diet.

(2) The Cabinet had decided the Economic Measures for Realization of Virtuous Cycles on

December 5, 2013. This aimed to (1) mitigate the effects of the consumption tax hike

and (2) realize an early return of the Japanese economy to a growth path by enhancing

economic growth potential. The government had secured financial resources of a scale

17


-----

exceeding 5 trillion yen by utilizing, for example, a natural increase in tax revenue,

rather than increasing the issuance of government bonds. It expected that the

economic impact of the measures on real GDP would be an increase of approximately 1

percent while that on job creation would amount to approximately 250 thousand people.

The Cabinet would approve the government's economic outlook for fiscal 2014 -
including the economic impacts of the measures -- on December 21, 2013.

(3) The Cabinet had decided the guidelines for formulating the budget for fiscal 2014 on

December 12, 2013. These aimed to create a positive cycle of (1) overcoming

deflation and revitalizing the economy as well as (2) fiscal consolidation, by focusing

on measures that would contribute to economic growth, after thoroughly reviewing the

budget without any exception, including mandatory expenses such as social security.

Based on these guidelines, the government would formulate the budget for fiscal 2014.

In consideration of the discussions held, for example, at the

Government-Labor-Management Meetings, the government had decided to end a year

ahead of schedule the special corporate tax for reconstruction that had followed the

Great East Japan Earthquake, on the condition that the financial resources for the

reconstruction of approximately 25 trillion yen would be secured as previously arranged.

The government would realize a positive cycle of the economy by taking advantage of

the recent improvement in corporate profits to bring about wage increases.

(4) Deflation was ending in Japan, but the overcoming of deflation was only halfway

accomplished. Therefore, the government deemed it necessary to pay due attention to

price developments and the downside risks to the economy stemming from the

slowdown in overseas economies. It expected the Bank to continue its efforts to

achieve the price stability target of 2 percent.

The representative from the Ministry of Finance made the following remarks.

(1) The Japanese economy was moving steadily on its upward trend. The overcoming of

deflation was still only halfway accomplished, and therefore the government expected

the Bank to continue to steadily pursue quantitative and qualitative monetary easing and

achieve the price stability target of 2 percent at the earliest possible time.

(2) As part of the economic policy package, decided in October 2013, the government had

decided the Economic Measures for Realization of Virtuous Cycles with a national

18


-----

expenditure of 5.5 trillion yen, which included the end a year ahead of schedule to the

special corporate tax for reconstruction that had followed the Great East Japan

Earthquake. In order to implement these measures, it also formulated the

supplementary budget for fiscal 2013. In line with these measures, it would carry out

taxation measures on a scale of 1 trillion yen, including tax breaks for business fixed

investment, and encourage cooperative efforts by government, labor, and business

communities, thereby mitigating the effects of the consumption tax hike and ensuring

that the Japanese economy would see an early return to a growth path.

(3) With regard to the budget for fiscal 2014, the Cabinet had decided the guidelines for its

formulation. The government would aim to improve the primary balance of the initial

budget for the general account by more than 4 trillion yen and do its utmost to reduce

the amount of newly issued government bonds to below the level of fiscal 2013. It

would formulate a quality-based budget by emphasizing priorities in the budget

allocation to be decided at the forthcoming Cabinet meeting.

(4) As for the tax reform in fiscal 2014, the ruling parties had compiled an outline for tax

reform, which contained additional measures to stimulate private investment and

consumption, as well as revision of vehicle taxation. Taking into account the ruling

parties' outline, the government would prepare to formulate a bill for the tax reform.

(5) In order to accelerate and strengthen the implementation of the Japan Revitalization

Strategy, nine related acts, including the Industrial Competitiveness Enhancement Act

and the Act on National Strategic Special Zones, had been passed in the previous

extraordinary session of the Diet. In addition, the Panel for Vitalizing Financial and

Capital Markets had released its recommendations to effectively utilize abundant

financial assets held by households, for example, and revitalize the Japanese economy.

(6) Through these measures, the government would promote the enhancement and

stabilization of the social security system and pursue fiscal consolidation while

enhancing the growth potential of the Japanese economy.

**V. Votes**

Based on the above discussions, members shared the view that it was appropriate

to maintain the current guideline for money market operations, so that the monetary base

would increase at an annual pace of about 60-70 trillion yen.

19


-----

To reflect this view, the chairman formulated the following proposal and put it to a

vote.

**The Chairman's Policy Proposal on the Guideline for Money Market Operations:**

1. The guideline for money market operations for the intermeeting period ahead will be as

follows.

The Bank of Japan will conduct money market operations so that the

monetary base will increase at an annual pace of about 60-70 trillion yen.

2. A public statement will be decided separately.

Votes for the proposal: Mr. H. Kuroda, Mr. K. Iwata, Mr. H. Nakaso, Mr. R. Miyao,

Mr. Y. Morimoto, Ms. S. Shirai, Mr. K. Ishida, Mr. T. Sato, and Mr. T. Kiuchi.

Votes against the proposal: None.

**VI. Discussion on the Statement on Monetary Policy**

On the basis of the above discussions, members discussed the Statement on

Monetary Policy and formed a majority view. One member, however, formulated a

proposal, and thus the following two proposals were submitted.

**A. Mr. T. Kiuchi's Policy Proposal**

With regard to the draft of the statement that formed a majority view, Mr. T.

Kiuchi proposed changing the current expression of the Bank's future monetary policy

stance that "the Bank will continue with quantitative and qualitative monetary easing,

aiming to achieve the price stability target of 2 percent, as long as it is necessary for

maintaining that target in a stable manner. It will examine both upside and downside risks

to economic activity and prices, and make adjustments as appropriate" to a new expression

that "the Bank will aim to achieve the price stability target of 2 percent in the medium to

long term. On this basis, it will designate quantitative and qualitative monetary easing as

an intensive measure with a time frame of about two years, and thereafter will review the

monetary easing measures in a flexible manner." The proposal was then put to a vote.

20


-----

The proposal was defeated by a majority vote.

Votes for the proposal: Mr. T. Kiuchi.

Votes against the proposal: Mr. H. Kuroda, Mr. K. Iwata, Mr. H. Nakaso, Mr. R.

Miyao, Mr. Y. Morimoto, Ms. S. Shirai, Mr. K. Ishida, and Mr. T. Sato.

**B. The Chairman's Policy Proposal**

The chairman formulated the Statement on Monetary Policy, and put it to a vote.

The Policy Board decided the text by a unanimous vote. It was confirmed that the

statement would be released immediately after the meeting (see Attachment 1).

**VII. Approval of the Minutes of the Monetary Policy Meeting**

The Policy Board approved unanimously the minutes of the Monetary Policy

Meeting of November 20 and 21, 2013 for release on December 26, 2013.

**VIII. Approval of the Scheduled Dates of the Monetary Policy Meetings in**

**January-December 2014**

At the end of the meeting, the Policy Board approved unanimously the dates of the

Monetary Policy Meetings to be held in the period of January-December 2014 for

immediate release (see Attachment 2).

21


-----

Attachment 1

December 20, 2013

Bank of Japan

**Statement on Monetary Policy**

1. At the Monetary Policy Meeting held today, the Policy Board of the Bank of Japan decided,

by a unanimous vote, to set the following guideline for money market operations for the

intermeeting period:

The Bank of Japan will conduct money market operations so that the monetary base will

increase at an annual pace of about 60-70 trillion yen.

2. With regard to the asset purchases, the Bank will continue with the following guidelines:

a) The Bank will purchase Japanese government bonds (JGBs) so that their amount

outstanding will increase at an annual pace of about 50 trillion yen, and the average

remaining maturity of the Bank's JGB purchases will be about seven years.

b) The Bank will purchase exchange-traded funds (ETFs) and Japan real estate investment

trusts (J-REITs) so that their amounts outstanding will increase at an annual pace of about

1 trillion yen and about 30 billion yen respectively.

c) As for CP and corporate bonds, the Bank will continue with those asset purchases until

their amounts outstanding reach 2.2 trillion yen and 3.2 trillion yen respectively by

end-2013; thereafter, it will maintain those amounts outstanding.

3. Japan's economy has been recovering moderately. Overseas economies as a whole are

picking up moderately, although a lackluster performance is partly seen. In this situation,

exports have generally been picking up. Business fixed investment has been picking up as

corporate profits have improved. Public investment has continued to increase, and housing

investment has also increased. Private consumption has remained resilient, with

improvement in the employment and income situation. Reflecting these developments in

demand both at home and abroad, industrial production has been increasing moderately.

Improvement in business sentiment has continued and become widespread. Meanwhile,

financial conditions are accommodative. On the price front, the year-on-year rate of change

22


-----

in the consumer price index (CPI, all items less fresh food) is at around 1 percent. Inflation

expectations appear to be rising on the whole.

4. With regard to the outlook, Japan's economy is expected to continue a moderate recovery as a

trend, while it will be affected by the front-loaded increase and subsequent decline in demand

prior to and after the consumption tax hike. The year-on-year rate of increase in the CPI is

likely to rise for the time being.

5. Regarding risks, there remains a high degree of uncertainty concerning Japan's economy,

including the prospects for the European debt problem, developments in the emerging and

commodity-exporting economies, and the pace of recovery in the U.S. economy.

6. The Bank will continue with quantitative and qualitative monetary easing, aiming to achieve

the price stability target of 2 percent, as long as it is necessary for maintaining that target in a

stable manner. It will examine both upside and downside risks to economic activity and

prices, and make adjustments as appropriate.[[Note]]

Such conduct of monetary policy will support the positive movements in economic activity

and financial markets, contribute to a rise in inflation expectations, and lead Japan's economy

to overcome the deflation that has lasted for nearly 15 years.

[Note] Mr. T. Kiuchi proposed that the Bank will aim to achieve the price stability target of 2 percent in the
medium to long term and designate quantitative and qualitative monetary easing as an intensive
measure with a time frame of about two years. The proposal was defeated by an 8-1 majority vote.
Voting for the proposal: Mr. T. Kiuchi. Voting against the proposal: Mr. H. Kuroda, Mr. K. Iwata, Mr.
H. Nakaso, Mr. R. Miyao, Mr. Y. Morimoto, Ms. S. Shirai, Mr. K. Ishida, and Mr. T. Sato.

23


-----

Attachment 2

December 20, 2013

Bank of Japan

### Scheduled Dates of Monetary Policy Meetings in January 2014-December 2014


(Reference)

Publication of

Monthly Report


Publication of
Date of MPM

MPM Minutes


Publication of

Outlook Report

(The Bank's View)


Jan. 2014 21 (Tues.), 22 (Wed.) Feb. 21 (Fri.) -- 23 (Thurs.)

Feb. 17 (Mon.), 18 (Tues.) Mar. 14 (Fri.) -- 19 (Wed.)

Mar. 10 (Mon.), 11 (Tues.) Apr. 11 (Fri.) -- 12 (Wed.)

Apr. 7 (Mon.), 8 (Tues.) May 7 (Wed.) -- 9 (Wed.)

30 (Wed.) May 26 (Mon.) 30 (Wed.) -
May 20 (Tues.), 21 (Wed.) June 18 (Wed.) -- 22 (Thurs.)

June 12 (Thurs.), 13 (Fri.) July 18 (Fri.) -- 16 (Mon.)

July 14 (Mon.), 15 (Tues.) Aug. 13 (Wed.) -- 16 (Wed.)

Aug. 7 (Thurs.), 8 (Fri.) Sep. 9 (Tues.) -- 11 (Mon.)

Sep. 3 (Wed.), 4 (Thurs.) Oct. 10 (Fri.) -- 5 (Fri.)

Oct. 6 (Mon.), 7 (Tues.) Nov. 6 (Thurs.) -- 8 (Wed.)

31 (Fri.) Nov. 25 (Tues.) 31 (Fri.) -
Nov. 18 (Tues.), 19 (Wed.) Dec. 25 (Thurs.) -- 20 (Thurs.)

Dec. 18 (Thurs.), 19 (Fri.) To be announced -- 22 (Mon.)

Note: The time of release will be, in principle, as follows.

MPM Minutes will be released at 8:50 a.m.
_Outlook for Economic Activity and Prices (Outlook Report):_
"The Bank's View" in the Outlook Report will be released at 3:00 p.m., and the full text at 2:00 p.m. on the
next business day. As an exception to this principle, the full text of the October 2014 Outlook Report will
be released at 2:00 p.m. on November 1 (Sat.), 2014.
_Monthly Report of Recent Economic and Financial Developments (Monthly Report):_
The Japanese original and the English translation for summary will be released at 2:00 p.m. (the English
translation for the full text will be published at 4:30 p.m. on the next business day).

24


-----

