Not to be released until 8:50 a.m.
Japan Standard Time on Tuesday,
November 26, 2013.

November 26, 2013

Bank of Japan

# Minutes of the
 Monetary Policy Meeting

## on October 31, 2013

(English translation prepared by the Bank's staff based on the Japanese original)


-----

Please contact the Bank of Japan at the address below in advance to request permission

when reproducing or copying the content of this document for commercial purposes.

Secretariat of the Policy Board, Bank of Japan

P.O. Box 30, Nihonbashi, Tokyo 103-8660, Japan

Please credit the source when quoting, reproducing, or copying the content of this

document.


-----

A Monetary Policy Meeting of the Bank of Japan Policy Board was held in the

Head Office of the Bank of Japan in Tokyo on Thursday, October 31, 2013, from 9:00 a.m.

to 1:09 p.m.[1]

**Policy Board Members Present**

**Mr. H. Kuroda, Chairman, Governor of the Bank of Japan**

**Mr. K. Iwata, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Japan**

**Mr. H. Nakaso, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Japan**

**Mr. R. Miyao**

**Mr. Y. Morimoto**

**Ms. S. Shirai**

**Mr. K. Ishida**

**Mr. T. Sato**

**Mr. T. Kiuchi**

Government Representatives Present

Mr. Y. Furukawa, Senior Vice Minister of Finance, Ministry of Finance

Mr. H. Ishii, Director-General, Economic and Fiscal Management, Cabinet Office

Reporting Staff

Mr. M. Amamiya, Executive Director

Mr. N. Kinoshita, Executive Director

Mr. K. Momma, Executive Director (Assistant Governor)

Mr. S. Uchida, Director-General, Monetary Affairs Department

Mr. M. Nomura, Deputy Director-General, Monetary Affairs Department[2]

Mr. K. Masaki, Head of Policy Planning Division, Monetary Affairs Department

Mr. H. Yamaoka, Director-General, Financial Markets Department

Mr. E. Maeda, Director-General, Research and Statistics Department

1 The minutes of this meeting were approved by the Policy Board at the Monetary Policy Meeting
held on November 20 and 21, 2013 as "a document describing an outline of the discussion at the
meeting" stipulated in Article 20, paragraph 1 of the Bank of Japan Act of 1997. Those present are
referred to by their titles at the time of the meeting.
2 Mr. M. Nomura was present from 9:00 a.m. to 9:11 a.m.

1


-----

Mr. S. Kameda, Head of Economic Research Division, Research and Statistics

Department

Mr. H. Toyama, Director-General, International Department

Secretariat of the Monetary Policy Meeting

Mr. N. Yoshioka, Director-General, Secretariat of the Policy Board

Mr. N. Fukunaga, Director, Deputy Head of Planning and Coordination Division,

Secretariat of the Policy Board

Mr. H. Kamiguchi, Head of Policy Infrastructure Division, Monetary Affairs

Department[3]

Mr. T. Kawamoto, Senior Economist, Monetary Affairs Department

Mr. M. Higashi, Senior Economist, Monetary Affairs Department

3 Mr. H. Kamiguchi was present from 9:00 a.m. to 9:11 a.m.

2


-----

**I. Review of the Effective Periods of the Temporary Bilateral Liquidity Swap**

**Arrangements with Five Central Banks and of the Funds-Supplying Operation in**

**Non-Domestic Currencies**

**A. Staff Reports**

The Bank of Japan's existing temporary bilateral liquidity swap arrangements with

five other central banks -- the Bank of Canada, the Bank of England, the European Central

Bank, the Federal Reserve, and the Swiss National Bank -- were effective through February

1, 2014. These swap arrangements had helped to ease strains in financial markets and

mitigate their effects on economic conditions. Taking this into account, it would be

appropriate for the Bank of Japan, together with the other central banks, to convert these

swap arrangements to standing arrangements, to reduce uncertainty regarding possible

future extensions of the effective period. The staff therefore proposed making an

amendment to the relevant principal terms and conditions, including those for the U.S.

dollar funds-supplying operation against pooled collateral.

**B. Vote**

"Amendment to 'Principal Terms and Conditions for U.S. Dollar Funds-Supplying

Operations against Pooled Collateral,'" which represented the aforementioned introduction

of the standing liquidity swap arrangements, was put to a vote. Members voted

unanimously to approve the amendment. It was confirmed that the amendment would be

released at the same time as those by the other central banks, and that the staff would make

it public accordingly.

**II. Summary of Staff Reports on Economic and Financial Developments[4]**

**A. Money Market Operations in the Intermeeting Period**

The Bank, in accordance with the guideline decided at the previous meeting on

October 3 and 4, 2013, had been providing funds through purchases of Japanese

government bonds (JGBs) and other measures.[5] In this situation, the amount outstanding

of the monetary base had been in the range of 182-191 trillion yen.

4 Reports were made based on information available at the time of the meeting.
5 The guideline was as follows:

The Bank of Japan will conduct money market operations so that the monetary base will
increase at an annual pace of about 60-70 trillion yen.

3


-----

**B. Recent Developments in Financial Markets**

Money market rates, including longer-term ones, had been at low levels. The

uncollateralized overnight call rate had been at a level below 0.1 percent. General

collateral (GC) repo rates had recently strengthened somewhat, and had been around 0.1

percent. As for interest rates on term instruments, yields on treasury discount bills

(T-Bills) had been below the 0.1 percent level for all maturities, although they had

strengthened somewhat. Rates on longer-term interbank instruments had declined, albeit

marginally.

Long-term interest rates in Japan had been more or less flat, although they had

temporarily declined somewhat partly due to the decline in U.S. long-term interest rates.

The Nikkei 225 Stock Average had been more or less flat throughout the intermeeting

period, despite fluctuations that mainly reflected movements in U.S. stock prices in

response to developments in the fiscal debate in the United States and to a delay in the

timing at which markets had expected the Federal Reserve to begin reducing the pace of its

asset purchases. Prices for Japan real estate investment trusts (J-REITs) had risen slightly,

mainly reflecting an increase in prices for overseas REITs. Yield spreads between

corporate bonds and JGBs had been narrowing on the whole, albeit very moderately,

reflecting solid demand from investors, despite a widening in some corporate bond spreads.

In the foreign exchange market, the U.S. dollar/yen rate had been more or less unchanged

throughout the intermeeting period: the yen had temporarily depreciated somewhat against

the U.S. dollar in the first half of October, but had appreciated somewhat thereafter.

**C. Overseas Economic and Financial Developments**

Overseas economies as a whole were gradually heading toward a pick-up,

although a lackluster performance was partly seen.

The U.S. economy had been on a moderate recovery trend against the backdrop of

steady private demand, despite downward pressure from the fiscal side. Federal

government expenditures had still been declining. On the other hand, private consumption

remained on a moderate increasing trend as the employment situation followed an

improving trend and asset prices rose. Housing investment continued to generally pick up.

Exports were also increasing moderately. Reflecting these developments in demand,

business sentiment continued to follow an improving trend, and production as well as

4


-----

business fixed investment were heading toward a pick-up, although the pace remained slow.

As for prices, the year-on-year rate of increase in the consumer price index (CPI) for all

items less food and energy, or the core CPI, had been more or less flat. In this situation,

the year-on-year rate of increase in the CPI for all items had declined, mainly as a result of

the drop in energy prices.

Economic activity in Europe as a whole had bottomed out. While business fixed

investment remained on a declining trend, exports had bottomed out. Private consumption

had stopped decreasing, with a continued improvement in consumer sentiment, although the

employment and income situation remained severe. Reflecting these developments in

demand, production had bottomed out. As for prices, while slack in supply and demand

conditions had been exerting downward pressure on prices, the year-on-year rate of increase

in the Harmonized Index of Consumer Prices (HICP) for all items excluding energy and

unprocessed food followed a moderate declining trend. Annual HICP inflation for all

items had declined further, mainly due to the advance in the year-on-year rate of decline in

energy prices. Meanwhile, economic activity in the United Kingdom was recovering,

particularly in domestic demand.

With regard to Asia, the Chinese economy continued to see stable growth on the

back of firm domestic demand. Exports had been showing signs of a pick-up but remained

relatively weak. On the other hand, stable growth in private consumption continued

against the background of a favorable employment and income situation, although effects of

the government's frugality campaign continued to be observed in some areas. Fixed asset

investment had been firm amid the continued high growth in infrastructure investment.

With these developments in demand, growth in production had risen somewhat, particularly

that in materials industries. As for prices, the year-on-year rate of increase in the CPI had

been somewhat low as a trend. Regarding the NIEs and the ASEAN countries,

developments toward a pick-up had been weakening on the whole, due to deceleration in

domestic demand as well as sluggish trade. Private consumption had been decelerating,

particularly in the ASEAN countries, against the background of (1) the end to the boost

from policy measures targeted at car sales and (2) consumer sentiment having turned

cautious. Exports continued to show some weakness on the whole, although signs of a

pick-up had been observed in the NIEs. Reflecting these developments in demand, moves

toward a pick-up in production remained paused, and growth in business fixed investment,

5


-----

particularly in machinery investment, had been sluggish. As for prices, the year-on-year

rates of increase in the CPI generally continued to be at somewhat low levels, although

there were differences by country and region. In India, the economy remained in a state of

deceleration, particularly in domestic demand.

Global financial markets had been nervous against the background of the

difficulties surrounding the fiscal debate in the United States, but investors resumed their

risk-taking stance after a tentative agreement was reached following the debate. In the U.S.

money market, interest rates on financial instruments maturing between mid-October and

mid-November, including yields on T-Bills and government bonds as well as GC repo rates,

rose markedly toward October 17, a major turning point of the debt ceiling problem.

Following the tentative agreement, however, these interest rates returned to the levels seen

prior to the rises, and investors resumed their risk-taking stance against the background that

the timing at which markets had anticipated that the Federal Reserve would begin reducing

the pace of its asset purchases had been delayed. In the U.S. and European markets, stock

prices had risen and long-term government bond yields had declined. Emerging markets

had been nervous while the outcome of the U.S. fiscal debate remained unclear, but saw an

appreciation in foreign exchange rates coupled with rises in stock and bond prices once the

tentative agreement was in sight. International commodity prices had recently been more

or less flat on the whole, although they continued to be weak from a relatively longer-term

perspective in a situation where recovery in emerging economies lacked momentum.

**D. Economic and Financial Developments in Japan**

1. Economic developments

Exports continued to generally pick up. Real exports had turned upward in the

January-March quarter of 2013 on a quarter-on-quarter basis for the first time in three

quarters and had grown at an accelerated rate in the April-June quarter. They then

declined only marginally in the July-September quarter.

Public investment continued to increase in a situation where effects of the

government's economic measures, including emergency economic measures, had come to

fully take hold. The amount of public construction completed -- which reflected the

progress of public works -- kept increasing in the July-August period relative to the

April-June quarter, after having risen for six consecutive quarters until that quarter. The

6


-----

value of public works contracted -- a measure that reflected public orders -- remained at a

high level in the July-September quarter, following the upsurge in the April-June quarter on

a quarter-on-quarter basis.

With regard to business fixed investment, a pick-up was being observed in the

manufacturing sector -- which had been relatively weak -- as corporate profits and business

sentiment had improved. Machinery orders (private sector, excluding orders for ships and

those from electric power companies) -- a leading indicator of machinery investment -- had

turned upward in the April-June quarter for the first time in five quarters, after having been

almost flat in the January-March quarter on a quarter-on-quarter basis, and registered a

marked increase in the July-August period relative to the April-June quarter. According to

the results of the survey on business fixed investment of small firms, the proportion of firms

that had carried out such investment in the July-September quarter continued to rise on the

whole, and business fixed investment plans for fiscal 2013 were expected to increase, as

was the case in fiscal 2012.

As for the employment and income situation, supply and demand conditions in the

labor market continued to improve moderately and employee income had also shown a

pick-up.

Private consumption remained resilient, with some improvement observed in the

employment and income situation. On a month-on-month basis, sales at department stores

had increased for two consecutive months, in August and September, after having fallen

back in July; they remained firm as a trend, notably in imports and high-end products.

Sales at convenience stores continued to trend moderately upward. As for services

consumption, outlays for travel and sales in the food service industry as a whole had held

steady. Meanwhile, signs of improvement in consumer sentiment had appeared again.

As for housing investment, sales of condominiums had increased further partly due

to the front-loaded increase in demand prior to the scheduled consumption tax hikes.

Reflecting these developments in demand both at home and abroad, industrial

production was increasing moderately. It had turned upward -- albeit marginally -- in the

January-March quarter of 2013 on a quarter-on-quarter basis for the first time in four

quarters, and had increased moderately in the April-June and July-September quarters on

the same basis.

7


-----

As for prices, domestic corporate goods prices were rising moderately relative to

three months earlier against the backdrop of movements in international commodity prices

and foreign exchange rates. The year-on-year rate of change in the CPI (all items less

fresh food) was in the range of 0.5-1.0 percent. Meanwhile, inflation expectations

appeared to be rising on the whole, considering the results of surveys conducted on

households, economists, and market participants.

2. Financial environment

Financial conditions were accommodative.

The monetary base had increased significantly as asset purchases by the Bank had

progressed, and the year-on-year rate of growth had been at around 45 percent.

Firms' funding costs had been hovering at low levels. With regard to credit

supply, firms continued to see financial institutions' lending attitudes as being on an

improving trend. Issuing conditions for CP continued to be favorable. Those for

corporate bonds also remained favorable on the whole. Firms' credit demand had been

increasing moderately, mainly for working capital and funds related to mergers and

acquisitions. Against this backdrop, the year-on-year rate of increase in the amount

outstanding of bank lending had been in the range of 2.0-2.5 percent. The year-on-year

rate of change in the amount outstanding of CP and corporate bonds was slightly negative.

Firms retained their recovered financial positions on the whole. Meanwhile, the

year-on-year rate of growth in the money stock had been in the range of 3.5-4.0 percent,

mainly due to the increase in bank lending.

**III. Summary of Discussions by the Policy Board on Economic and Financial**

**Developments and the October 2013 Outlook for Economic Activity and Prices**

**A. Economic Developments**

Members shared the recognition that global financial markets had been nervous for

some time against the background of the difficulties surrounding the fiscal debate in the

United States; subsequently, however, investors resumed their risk-taking stance in response

to the tentative agreement and to the delay in the timing at which markets had expected the

Federal Reserve to begin reducing the pace of its asset purchases. Meanwhile, one

member noted that uncertainty surrounding future developments had actually heightened,

8


-----

mainly because the timing had become unclear and because resolution of the fiscal problem

in the United States had been postponed to at least the beginning of 2014.

Members concurred that overseas economies as a whole were gradually heading

toward a pick-up, although a lackluster performance was partly seen. As for the outlook,

they shared the recognition that overseas economies -- particularly advanced economies -
would pick up gradually on the assumption that financial markets would remain generally

stable. One member pointed out that, although the forecast for global growth presented in

the World Economic Outlook released in October 2013 by the International Monetary Fund

(IMF) was revised downward from that made in July, the forecast for growth in advanced

economies had been almost unchanged, and therefore the scenario -- namely, that the

growth rate of the global economy as a whole would gradually pick up -- had been

maintained.

Members agreed that the U.S. economy had been on a moderate recovery trend

against the backdrop of steady private demand, despite downward pressure from the fiscal

side. As for the outlook, they shared the view that the pace of economic recovery would

gradually rise, mainly as accommodative financial conditions would be maintained and the

fiscal drag would gradually fade. Nevertheless, many members pointed out that resolution

of the debt ceiling problem had merely been postponed and that, with uncertainty remaining,

it was necessary to pay attention to (1) a halt to recovery in the housing market and (2)

deterioration in sentiment and the effect of that on the economy. Meanwhile, one member

expressed the view that there was a possibility that households' expectations for

improvement in their income situation looked unlikely to rise, as the trend in the growth

rate of labor productivity had declined.

Members shared the recognition that economic activity in the euro area as a whole

had bottomed out. Some members pointed out that the economy was heading toward a

pick-up but that it still lacked momentum. As for the outlook, members concurred that,

while adjustment pressure associated with the European debt problem would remain, the

economy would gradually pick up, supported mainly by an improvement in economic

entities' sentiment. A few members noted that attention needed to be paid to the effects of

the recent appreciation of the euro on exports. One of these members added that attention

should also be paid to its effects on business fixed investment, given that the recent

appreciation was partly attributable to the elevated real interest rates stemming from the

9


-----

disinflationary trend in the euro area. One member noted that it was necessary to continue

monitoring whether efforts, including those toward the establishment of a banking union,

would become full-fledged and thereby create a break in the adverse feedback loop among

the fiscal situation, the financial system, and economic activity.

Members agreed that the Chinese economy continued to see stable growth on the

back of firm domestic demand. One member pointed out that, although weakness

remained in exports, the economy had picked up somewhat, mainly reflecting the stimulus

measures by the government and an increase in real estate investment. As for the outlook,

most members concurred that the economy would maintain stable growth at around the

current pace as authorities carried out policy measures to underpin economic activity while

progressing with structural reforms. One member, on the other hand, pointed out that the

growth rate was likely to decline again in 2014, due to corrections to accommodative

financial conditions and weaker growth in exports.

Regarding the NIEs and the ASEAN countries, members concurred that

developments toward a pick-up had been weakening on the whole, due to deceleration in

domestic demand as well as sluggish trade. A few members pointed out that exports

remained somewhat weak, despite the fact that financial markets had calmed down, and in

some economies an improvement was observed in the Purchasing Managers' Index (PMI)

for new export orders. As for the outlook, members shared the recognition that the pace of

economic growth in the NIEs and the ASEAN countries would likely remain relatively slow

for the time being, but thereafter would gradually rise as advanced economies picked up.

Members concurred that financial conditions in Japan were accommodative.

They shared the view that the monetary base had increased significantly, reflecting the

progress in asset purchases by the Bank, and that firms' funding costs had been hovering at

low levels. Members shared the recognition that firms continued to see financial

institutions' lending attitudes as being on an improving trend, issuing conditions for CP

continued to be favorable, and those for corporate bonds also remained favorable on the

whole. As for firms' credit demand, they concurred that the amount outstanding of bank

lending had been increasing moderately.

Based on the above deliberations on economic and financial conditions abroad, as

well as Japan's financial conditions, members discussed the state of Japan's economy.

10


-----

With regard to economic activity, members concurred that the economy had been

recovering moderately, led by firm domestic demand, notably private consumption, while

exports had been picking up at a somewhat slower pace. A few members, however,

pointed out that the annualized quarter-on-quarter real GDP growth rate for the

July-September quarter was likely to see a temporary but significant deceleration compared

with the first half of 2013 -- when it had been around 4 percent -- mainly because private

consumption would level off due to the waning of wealth effects and the reversal of the high

growth registered during the first half of the year.

Members shared the recognition that, as overseas economies as a whole were

gradually heading toward a pick-up, Japan's exports had generally been picking up, albeit at

a somewhat slower pace, underpinned partly by developments in foreign exchange rates.

Some members pointed to the weakness in exports, particularly to emerging and

commodity-exporting economies. Nevertheless, regarding the outlook, members shared

the view that exports would trend moderately upward, underpinned by the significant

decline in the level of the yen's real effective exchange rate with a time lag and supported

by the pick-up trend in overseas economies. They concurred that public investment was

increasing. Members agreed that business fixed investment had been picking up as

corporate profits had improved. One member said that the pick-up in such investment

mainly reflected improvements in business sentiment and corporate profits, as well as a

decline in real interest rates. A different member pointed out that machinery orders had

begun to pick up, even in the manufacturing sector. As for the outlook, this member

continued that firms' fixed investment plans were at relatively high levels in the September

2013 _Tankan (Short-Term Economic Survey of Enterprises in Japan), as well as in the_

survey results released by the Development Bank of Japan, and that fixed investment plans

of small manufacturing firms had also been increasing, as confirmed in the results of a

survey conducted by the Japan Finance Corporation. On the other hand, one member said

that, while business fixed investment had recently been picking up, attention should be paid

to whether this pace of improvement would decelerate, as the improvement in exports

lacked momentum. Members shared the recognition that private consumption remained

resilient, reflecting an improving trend in consumer sentiment from a somewhat long-term

perspective as well as improvement seen in the employment and income situation. As for

the employment and income situation, a few members pointed out that the active job

11


-----

openings-to-applicants ratio was improving and that nominal wages per full-time employee

(regular employees excluding part-time employees) as well as hourly wages per part-time

employee had generally been above the previous year's level. As for the outlook, one of

these members expressed the view that a virtuous cycle would develop, whereby an

increase in income through a narrowing of the negative output gap and an improvement in

supply and demand conditions in the labor market would encourage a rise in spending,

thereby leading to further improvement in the supply and demand conditions in the labor

market. Members concurred that housing investment had increased. They shared the

view that industrial production was increasing moderately, reflecting these developments in

demand both at home and abroad.

Regarding prices, members concurred that the year-on-year rate of change in the

CPI (all items less fresh food) was in the range of 0.5-1.0 percent. Many members -
noting that the year-on-year rate of change in the CPI for all items less food and energy had

reached 0 percent and that marked improvement had been observed in the proportion of

items for which prices had increased relative to that for which prices had decreased -
expressed the recognition that the recent inflation was attributable not only to upward

pressure from movements in energy-related goods but also to price rises observed across a

wide range of items. One of these members added that there was upward pressure on

prices of a wide range of items on the back of resilient private consumption. In response,

one member pointed out that the rate of change in the CPI for all items less food and energy

relative to three months earlier had already peaked as the effects of the rapid depreciation of

the yen had dissipated, and that the year-on-year rate of increase in the CPI would therefore

rise at a reduced pace for some time. A different member pointed to the possibility that the

effects of the rise in prices stemming from the depreciation of the yen and the rise in energy

prices would disappear gradually in the immediate future. As for inflation expectations,

members shared the recognition that, considering the results of surveys conducted on

households, economists, and market participants, these appeared to be rising on the whole.

**B. Outlook for Economic Activity and Prices**

With regard to the baseline scenario of the outlook for Japan's economic activity,

members shared the following view: (1) while domestic demand was likely to maintain

firmness as external demand was likely to increase, albeit moderately, a virtuous cycle

12


-----

among production, income, and spending was likely to be maintained; and (2) therefore,

while the economy would be affected by the front-loaded increase and subsequent decline

in demand prior to and after the two scheduled consumption tax hikes, it was likely to

continue growing at a pace above its potential, as a trend. On this basis, they agreed that,

comparing the current projection with that in the July 2013 interim assessment, the growth

rates were likely to be more or less unchanged.

Regarding developments in economic activity in the second half of fiscal 2013,

members shared the view that, on the back of exports and industrial production -- which

were likely to increase, albeit moderately -- a pick-up in business fixed investment would

become further pronounced and private consumption was also likely to remain resilient,

underpinned by an improvement in the employment and income situation. In addition, as

a front-loaded increase in demand prior to the consumption tax hike would take place for

private consumption and housing investment, they agreed that the economic growth rate for

the second half of fiscal 2013 would be significantly elevated. Members shared the view

that the growth rate for fiscal 2014 would slow substantially compared with the previous

fiscal year, as there would be a decline in demand from the front-loaded increase in demand

prior to the consumption tax hike, mainly in the first half. They continued that,

nevertheless, the growth in exports was likely to accelerate, and business fixed investment

would likely continue to increase firmly, partly due to monetary easing and the effects of

various tax reduction measures for businesses, and owing to these developments, the

economy would likely continue growing at a pace above its potential. Also, for fiscal

2015, members shared the recognition that, while affected by fluctuations in demand

stemming from the scheduled second consumption tax hike, a virtuous cycle among

production, income, and spending would be maintained and the economy was likely to

continue growing at a pace above its potential. A few members expressed the view that

the economic growth rate would generally remain unchanged or be somewhat higher than

expected on the back of upward pressure on domestic demand, including the effects of the

government's economic policy package, although factors including the weaker outlook for

overseas economies would become downside factors to the outlook for Japan's economy.

Meanwhile, one member expressed the view that, if the difference in monetary policy

stance between Japan and the United States were clearly acknowledged as the Federal

Reserve started to reduce the pace of its asset purchases, the virtuous cycle in economic

13


-----

activity was likely to strengthen further through a rise in inflation expectations and a decline

in real interest rates following depreciation of the yen and a rise in Japanese stock prices.

In terms of the outlook for prices, excluding the direct effects of the consumption

tax hikes, most members expressed the view that the year-on-year rate of change in the CPI

was likely to follow a rising trend, reflecting factors such as the improvement in the

aggregate supply and demand balance as well as the rise in medium- to long-term inflation

expectations, and it was likely to reach around 2 percent -- the price stability target -
toward the latter half of the projection period. One member noted that, in order for prices

to rise in line with the Bank's projection, it was extremely important that wages -- especially

permanent scheduled cash earnings -- increase, because this would not only further

underpin private consumption but also heighten medium- to long-term inflation

expectations. As for price developments prior to and after the consumption tax hike, one

member pointed out that the diffusion index for small firms' output prices released in the

_Tankan remained in negative territory, and said that it was necessary to carefully monitor_

whether the rise in the consumption taxes would be smoothly passed on to output prices by

small firms. Most members shared the view that medium- to long-term inflation

expectations were likely to continue on a rising trend under quantitative and qualitative

monetary easing, partly supported by a rise in the observed inflation rate, gradually

converging to around 2 percent -- the price stability target. One member, noting that the

money stock had been increasing steadily, expressed the view that this would further push

up the observed inflation rates with a time lag, which would in turn lead to an increase in

the expected rate of inflation. In contrast, one member pointed out that it was highly

uncertain whether the expected rate of inflation would rise toward the 2 percent target, and

noted that, if the observed inflation rate turned out to be lower than the Bank's projection,

there was a significant concern that this could undermine the credibility of the Bank's

outlook and of its monetary policy. Furthermore, a different member expressed the view

that, taking account of developments in inflation expectations to date, it was rather unlikely

that the expected rate of inflation would rise and converge toward the price stability target

of 2 percent.

Members also discussed upside and downside risk factors to the baseline scenario.

Regarding the outlook for economic activity, members noted the following upside

and downside risk factors: (1) uncertainty regarding developments in overseas economies;

14


-----

(2) developments in households' employment and income situation; (3) the effects of the

consumption tax hikes; (4) firms' and households' medium- to long-term growth

expectations; and (5) fiscal sustainability in the medium to long term.

With regard to developments in overseas economies, members concurred that the

pace of recovery in the U.S. economy might become faster or slower depending on

developments such as the consequences of the fiscal problem and the effects of new energy

sources. As for the European economy, they agreed that attention should continue to be

paid mainly to future developments in the debt problem. Regarding the Chinese economy,

members shared the recognition that uncertainty was high with respect to effects of the

structural problems of excess production capacity and excess debt. They shared the view

that other emerging and commodity-exporting economies, some of which were facing

structural problems such as current account deficits, warranted attention together with

developments in the global financial markets. One member pointed out that, if financial

authorities in advanced and emerging economies implemented excessive monetary easing

measures without recognizing the growing structural mismatch in the labor market and in

production facilities, this might lead to higher inflation and financial imbalances. One

member noted the risk that exports would become weaker than expected, given the

possibility that Japan's export structure had been changing due to progress in overseas

production by Japanese firms.

As for developments in households' employment and income situation, members

shared the recognition that, for domestic demand to continue to maintain its firmness in the

future, it was important to maintain a virtuous cycle whereby improvement in the

employment and income situation supported consumption. Some members said that

positive efforts toward increasing base pay had started to be observed in both labor and

management, and expressed the intent to pay close attention to whether these efforts

prevailed. One of these members added that developments in wage increases in spring

2014 would be extremely important in terms of (1) maintaining the virtuous cycle in the

economy, by mitigating the adverse effects on households' real disposable income stemming

from the consumption tax hikes; and (2) raising inflation expectations. A different

member pointed to the possibility that the efforts toward increasing base pay would not

spread sufficiently, in which case wages and prices might be weaker than expected.

Another member noted the possibility that downward pressure on scheduled cash earnings

15


-----

would remain, reflecting the rising trend in the ratio of part-time workers. In response, a

different member pointed out that it was important that labor productivity continue to

exhibit firm growth, thereby improving people's outlook for income from a relatively

long-term perspective. This member continued that there was also a possibility that

developments in the employment and income situation would become more positive than

expected, considering trends thus far in labor supply and demand conditions, as well as in

labor productivity.

Regarding the effects of the consumption tax hikes, members concurred that,

although the hikes would have adverse effects on households' real disposable income, forces

to mitigate adverse effects on consumption to some extent could be at work, partly because

(1) various economic measures were scheduled to be taken by the government, (2) the tax

hikes seemed to have already been factored in substantially among households, and (3) the

rate hikes were likely to have the effect of alleviating households' future concerns over the

fiscal condition and the social security system. One member expressed the view that

continued improvement in the employment situation would contain downside risks

stemming from the consumption tax hikes.

Members highlighted the following three points as upside and downside risk

factors specific to the outlook for prices: (1) developments in firms' and households'

medium- to long-term inflation expectations; (2) the responsiveness of prices to the

aggregate supply and demand balance; and (3) developments in import prices.

With regard to medium- to long-term inflation expectations, many members

expressed the view that, while people's inflation expectations might not readily rise in

reflection of the moderate decline in prices and wages observed in the past, it was also

possible that they would rise relatively quickly with a rise in observed inflation and wages.

Furthermore, members concurred that effects on these expectations of price increases for

items across the board associated with the consumption tax hikes warranted attention. One

member expressed the view that, with an increase in scheduled cash earnings, medium- to

long-term inflation expectations would become more likely to rise since there would be a

growing tendency among people to take action based on the expectation that prices and

wages would increase. A different member was paying attention to the extent to which the

formation of inflation expectations was more forward looking, mainly through a widening

acknowledgment of the prospects for a sustainable improvement in economic activity, as

16


-----

well as a rise in inflation expectations supported by the rise in the observed inflation rate.

Meanwhile, one member pointed out that the pace at which medium- to long-term inflation

expectations had recently risen was only moderate or more or less flat, and thus there were

considerable downside risks.

On the responsiveness of prices to the aggregate supply and demand balance,

members shared the view that attention needed to be paid to whether firms would raise

prices and wages in accordance with the extent to which the supply and demand balances in

goods and services as well as in employment tightened under a highly competitive

environment sustained over time.

In relation to developments in import prices, members shared the recognition that

there continued to be high uncertainty regarding the extent to which fluctuations in

international commodity prices and foreign exchange rates were passed on to domestic

prices through import prices.

Based on the above discussions, some members said that they saw risks to

economic activity and prices as tilted to the downside on the whole. Many members,

however, expressed the view that, as indicated in the Forecast Distribution Charts of Policy

Board members, upside and downside risks recognized by the members as a whole could be

assessed as being balanced. These members continued that the _Outlook for Economic_

_Activity and Prices (hereafter the Outlook Report) should provide an assessment by the_

members as a whole.

In light of the discussion on upside and downside risk factors to the outlook for

Japan's economic activity and prices, members shared the recognition that there was high

uncertainty regarding developments in overseas economies and medium- to long-term

inflation expectations in particular, and that attention should continue to be paid to the

effects of these developments on Japan's economic activity and prices.

Based on the above considerations, members assessed the economic and price

situation from two perspectives.

Members made an assessment in terms of the first perspective: an examination of

the baseline scenario of the outlook for economic activity and prices through fiscal 2015.

Most members expressed the view that Japan's economy was likely to achieve around 2

percent inflation and return to a sustainable growth path toward the latter half of the

projection period. Counter to this view, a few members said that it seemed difficult to

17


-----

achieve around 2 percent inflation toward the latter half of the projection period.

Members then made an assessment in terms of the second perspective: an

examination of the risks considered most relevant to the conduct of monetary policy. With

regard to the baseline scenario for economic activity, they shared the recognition that upside

and downside risks could be assessed as being balanced, although uncertainty remained

high, including over developments in overseas economies. Most members expressed the

view that risks on the price front also could be assessed as being largely balanced, although

considerable uncertainty surrounded developments in medium- to long-term inflation

expectations. Members reaffirmed that there was no sign at this point of excessively

bullish expectations in asset markets or in the activities of financial institutions;

nevertheless, due attention needed to be paid to the fact that financial institutions' holdings

of JGBs remained at an elevated level while the amount outstanding of government debt

had shown a cumulative increase. Meanwhile, one member pointed out that it was

necessary to thoroughly explain to the public what the assessments of the economic activity

and prices from the two perspectives meant, and that the Bank should therefore describe the

overall structure of the Outlook Report at the beginning of "The Bank's View."

**IV. Summary of Discussions on Monetary Policy for the Immediate Future**

Based on the above assessment of economic and financial developments, members

discussed monetary policy for the immediate future.

Regarding the guideline for money market operations for the intermeeting period

ahead, members agreed that it was appropriate to maintain the current guideline that the

Bank would conduct money market operations so that the monetary base would increase at

an annual pace of about 60-70 trillion yen.

With regard to the asset purchases, members concurred that it was appropriate for

the Bank to continue with the guidelines decided when it introduced quantitative and

qualitative monetary easing at the meeting on April 3 and 4, 2013. Specifically, they

confirmed the following. First, the Bank would purchase JGBs so that their amount

outstanding would increase at an annual pace of about 50 trillion yen, and the average

remaining maturity of the Bank's JGB purchases would be about seven years. Second, it

would purchase exchange-traded funds (ETFs) and J-REITs so that their amounts

outstanding would increase at an annual pace of about 1 trillion yen and about 30 billion

18


-----

yen, respectively. And third, for CP and corporate bonds, the Bank would continue with

these asset purchases until their amounts outstanding reached 2.2 trillion yen and 3.2 trillion

yen, respectively, by end-2013; thereafter, it would maintain these amounts outstanding.

Some members pointed out that the Bank had been conducting its market operations more

smoothly than before, partly due to the looser supply and demand conditions of T-Bills

observed after entering the second half of fiscal 2013.

With respect to the future conduct of monetary policy, most members shared the

view that the Bank would continue with quantitative and qualitative monetary easing,

aiming to achieve the price stability target of 2 percent, as long as it was necessary for

maintaining this target in a stable manner. These members continued that, in doing so, it

would examine both upside and downside risks to economic activity and prices, and make

adjustments as appropriate. In response, one member expressed concern that, in a

situation where it seemed difficult to achieve the price stability target in about two years, if

a rise were to occur in markets' anticipation that quantitative and qualitative monetary

easing would continue for a protracted period or extreme additional measures would be

implemented, this could lead to economic instability in the medium to long term, such as

through a buildup of financial imbalances. On this basis, this member said that it was

appropriate to change the expression representing the Bank's commitment by stating that the

time frame for continuing quantitative and qualitative monetary easing should be restricted

to about two years, and that thereafter the Bank would review the monetary easing measures

in a flexible manner. A different member expressed the recognition that the price stability

target was meant to be a flexible framework, and the Bank should avoid giving rise to a

possible misunderstanding that its ultimate goal was to achieve the specific inflation rate of

2 percent. This member continued that the price stability target could be judged to have

been achieved when it was fairly possible to envisage the inflation rate reaching 2 percent

based on developments in wages, for example.

With regard to the effects of quantitative and qualitative monetary easing,

members shared the recognition that these continued to firmly take hold, and financial

conditions were easing steadily to underpin firms' and households' spending. They agreed

that, in this situation, there was a wider range of positive movements in economic activity

and financial markets, and people's expectations for economic activity and prices had turned

favorable. Regarding how much of an effect could be exerted on longer-term interest rates,

19


-----

many members noted that long-term interest rates in Japan had been stable at low levels

under the Bank's massive JGB purchases. Many members expressed the view that, in a

situation where nominal interest rates had been stable, real interest rates were declining on

the back of a rise in inflation expectations. Meanwhile, one member was of the opinion

that, while price developments thus far had been broadly in line with the Bank's projection,

the developments mainly reflected the significant contribution of the price rise in

energy-related items. This member continued that, therefore, it could not yet be judged

that Japan's economy was following a path toward achieving the price stability target of 2

percent as expected.

**V. Remarks by Government Representatives**

The representative from the Ministry of Finance made the following remarks.

(1) About half a year had passed since the introduction of quantitative and qualitative

monetary easing. The Japanese economy was on the way to recovery at a moderate

pace, as seen in the fact that it had attained an annualized real GDP growth rate of more

than 3 percent in two consecutive quarters, due in part to the effects of the

three-pronged strategy including bold monetary easing. As for prices, there were

some signs that prices had stopped decreasing across a wide range of items, indicating

that deflation was ending. The government acknowledged that the Japanese economy

was steadily progressing toward achieving the overcoming of deflation and economic

revitalization, and understood that this was confirmed by the October 2013 Outlook

Report. It expected the Bank to continue to steadily pursue quantitative and

qualitative monetary easing and achieve the price stability target of 2 percent at the

earliest possible time.

(2) The government deemed it important to achieve sustainable economic growth and a

desirable inflation in which employment and wages improved accordingly, amid

continued progress toward overcoming deflation. To this end, with a view to

aggressively implementing the Japan Revitalization Strategy and aiming to enhance the

competitiveness of Japanese firms, the government had submitted the Bill for the

Industrial Competitiveness Enhancement Act to the Diet. Along with this, the

government would carry out special tax measures to stimulate private investment, such

as the reduction of taxes on business fixed investment and on research and development.

20


-----

In addition, in order to strongly encourage firms' efforts to raise wages, the government

would expand the income growth promotion tax system and aim to form a common

understanding toward realizing a positive cycle of the economy at the

Government-Labor-Management Meeting it had launched on September 20, 2013. At

a second meeting, it had also heard positive and encouraging statements from the

management side.

(3) From the viewpoint of making the social security system sustainable and maintaining

confidence in public finance, on October 15 the government had submitted to the Diet

the so-called program bill, which presented an overall picture of the social security

system reform and described how this would be implemented. The government would

steadily pursue comprehensive reform of the social security and taxation systems.

(4) The government would decisively implement these measures toward achieving (1) the

overcoming of deflation as well as economic revitalization and (2) fiscal consolidation

through pursuit of the Medium-Term Fiscal Plan.

The representative from the Cabinet Office made the following remarks.

(1) The Japanese economy was on the way to recovery at a moderate pace. As for the

outlook, the recovery was expected to take hold as household income and business

investment continued to be on upward trends while exports picked up and the effects of

a range of policies developed. Prices continued to show steady progress toward

overcoming deflation, as evidenced by the fact that the year-on-year rate of change in

consumer prices -- all items less fresh food, petroleum products, and other specific

components -- which indicated underlying trends in consumer prices, had been flat.

(2) On October 17, 2013, the government held a second meeting -- its

Government-Labor-Management Meeting for Realizing a Positive Cycle of the

Economy -- and reported government initiatives toward realizing a positive cycle of the

economy. It also heard positive statements from the management side that they would

aim to make improvement in corporate profits lead to increases in wages and

employment. The government would continue to work to realize a positive cycle of

the economy in an integrated manner by, for example, requesting that the related

ministries and agencies encourage industries for which they were responsible to

increase wages and extend support to trading partners. Furthermore, the Cabinet had

21


-----

decided the Bill for the Industrial Competitiveness Enhancement Act and submitted it to

the Diet, in order to accelerate and strengthen the implementation of the growth strategy.

It would also submit to the Diet related bills, such as the Bill on National Strategic

Special Zones, and would make efforts to promptly obtain its approval. Moreover,

regarding the Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP) Agreement, which was an important

pillar for the growth strategy, the government deemed that a path toward conclusion of

the negotiations and political issues had become clear through the negotiations in

October, thereby creating tremendous momentum toward reaching an agreement before

the end of 2013. It would continue to be proactive in achieving conclusion of the

negotiations by the end of 2013. Through these initiatives, the government would

work toward strengthening the growth potential of the Japanese economy.

(3) The government expected the Bank to achieve the price stability target of 2 percent, in

line with the October 2013 Outlook Report discussed at this meeting. It also expected

the Bank to continue providing a sufficient explanation on the state of its monetary

policy conduct and its outlook for prices at the Council on Economic and Fiscal Policy

and on other occasions.

**VI. Votes**

**A. Vote on the Guideline for Money Market Operations**

Based on the above discussions, members shared the view that it was appropriate

to maintain the current guideline for money market operations, so that the monetary base

would increase at an annual pace of about 60-70 trillion yen.

To reflect this view, the chairman formulated the following proposal and put it to a

vote.

**The Chairman's Policy Proposal on the Guideline for Money Market Operations:**

The guideline for money market operations for the intermeeting period ahead will be as

follows, and will be made public by the attached statement (see Attachment).

The Bank of Japan will conduct money market operations so that the

monetary base will increase at an annual pace of about 60-70 trillion yen.

22


-----

Votes for the proposal: Mr. H. Kuroda, Mr. K. Iwata, Mr. H. Nakaso, Mr. R. Miyao,

Mr. Y. Morimoto, Ms. S. Shirai, Mr. K. Ishida, Mr. T. Sato, and Mr. T. Kiuchi.

Votes against the proposal: None.

**B. Decision regarding the Outlook for Economic Activity and Prices**

Members discussed the draft of "The Bank's View" in the October 2013 _Outlook_

_for Economic Activity and Prices (consisting of "The Bank's View" and "The Background"),_

and formed a majority view.

Ms. S. Shirai, however, formulated a proposal to make the following changes.

First, from the viewpoint of enhancing clarity and intelligibility, she proposed to add a

paragraph at the beginning of "The Bank's View" stating, "The October 2013 Outlook

Report will first present the baseline scenario of the outlook for economic activity and

prices in Japan for the next one to three years. It will next highlight upside and downside

risks to the baseline scenario. The Bank will then assess that scenario from two

perspectives: the first perspective concerns an examination of the scenario from the

viewpoint of whether the economy will follow the sustainable growth path with price

stability; the second perspective involves an examination of various risks considered most

relevant to the conduct of monetary policy -- including those in the longer term -- from the

viewpoint of achieving the sustainable growth path with price stability. Lastly, taking into

account its assessment based on those perspectives, the Bank will outline its thinking on the

future conduct of monetary policy." The second change was with regard to upside and

downside risks to economic activity, and Ms. Shirai proposed to add "attention should be

paid to the downside risks" since there was a high degree of uncertainty regarding

developments in overseas economies and households' employment and income situation.

In addition, with regard to upside and downside risks to prices, she proposed to add the

same description, because there was a high degree of uncertainty regarding developments in

medium- to long-term inflation expectations and the responsiveness of prices to the

aggregate supply and demand balance. Third, as for the future conduct of monetary policy,

Ms. Shirai proposed to change the current expression that "Japan's economy has been

following the path toward achieving the 2 percent price stability target as expected" to a

new expression that "Japan's economy has been following the path toward achieving the 2

percent price stability target at a moderate pace." The proposal was then put to a vote, and

23


-----

was defeated by a majority vote.

Votes for the proposal: Ms. S. Shirai.

Votes against the proposal: Mr. H. Kuroda, Mr. K. Iwata, Mr. H. Nakaso, Mr. R.

Miyao, Mr. Y. Morimoto, Mr. K. Ishida, Mr. T. Sato, and Mr. T. Kiuchi.

Mr. T. Sato formulated a proposal to make the following changes. First, with

regard to the outlook for prices toward the latter half of the projection period, he proposed

to change the current expression that the year-on-year rate of change in the CPI "is likely to

reach around 2 percent" to a new expression that "around 2 percent in terms of the

year-on-year rate of increase in the CPI will come into sight." Second, with regard to the

baseline scenario for the outlook for economic activity and prices, he proposed changing the

current expression that "Japan's economy is judged as likely to achieve around 2 percent

inflation" to a new expression that "Japan's economy is judged as likely to head toward

achieving around 2 percent inflation." Third, with regard to risks on the price front, Mr.

Sato proposed changing the current expression that risks "can be assessed as being largely

balanced" to a new expression that they "are somewhat tilted to the downside." The

proposal was then put to a vote, and was defeated by a majority vote.

Votes for the proposal: Mr. T. Sato.

Votes against the proposal: Mr. H. Kuroda, Mr. K. Iwata, Mr. H. Nakaso, Mr. R.

Miyao, Mr. Y. Morimoto, Ms. S. Shirai, Mr. K. Ishida, and Mr. T. Kiuchi.

Mr. T. Kiuchi formulated a proposal to make the following changes. First, with

regard to inflation expectations, he proposed changing the current expression that inflation

expectations "are likely to continue on a rising trend under quantitative and qualitative

monetary easing, partly supported by a rise in the observed inflation rate, gradually

converging to around 2 percent -- the price stability target" to a new expression that they

"are likely to continue on a moderate rising trend, partly supported by a rise in the observed

inflation rate." Second, with regard to the outlook for prices toward the latter half of the

projection period, he proposed to change the current expression that the year-on-year rate of

change in the CPI "is likely to reach around 2 percent -- the price stability target" to a new

24


-----

expression that "the rate of increase in the CPI is expected to rise moderately." Third, with

regard to the future conduct of monetary policy, Mr. Kiuchi proposed changing the current

expression that "the Bank will continue with quantitative and qualitative monetary easing,

aiming to achieve the price stability target of 2 percent, as long as it is necessary for

maintaining that target in a stable manner. It will examine both upside and downside risks

to economic activity and prices, and make adjustments as appropriate" to a new expression

that "the Bank will aim to achieve the price stability target of 2 percent in the medium to

long term. On this basis, it will designate quantitative and qualitative monetary easing as

an intensive measure with a time frame of about two years, and will review the monetary

easing measures in a flexible manner when this time frame comes to an end." The

proposal was then put to a vote, and was defeated by a majority vote.

Votes for the proposal: Mr. T. Kiuchi.

Votes against the proposal: Mr. H. Kuroda, Mr. K. Iwata, Mr. H. Nakaso, Mr. R.

Miyao, Mr. Y. Morimoto, Ms. S. Shirai, Mr. K. Ishida, and Mr. T. Sato.

To reflect the majority view, the chairman formulated a proposal on "The Bank's

View" and put it to a vote. The Policy Board decided the text of "The Bank's View" by a

majority vote. It was confirmed that "The Bank's View" would be made public on October

31, 2013 and the whole report on November 1, 2013.

Votes for the proposal: Mr. H. Kuroda, Mr. K. Iwata, Mr. H. Nakaso, Mr. R. Miyao,

Mr. Y. Morimoto, and Mr. K. Ishida.

Votes against the proposal: Ms. S. Shirai, Mr. T. Sato, and Mr. T. Kiuchi.

Ms. S. Shirai, Mr. T. Sato, and Mr. T. Kiuchi dissented for the reasons presented in

each of the aforementioned proposals.

**VII. Approval of the Minutes of the Monetary Policy Meeting**

The Policy Board approved unanimously the minutes of the Monetary Policy

Meeting of October 3 and 4, 2013 for release on November 6, 2013.

25


-----

Attachment

October 31, 2013

Bank of Japan

**Statement on Monetary Policy**

At the Monetary Policy Meeting held today, the Policy Board of the Bank of Japan

decided, by a unanimous vote, to set the following guideline for money market operations

for the intermeeting period:

The Bank of Japan will conduct money market operations so that the monetary

base will increase at an annual pace of about 60-70 trillion yen.

26


-----

