### Publication date: 20 May 2009

## MINUTES OF THE 
# MONETARY POLICY COMMITTEE MEETING
## 6 AND 7 MAY 2009

##### These are the minutes of the Monetary Policy Committee meeting held on  6 and 7 May 2009.

 They are also available on the Internet http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/minutes/mpc/pdf/2009/mpc0905.pdf

 The Bank of England Act 1998 gives the Bank of England operational responsibility  for setting interest rates to meet the Government’s inflation target. Operational  decisions are taken by the Bank’s Monetary Policy Committee. The Committee meets  on a regular monthly basis and minutes of its meetings are released on the  Wednesday of the second week after the meeting takes place. Accordingly, the  minutes of the Committee meeting to be held on 3 and 4 June will be published on  17 June 2009.


-----

#### MINUTES OF THE MONETARY POLICY COMMITTEE MEETING HELD ON 6 AND 7 MAY 2009

1 Before turning to its immediate policy decision, and against the background of its latest

projections for output and inflation, the Committee discussed financial market developments; the

international economy; money, credit, demand and output; and costs and prices. The Committee

noted a letter from the Chancellor (attached as an annex) setting out the remit for the Committee over

the following year, in accordance with Section 12 of the Bank of England Act.

**Financial markets**

2 Financial market sentiment had generally improved during the month. The three-month LIBOR

rate had continued to fall, and spreads over risk-free rates had continued to decline. That might have

in part reflected reduced demand by UK banks for this type of funding following the rise in bank

reserves generated by the Monetary Policy Committee’s asset purchases. But the narrowing of LIBOR

spreads had also been a feature of US and euro-area markets. Major UK banks’ Credit Default Swap

(CDS) premia – a measure of likely default on debt – had fallen somewhat, continuing the gradual

downward trend apparent since March.

3 Since the MPC’s decision at its March meeting to purchase assets financed by the issuance of

central bank reserves, the Bank had acquired just over £52 billion of assets through its Asset Purchase

Facility (APF). Secured overnight rates had declined somewhat over the past month and had on a

number of occasions traded marginally below Bank Rate.

4 The bulk of the purchases under the APF had been of gilts. Yields on gilts with maturities above

ten years were around 10-30 basis points lower than at the time of the March decision to start asset

purchases financed by the issuance of central bank reserves. Gilt yields had generally risen on the

month. Market contacts had attributed at least some of the rise to news about the scale of the increased

government borrowing revealed in the Budget.


-----

2

5 The Bank’s holdings of commercial paper had not changed much since the April MPC meeting.

Net purchases financed by the issuance of central bank reserves still amounted to around £1 billion.

The success of this scheme should not be judged by the quantity of assets purchased. Spreads in the

market for commercial paper had fallen and were bunching around or below those offered by the

Bank. There was also evidence that there had been more issuance of A2 rated commercial paper

taking place than before the APF was introduced.

6 Market contacts had become more positive about the impact of the APF corporate bond scheme.

Bid-offer spreads for eligible bonds had narrowed in the secondary market since the programme’s

inception, although the causal link to asset purchases was unclear. The aim of the programme was to

make frequent, but relatively small, purchases in the secondary market to aid price discovery and

thereby to improve the functioning of that market. There had been steady falls in sterling investment

grade corporate bond yields over the month, although movements in other investment grade markets

had been more pronounced. Gross issuance of corporate securities had risen since the start of the year.

7 UK equity prices had risen by 13% on the month, following a rise in the previous month, with

the United Kingdom sharing a more general recovery in global equity markets. There had been further

downward revisions to market analysts’ expectations of UK companies’ earnings growth in 2009. So

it was not obvious that market participants’ views about the most likely path for the economy had

improved. However, it was possible that the increases in equity prices, and the improvement in

financial market sentiment more generally, reflected reduced perceptions of risk associated with these

assets, perhaps related to a lower probability of extreme negative outturns for the macroeconomy.

8 The sterling exchange rate index had risen slightly on the month.

**The international economy**

9 US GDP had fallen by 1.6% in Q1, a larger fall than many market commentators had expected,

with negative contributions from investment and inventories. In the euro area, industrial production

had fallen in February – the sixth month in a row; unemployment had continued to rise in March; and

lending growth was slowing.


-----

3

10 But there had also been some encouraging developments in the world economy. There had been

signs that the sharp fall in world trade was coming to an end. According to the Netherlands Bureau for

Economic Policy Analysis, the volume of world trade in goods had risen by 0.8% in February, having

fallen 16.8% in the year to January. More timely, though less reliable, indicators of global trade such

as air freight volumes suggested that world trade had not fallen in March also.

11 Business surveys indicated that, though the level of global output was probably still falling, the

rate of contraction was slowing. The JP Morgan global manufacturing Purchasing Managers Index

(PMI) had continued to rise, reaching 41.8 in April from 37.3 in March. The scores for output,

employment and new orders had all increased. There had also been encouraging developments in the

services PMIs, with both the US and euro-area indices increasing in April. The EC manufacturing and

services business confidence measures had also picked up in April – for the first time since the middle

of 2008.

12 Having deteriorated rapidly during the past six months, recent data for Asia had improved. In

addition to the PMIs picking up, Japanese industrial production had risen in March for the first time in

six months and production plans for April and May were for further growth. Korean GDP had risen by

0.1% in the first quarter, after falling by 5.1% in 2008 Q4. And new bank lending in China during Q1

was higher than for the whole of 2008.

13 A key question for the long-term sustainability of the recovery would be whether the major

surplus countries could generate more domestic demand. If not, global growth was likely to remain

subdued.

14 Counter-cyclical fiscal stimulus packages and measures to deal with losses in the global banking

system had added significantly to public sector liabilities around the world. It was possible that

governments would have to begin to deal with these growing debts and deficits in the near future,

which could cause the world recovery to lose momentum. Equally, the realisation among households

and companies of the greater tax burden that the higher public borrowing would eventually imply,

could impede any pickup in the global economy.

15 Banks around the world were still in the process of restructuring their balance sheets. There was

a risk that this would prolong the time it took for bank lending to return to more normal levels.


-----

4

**Money, credit, demand and output**

16 The MPC’s programme of asset purchases was intended to affect the economy by boosting the

money supply and nominal spending. But it was too soon to see that in the data. Financial companies

had continued to increase their deposit balances in March, though the growth rate of aggregate broad

money (excluding the impact from money holdings of institutions that intermediate between banks)

remained weak. Bank lending growth had also been subdued, while spreads over Bank Rate on

secured and unsecured loans to households had risen. Nominal GDP data were only available for the

final quarter of 2008. Nominal GDP had fallen by 1% in Q4, and the decline in 2009 Q1 was likely to

have been larger. The shock to demand from collapsing confidence and the turmoil in financial

markets appeared to have had a greater impact on economic activity than the Committee had projected

in February. According to the latest official data on volumes, GDP had fallen by 1.9% in 2009 Q1 −

the largest quarterly fall since 1979 Q3.

17 There were some promising signs from business surveys that the pace of the decline in output

may have moderated in 2009 Q2. According to the CIPS/Markit surveys, the output and orders indices

for both manufacturing and services had continued to pick up in April. In the services survey, the

business activity balance had risen for the fifth consecutive month, and stood at its highest level since

August 2008. In the manufacturing survey, the output balance had increased by three points to 44.6,

twelve points above the series low seen in February.

18 The latest indicators of household spending suggested that consumption had fallen further in the

first quarter, following a sharp drop in 2008 Q4. There were few indicators of spending on consumer

services, but the falls in services output in the first quarter pointed to a marked contraction in that

component of consumption. Spending on goods, by contrast, had not fallen, at least according to

official data. The ONS estimated that retail sales volumes had risen by 0.9% in 2009 Q1, following

growth of 0.7% in 2008 Q4. But these estimates were likely to be revised down somewhat in the

coming months, when the ONS updated the weights used to construct the retail sales volume index.

19 The CBI Distributive Trades Survey balance for retail sales had jumped from -44 in March to +3

in April. But it was likely that this number was affected by the timing of Easter compared with the

previous year. According to the GfK survey, consumer confidence had continued to rise in April, and

the headline balance had picked up by ten points since January.


-----

5

20 House prices (as measured by the average of the lenders’ indices) had fallen by 1.0% in April,

consistent with a further easing in house price deflation, and remained around 20% below their

October 2007 peak. The preview of the April survey from the Royal Institution of Chartered

Surveyors showed further improvements across most housing market activity indicators: new buyer

enquiries and sales had continued to pick up. Mortgage approvals for house purchase had also

recovered further in March, but remained around 60% below their long-term average.

21 The near-term outlook for business investment was subdued. Construction orders for new

commercial property had fallen by 36% in the three months to February. And although some forward
looking surveys of investment in plant and machinery had stabilised in the first quarter, they remained

at historically low levels, and continued to suggest that further cutbacks in investment would take

place in the months ahead.

22 There had been little additional information on stockbuilding during the month. But

manufacturing surveys suggested that firms may have continued to run down their inventories in

2009 Q1.

23 The Government had set out its latest fiscal plans in the April Budget. The Budget had included

some additional discretionary measures, which should help to support demand in the near term.

However, the Treasury’s projection for public sector net borrowing had been revised up substantially

and this could depress spending to the extent that households and companies expected the higher level

of borrowing to lead to higher taxes in the future.

24 Exports had fallen by 3.7% in the fourth quarter. The CIPS/Markit survey index for

manufacturing export orders had picked up more recently. Though it remained just below the “no
change” level, April had seen the largest rise in the index for a single month since the series began.

The fall in UK exports was likely to have been smaller than the decline in world trade. The fall in

global demand had particularly affected certain types of goods, and goods made up a smaller

proportion of UK exports than for the world as a whole. Furthermore, it was likely that the downward

pressure on UK export growth was being partly offset by the decline in the sterling exchange rate,

which had fallen by more than a quarter since mid-2007. The depreciation of sterling had also


-----

6

discouraged spending on imports, thus encouraging more demand for domestically produced goods

and services − a trend confirmed by contacts of the Bank’s regional Agents.

**Costs and prices**

25 According to the Labour Force Survey (LFS), employment had fallen by 126,000 in the three

months to February. And unemployment had risen by 177,000 over the same period. Business

surveys of employment intentions suggested that there would be further marked falls in employment in

the near term.

26 Earnings growth had fallen very sharply in the early months of 2009. According to the average

earnings index (AEI), whole economy earnings fell by 0.4% in January and 2.1% in February

compared with a year earlier − the first falls over a twelve-month period since the series began in

1964. The average weekly earnings measure had been weaker still, falling by nearly 6% in the year to

February. The falls in overall earnings had largely reflected a sharp drop in bonuses, particularly in

the financial sector. Excluding bonus payments, twelve-month pay growth had eased back to 2.9% in

February, from 3.4% in January, according to the AEI. The latest wage settlements data had also

pointed to weakness in earnings growth. A substantial number of settlements agreed so far in 2009

had been for no increase in basic pay.

27 The weakness in earnings growth was likely to be the result of a number of factors. The subdued

wage data had probably reflected reduced demand for labour following the recent falls in output. The

rise in non-labour costs could have been an additional factor putting downward pressure on wage

growth. The depreciation of sterling since the middle of 2007 had had a pronounced effect on many

businesses’ costs, by increasing the price of imported goods and services used in production. Some

businesses had probably sought to offset some of the increases in the costs of imports by cutting back

on their wage bills. Workers may also have responded to the depreciation of sterling and the onset of

the recession by accepting lower or no wage increases, in an attempt to encourage their employers to

achieve more of the desired reduction in labour costs through weaker pay, rather than through

reductions in employment. A further possible reason for the fall in nominal wage growth was the

reduction in some measures of inflation and inflation expectations.


-----

7

28 CPI inflation in March had been 2.9%, above the 2% target and the Committee’s central

projection for inflation in the February Inflation Report. That surprising resilience had probably

reflected the lower level of sterling continuing to exert upwards pressure on inflation. Despite the

recent unexpectedly high outturns, the MPC continued to expect annual CPI inflation to fall rapidly

over the remainder of 2009 to well below the inflation target. RPI inflation had turned negative in

March, pulled down by the impact of reductions in Bank Rate on mortgage interest payments and by

declines in the housing depreciation component of the index.

29 One-year-ahead measures of household inflation expectations had stabilised at levels which

appeared consistent with CPI inflation dipping below the 2% target during the next twelve months.

Longer-term measures of expectations had changed little on the quarter and remained slightly below

their recent averages. The MPC would continue to monitor these data closely in the coming months.

**The May GDP growth and inflation projections**

30 The Committee reached its policy decision in the light of the projections to be published in the

_Inflation Report on Wednesday 13 May. The outlook for economic growth was unusually uncertain._

The sharp downturn in global economic activity, combined with the process of adjustment underway in

the UK economy as households and companies, especially in the financial sector, restructured their

balance sheets, continued to act as a significant drag on growth. But that was counteracted by the

considerable stimulus stemming from the easing in monetary and fiscal policy at home and abroad, the

substantial depreciation in sterling, past falls in commodity prices, and actions taken by authorities

internationally to bolster the availability of credit. That stimulus, when combined with a turnaround in

the stock cycle, should lead to a recovery in economic growth over the forecast period.

31 Whatever the outlook over the next year, the strength and sustainability of the recovery in the

medium term was uncertain. On the one hand, the contraction in world demand and trade could be

protracted; households might save more; and the availability of credit to companies and households

might improve only gradually. On the other hand, it was possible that the substantial scale of the

economic stimulus in train could prompt a rapid rebound in economic activity. In particular, the

impact of monetary policy on nominal spending was more difficult to judge than normal. On balance,

the Committee judged that these factors taken together pointed to a relatively slow recovery in

economic activity.


-----

8

32 The outlook for inflation also remained extremely uncertain. The margin of spare capacity that

was likely to persist over the forecast period would bear down on CPI inflation. That was partly offset

by the upward pressure associated with the pass-through of sterling’s depreciation to consumer prices.

The balance of these factors suggested that, conditioned on the assumptions that Bank Rate followed a

path implied by market yields and the stock of purchased assets increased to £125 billion, it was more

likely than not that CPI inflation would be below the 2% inflation target in the medium term. In the

projection for CPI inflation conditioned on Bank Rate held constant at 0.5%, the risks of inflation

being above or below the 2% target became more evenly balanced towards the two-year horizon.

**The immediate policy decision**

33 Output had continued to contract across the world, and international trade had fallen

precipitously. The global banking and financial system remained fragile. In the United Kingdom,

GDP had fallen sharply in the first quarter of 2009, and by more than the Committee had expected at

both the time of the February Inflation Report and at the time of its March meeting when it had

decided to undertake a £75 billion programme of asset purchases. There were some promising signs in

a range of surveys that the pace of decline in activity had moderated. But those data provided only an

indication of activity in the short run and offered little insight as to how robust or sustained any

recovery might be.

34 CPI inflation had been 2.9% in March, significantly higher than the 2% inflation target. CPI

inflation was likely to drop below the target over the coming months, driven in part by diminishing

contributions from food and energy prices. But the falls in output that had already occurred, combined

with the relatively subdued outlook for growth, meant that there was likely to be a substantial margin

of spare capacity bearing down on inflation for some time. The outlook for inflation indicated that, on

balance, some further monetary stimulus was probably needed to ensure that inflation would meet the

2% target in the medium term.

35 Market participants appeared to expect Bank Rate to rise around the turn of the year and to

continue increasing thereafter. It was possible that the publication of a projection, based on market

yields, in which inflation was more likely than not to undershoot the target might lead the market yield

curve to fall, delivering an additional degree of monetary stimulus.


-----

9

36 There were some arguments for not extending the £75 billion asset purchase programme this

month. There was uncertainty about the impact of asset purchases on this scale to stimulate nominal

spending. The Committee would learn a considerable amount about the transmission mechanism of

asset purchases in the coming months. There were also signs that economic conditions could be

starting to improve. There was a substantial degree of monetary stimulus already in train and, given

the uncertain nature of the transmission mechanism, there was a risk that the Committee would not be

able to identify early enough when it should be withdrawn. With the benefit of more information on

the impact of its existing asset purchase programme, the Committee would be in a better position to

judge these issues at future policy meetings.

37 But there were also arguments in favour of expanding the asset purchase programme at this

meeting. In Inflation Report months, the Committee took stock of the likely outcomes through the

discussion and analysis that led up to agreeing its quarterly projections for growth and inflation. On

balance, the recovery was likely to be relatively slow. There was a persistent degree of slack forecast

for the economy and a high probability that inflation, in the absence of a further monetary stimulus,

could significantly undershoot the 2% target in the medium term. The projections indicated that more

monetary stimulus was probably needed to bring inflation back to target in the medium term. The

Committee could use the instrument of asset purchases to stimulate demand, thus enabling it to reduce

the period of time at which Bank Rate had to be held at extraordinarily low levels. There was an

expectation in markets and elsewhere that the asset purchase programme would be extended. Failure

to do so when the economic outlook suggested more monetary stimulus was necessary could harm the

public’s confidence in the recovery.

38 The risks of stimulating demand too little at the current time seemed greater than the risks of

stimulating it too much. If the recovery faltered, then policymakers might find that their ability to

stimulate demand in the face of receding confidence would be impaired. But if inflation were to rise

more rapidly than expected and appeared likely to breach the inflation target on the upside, then

monetary policy could be tightened through some combination of raising Bank Rate and selling assets

back to the market. The Committee was alert to such risks and would take effective action should they

crystallise.


-----

10

39 The Chancellor had set an initial upper limit of £150 billion for the indemnity on the Asset

Purchase Facility. This had been confirmed in the annual remit for the Committee attached as an

annex to these Minutes. The Committee would ask the Governor to write to the Chancellor seeking an

increase in that limit should economic conditions require it.

40 All members agreed that the asset purchase programme should be extended this month. The

Committee discussed the case for increasing the size of the programme by either £50 billion or £75

billion. For some members, the economic outlook warranted an increase in the size of the programme

of £50 billion. For other members, a case could be made for the larger stimulus. But as the precise

amount that would ultimately be required was so uncertain, there was no pressing need for the larger

extension at this meeting. The programme would be reviewed every month. The amount of assets

purchased could then be increased or decreased in light of the Committee’s assessment of economic

developments.

41 In light of the outlook for inflation, the Committee agreed to maintain Bank Rate at 0.5% and

increase the size of asset purchases by £50 billion to a total of £125 billion – with the remaining

purchases of that new total to be completed in three months. The maturity range of the gilts purchased

would be kept under review.

42 The Governor invited the Committee to vote on the proposition that:

Bank Rate should be maintained at 0.5%;

The Bank of England should finance a further £50 billion of asset purchases by the creation

of central bank reserves, implying a total quantity of £125 billion of such asset purchases.

The Bank should seek to complete the £125 billion of purchases within the next three

months.

The Committee voted unanimously in favour of the proposition.

43 The Committee noted that purchases of private sector assets under the Asset Purchase Facility

would continue to be financed using central bank reserves rather than Treasury Bills and, in so far as

such purchases fell short of the £125 billion total, the Bank of England would buy gilts.


-----

11

44 Finally, the Governor expressed his appreciation to David Blanchflower for his contribution as a

member of the Committee.

45 The following members of the Committee were present:

Mervyn King, Governor
Charles Bean, Deputy Governor responsible for monetary policy
Paul Tucker, Deputy Governor responsible for financial stability
Kate Barker
Tim Besley
David Blanchflower
Spencer Dale
Paul Fisher
Andrew Sentance

Dave Ramsden was present as the Treasury representative.


-----

