**HIGHLIGHTS OF THE MEETING OF THE MONETARY BOARD ON THE MONETARY POLICY**

**STANCE HELD ON 20 AUGUST 2020[1]**


**I.** **Monetary Policy Decision**

The Monetary Board decided to:

a) maintain the overnight RRP (borrowing) at 2.25 percent; and

b) keep the current levels of overnight deposit and overnight lending rates at 1.75 percent

and 2.75 percent, respectively.

**II.** **Key Considerations in the Formulation of the Monetary Policy Stance**

  - The Monetary Board’s (MB) decision to maintain the BSP’s policy interest rate was based on its
assessment that the inflation environment remains benign. The latest baseline forecasts
indicate that inflation could settle within the government’s target range of 3.0 percent
± 1.0 percentage point at 2.6 percent for 2020, 3.0 percent for 2021, and 3.1 percent for 2022.
Consistent with the latest baseline inflation forecasts, inflation expectations have remained well
within the government’s target range.

  - In assessing the monetary policy stance, the MB also considered that the overall balance of risks
to the inflation outlook remains tilted to the downside for 2021 to 2022. The potential impact
of a more disruptive COVID-19 epidemic on global and domestic economic growth is seen as the
primary downside risk factor to inflation over the policy horizon. Meanwhile, adjustments in
power and water rates are the main upside risks to inflation.

  - The MB also observed that the outlook for global economic growth remain subdued and
uncertain amid a resurgence in COVID-19 cases in many jurisdictions. The future path of global
economic recovery remains subject to downside risk and dependent upon containment of the
virus. Furthermore, the MB noted the sharp contraction in domestic output in the first half of
2020 reflecting the impact of the enforcement of necessary measures to contain the spread of
the virus in the country. At the same time, early signs of recovery were observed in domestic
economic activity with the gradual easing of lockdown restrictions, supported by ample liquidity
in the financial system.

  - Given these considerations, the MB is of the view that monetary policy settings remain
appropriate for the time being. A prudent pause will enable the cumulative 175-basis-pointreduction in the policy rate as well as other monetary and regulatory relief measures by the BSP
to fully work their way through the economy, even as the National Government continues to
implement interventions to bolster economic activity and protect human lives and livelihoods.

1 The discussions herein reflect the assessment made by the Monetary Board based on a comprehensive set of economic information available at the


-----

**III.   Recent Developments and Inflation Outlook**

The MB considered the following developments in deciding on the monetary policy stance:

**A. Domestic price conditions**

  - Year-on-year headline inflation has increased in June and July 2020 to 2.5 percent and
2.7 percent, respectively. This brought the year-to-date average inflation to 2.5 percent, which
remains within the government’s 2-4 percent target range. Headline inflation increased in JuneJuly driven mainly by rising transport costs such as, higher domestic petroleum prices and
tricycle fare hikes. By contrast, inflation rates have eased for selected key food items such as,
fish, fruits, and vegetables.

  - Official core inflation, which measures generalized price pressures by excluding volatile food and
energy items, rose to 3.3 percent year-on-year in July, driven by higher transport fares.
Meanwhile, the month-on-month change in the seasonally-adjusted CPI at 0.4 percent was
unchanged from the previous month’s rate.

**B.  Inflation expectations**

  - Results of the August 2020 BSP survey of private sector economists show a higher mean inflation
forecast for 2020 and steady mean inflation forecasts for 2021 and 2022. The mean inflation
forecasts for 2021 and 2022 were unchanged at 2.8 percent and 2.9 percent, respectively.

**C.  Inflation outlook**

  - The latest baseline forecasts continue to suggest benign inflation environment over the policy
horizon. Inflation is expected to average at 2.6 percent for 2020, 3.0 percent for 2021, and
3.1 percent for 2022. These forecasts are higher by 0.3 percentage point (ppt), 0.4 ppt, and
0.1 ppt for 2020 to 2022, respectively, compared to the previous round due primarily to the
higher-than-expected inflation outturns for June and July as well as the continued increase in
global crude oil prices. These were partly offset by the sharper contraction in domestic economic
growth and continued appreciation of the peso.

**Baseline Inflation Forecasts**

**Forecast as of** **Forecast as of**

**25 June 2020** **20 August 2020**

2020 2.3 2.6

2021 2.6 3.0

2022 3.0 3.1

  - The overall balance of risks to the inflation outlook remains tilted to the downside for 2021 to
2022. The potential impact of a more disruptive COVID-19 pandemic on global and domestic
economic growth is seen as the primary downside risk factor to inflation over the policy horizon.
Meanwhile, adjustments in power and water rates are the main upside risks to inflation.

**D. Demand conditions**

  - Domestic economic activity is projected to contract at a slower pace in the remaining quarters
of 2020 before recovering in 2021 and 2022. The preliminary nowcast for GDP growth indicates
that the economy could contract further in Q3 2020. The decline in GDP for the quarter could
be driven primarily by the further deterioration in the performance of both the industry and
services sectors, which remain heavily affected despite some easing in quarantine measures.

|Baseline Inflation Forecasts|Col2|Col3|
|---|---|---|
|Forecast as of Forecast as of 25 June 2020 20 August 2020|||
|2020 2.3 2.6|||
|2021 2.6 3.0|||
|2022|3.0|3.1|


-----

Among the major industries, however, only the agriculture sector recorded an expansion of
1.6 percent in Q2 2020 from -0.3 percent in the previous quarter.

  - Forward-looking indicators for manufacturing production suggest momentum remained
disrupted. Notwithstanding a further improvement from the June PMI of 43.5, the preliminary
composite PMI in July 2020 continued to settle below the 50-point expansion threshold at
45.0. The slower contraction of manufacturing and services more than offset the marginal
decline of the retail and wholesale sector. The manufacturing sector’s better performance was
due to the gradual easing of lockdown measures and travel restrictions, wherein more firms
re-opened and operated during the month.

  - At the same time, limited improvements in mobility indicators suggest that the public is opting
to stay at home, which could affect retail sales and spending for other non-essentials, the same
factors that pulled down consumption growth in the previous quarter.

**E.  Supply-side indicators**

Developments in Agriculture

  - Domestic rice prices continue to increase amid disruption to the food supply chain due to
quarantine measures combined with strong local demand for rice amid relief efforts.

  - Meanwhile, according to the latest climate advisory of the Philippine Atmospheric, Geophysical
and Astronomical Services Administration,[2] cool ENSO-neutral conditions will likely persist
across the tropical Pacific Ocean between end-October and November 2020.

Oil Price Developments

  - International oil price continued to rise in July 2020 but was broadly steady in early August as
considerable uncertainty over global demand prospects weighed down on prices despite the
OPEC+ production cuts. Domestic petroleum prices still posted a net decrease on a year-todate basis in Metro Manila despite retail outlets imposing a 10-percent tariff increase.

Developments in the Utilities Sector

  - The overall electricity rate declined in August 2020 due to lower power generation charges. The
decrease in cost of power from the Wholesale Electricity Spot Market (WESM) was due to
improved supply situation in the Luzon grid with lower average plant capacity outage.
Meanwhile, generation charge from the Power Supply Agreements (PSAs) increased due to
lower average plant dispatch and lower Force Majeure (FM) claims[3] in August compared
with the previous month.

**F. Financial market developments**

  - In July 2020, the peso appreciated against the US dollar compared to the previous month on
market optimism amid Moody’s Investors Service’s affirmation of the country’s credit rating;
the continued growth in the gross international reserves (GIR); wider balance of payments (BoP)
surplus in May 2020; news of progress in the development of an antiviral drug for COVID-19;
and the State of the Nation Address (SONA) of President Duterte, which outlined some measures
to support economic recovery amid the pandemic.

2 Seasonal Climate Outlook Report as of 22 July 2020.
3 Due to the significant reduction in power demand in its service area during the implementation of community quarantine protocols,
Meralco invoked the Force Majeure provision in its Power Supply Agreements (PSAs) for the duration of the lockdown, reducing


-----

**G. Domestic liquidity and credit conditions**

  - Domestic liquidity growth eases in June. Preliminary data show that domestic liquidity (M3)
expanded by 14.9 percent year-on-year to about ₱13.6 trillion in June. This was slower than the
16.7-percent expansion in May. Meanwhile, bank lending grew by 9.6 percent in June, though
slower than the 11.3-percent growth in May.

  - Weakened corporate sector performance in the first half of 2020 reflected in part the slowdown
in bank lending. A general decline in net income was reported by firms across key industries
based on reports submitted in Q1 2020. Similarly, Q2 2020 earnings performance showed
further declines in net profits. Banks continue to note higher loan loss provisioning as a source
of the decline in earnings.

  - Credit growth is expected to improve over the coming months with continued policy support as

the economy gradually reopens and as the BSP’s monetary and regulatory measures gain further
traction. In terms of alternative compliance with reserve requirements (RR), preliminary data
show that for the reserve week ending 23 July 2020, 97 banks have extended loans to micro,
small, and medium enterprises (MSMEs) with an average daily balance of P84.2 billion.
Meanwhile, 13 banks provided loans to large enterprises with average daily loan balance of
P12.3 billion for the reserve week ending 23 July 2020. Moreover, the Philippine banking system
remains well-capitalized to sustain credit activity with a risk-based capital adequacy ratio (CAR)
of 15.3 percent on solo basis and 15.9 percent on consolidated basis as of end-March 2020.

  - Notwithstanding the Retail Treasury Bond (RTB) offering of the Bureau of the Treasury (BTr),[4]
liquidity in the financial system remain ample as a result of the implementation of the BSP's
liquidity-enhancing measures. In fact, as the BSP see improvements in domestic liquidity
dynamics and market functioning, the BSP started recalibrating its monetary operations. The
BSP reopened gradually its TDF for the 7-, 14-, and 28-day tenors. At the same time, the BSP
increased the RRP offer volume to its pre-enhanced community quarantine (ECQ) level. These
reconfigurations are operational adjustments that are meant to provide better traction on
short-term market interest rates while keeping monetary policy accommodative.

**H.  Fiscal developments**

  - The National Government (NG) recorded a P560.4 billion fiscal deficit for the first half of 2020.
Netting out the interest payments in NG expenditures, the primary deficit amounted to
P372.7 billion, a turnaround from the P137.4 billion primary surplus recorded in the previous
year.

  - Driving economic activity will hinge on the deployment of additional fiscal measures to support
domestic demand including extending wage subsidies and loans to support household incomes
and ensure employment for displaced workers. Various legislative measures are currently
pending in the Senate and Congress to further stimulate incomes and demand.

4 The public offer period for the 3-year RTBs was scheduled on 16 July – 7 August 2020, while the settlement date was set on


-----

**I.  External developments**

  - There are signs of recovery in global economic activity amid substantial policy stimulus and
easing of restrictions. The JP Morgan Global All-Industry Output Index rose to a six-month high
of 50.8 in July from 47.8 in June. Five out of the six sub-sectors covered by the survey registered
output growth during the month, with the fastest rate of expansion posted by consumer goods
producers. Meanwhile, nine out of the 13 countries for which data are available showed
expansions, with the strongest performances recorded in Australia, France, and the UK.
Downturns continued in Japan, India, Brazil, and Kazakhstan. Manufacturing conditions in the
ASEAN region continue to be below the 50-mark despite the recent upturn in the Nikkei ASEAN
Manufacturing PMI to 46.5 in July from 43.7 in the previous month as both output and new
orders decreased at softer rates in July than in June. However, it should be noted that downside
growth risks are still present with the emergence of COVID-19 cases, which could lead to further
disruptions in economic activity.

  - The worldwide PMI surveys indicated some strengthening of global economic growth in July
particularly in developed economies amid rebounding activity from COVID-19 lockdowns
notably in Europe as well as sustained robust expansion in China. US business activity stabilized
but remained subdued by virus containment measures. There are likewise concerns that global
growth could slow again after the initial rebound amid rising worries over second waves of virus
infections.


-----

