**HIGHLIGHTS OF THE MEETING OF THE MONETARY BOARD ON THE**

**MONETARY POLICY STANCE HELD ON 27 JUNE 2024 [1]**


**I.** **Monetary Policy Decision**

The Monetary Board decided to:

a) Maintain the Target RRP Rate at 6.50 percent; and

b) Maintain the current interest rates on the overnight deposit facility at

6.00 percent and overnight lending facility at 7.00 percent.

**II.** **Key Considerations in the Formulation of the Monetary Policy Stance**

  - The Monetary Board decided to maintain the BSP’s Target Reverse

Repurchase (RRP) Rate at 6.50 percent. The balance of risks to the inflation
outlook has shifted toward the downside due to the impact of the tariff
adjustment on rice prices under Executive Order No. 62 (EO 62).
Nonetheless, lingering pressures on domestic prices of food items other
than rice, transport charges, and electricity rates continue to pose upside
risks to inflation.

  - Inflation continues to ease closer to the midpoint of the Government’s

2– 4 percent target range. Risk-adjusted forecasts (RAF) have also declined
significantly. Meanwhile, inflation expectations remain well-anchored for
2024 to 2026, based on the BSP’s latest survey of private sector forecasters.

  - Meanwhile, prospects for domestic output growth are largely intact over

the medium term, supported by improved labor market conditions and
robust export growth. However, GDP growth is seen to decelerate in H2
2024 partly due to the impact of positive real interest rates following the
BSP’s tightening cycle.

  - On balance, the Monetary Board deems it appropriate to hold monetary

policy settings steady at this time. Price pressures are expected to further
dissipate in the near term following the implementation of reduced tariffs
on rice, along with other non-monetary interventions that could ensure
sufficient domestic food supply. If sustained, an improvement in inflation
outlook would allow the Monetary Board to consider a less restrictive
monetary policy stance. However, uncertainty in the external environment
requires continued caution against potential spillovers, including those in
the financial markets.

1 The discussions herein reflect the assessment made by the Monetary Board based on macroeconomic and financial

information available at the time of the monetary policy meeting. The next meeting of the Monetary Board on the

li i h d l d 15 A 2024


-----

**III.** **Recent Developments and Inflation Outlook**

In assessing the monetary policy stance, the Monetary Board considered

the latest macroeconomic and financial developments as discussed below:

**A. Domestic price conditions**

  - Headline inflation increased slightly to 3.9 percent y-o-y in May from 3.8

percent in April due mainly to higher non-food inflation. The upward
adjustment in electricity rates owing to higher generation costs as well as
uptick in transport inflation drove non-food inflation. By contrast, food
inflation eased but remained elevated given the double-digit inflation for
rice. Meanwhile, core inflation continued to decelerate in May.

**B.  Inflation expectations**

  - Results of the BSP’s survey of external forecasters for June 2024 showed

inflation expectations staying near the upper end of the target range for
2024, while those for 2025-2026 have eased further toward the midpoint of
the target range. The mean inflation forecast for 2024 remained at 3.7
percent relative to the results of the May 2024 survey round. For 2025 and
2026, the mean inflation forecasts declined to 3.4 percent (from 3.5 percent)
and 3.3 percent (from 3.4 percent), respectively.

  - Analysts expect within-target inflation over the policy horizon, although

upside risks continue to dominate their outlook owing to supply-side
pressures and potential second-round effects.

**C.  Inflation outlook**

  - The latest baseline inflation forecasts for 2024 and 2025 are lower

compared to the previous forecasts in May. The overall impact of lowerthan-projected actual inflation in May 2024, lower global crude oil prices,
and the tariff reduction on imported rice fully offset the impact of the
recent depreciation of the peso against the US dollar. While inflation is
projected to settle above the target range in July due to positive base
effects, inflation is expected to return within the target range beginning in
August. Price pressures from rice are anticipated to ease following the
implementation of the rice tariff reduction as well as improved rice
production with the end of the El Niño phenomenon.

  - The latest risk-adjusted inflation forecast is estimated at 3.1 percent for both

2024 and 2025, significantly lower than those in the previous forecast
round. Meanwhile, the estimated impact of inflation risks has declined, as
the disinflationary impact of the rice tariff reduction more than offset the
total estimated impact of upside risks. Upside pressures may still emanate
from higher prices of food items other than rice, transport charges, and
electricity rates.


-----

**D. Demand conditions**

- Domestic growth prospects remain intact for 2024 and 2025 based on BSP

staff estimates. GDP growth may decelerate in H2 2024 due partly to
positive real interest rates following the BSP’s tightening cycle, and
subsequently pick up in 2025. This outlook is consistent with the negative
output gap in 2024 to 2025 amid tight financial conditions.

**E. Supply-side indicators**

Developments in Agriculture

- Nationwide average retail rice prices decreased in May as domestic supply

increased during the summer harvest season. The signing of EO 62 on
20 June 2024 led to the consideration of lower rice tariff in the latest
baseline and RAF. The lower tariff on rice is one of the primary contributors
to the downward revision in the inflation forecasts for 2024-2025 and the
shift to the balance of risks towards the downside. Domestic retail prices of
imported rice are estimated to decline by 14.8 percent or about P6.67 per
kilogram based on the landed cost of imported rice with a 15.0 percent
tariff.

- The climate outlook by the Philippine Atmospheric, Geophysical, and

Astronomical Services Administration (PAGASA) as of 6 June 2024 indicate
that El Niño conditions have concluded. PAGASA has officially declared the
onset of the rainy season on 29 May 2024 and reported the high probability
of La Niña conditions to develop by H2 2024.

Oil Price Developments

- The Dubai crude oil spot price decreased in the first half of June from the

full-month average price in May. The decline in global oil prices was driven
mainly by the possible unwinding of voluntary production cuts by several
OPEC+ members beginning in Q4 2024, the ongoing ceasefire negotiations
between Israel and Hamas, and prospects of higher-for-longer US interest
rates.

Developments in the Utilities Sector

- The overall electricity rate declined by 17.2 percent to P9.4519 per kWh in

June 2024 from P11.4139 per kWh in May 2024. The overall rate decreased as
Meralco implemented a staggered collection of generation costs from the
Wholesale Electricity Spot Market and Power Supply Agreements.

**F.  Financial market developments**

- The peso depreciated by 1.49 percent to an average of P58.19/US$1 for the

period 16 May – 5 June 2024 from the previous monetary policy cycle’s
average of P57.33/US$1 (period covering 8 April – 15 May 2024). The peso
weakened on expectations that the US Federal Reserve will keep interest


-----

rates higher for longer amid slow disinflation progress. On the domestic
front, reports of higher headline inflation in May, a wider balance of
payments deficit and higher foreign investment outflows in April, and
higher external debt service in February dampened market sentiment and
weighed down the peso.

**G. Liquidity and credit conditions**

  - Bank lending activity during H1 2024 has shown signs of increasing

momentum amid sustained loan demand from households and
businesses. Preliminary data indicated that outstanding loans of universal
and commercial banks, net of reverse repurchase placements with the BSP,
expanded by 9.6 percent y-o-y in April 2024 from 9.4 percent y-o-y in March
2024.

**H. Fiscal developments**

  - Overall National Government (NG) spending rose by 16.2 percent y-o-y in

January-April 2024. NG revenues also increased by 16.8 percent owing
mainly to the growth in both tax and non-tax revenues. On balance, the NG
fiscal deficit in January-April 2024 widened to P229.9 billion from a deficit
of P204.1 billion in the same period a year ago.

**I.  External developments**

  - Prospects for global economic activity have broadly improved. The JP

Morgan All-Industry Output Index increased in May as new business activity
and new orders strengthened, reflecting a resurgence of global trade in
goods and services. Economic activity rose in nearly all the countries
covered, led by India, followed by the US, the Eurozone, China, and Japan.
Likewise, ASEAN manufacturing activity expanded at a faster rate in May
owing mainly to solid domestic demand.

  - While many central banks continue to assess inflation dynamics and the

impact of previous monetary policy tightening, several major central banks
have begun reducing their respective key interest rates as inflationary
pressures eased further in their respective economies.


-----

