**HIGHLIGHTS OF THE MEETING OF THE MONETARY BOARD ON THE MONETARY POLICY**

**STANCE HELD ON 20 JUNE 2019[1]**

**I.** **Monetary Policy Decision**

The Monetary Board decided to:

a) maintain the overnight RRP (borrowing) rate at 4.50 percent; and

b) maintain the current overnight deposit and overnight lending rates at 4.00 percent and

5.00 percent, respectively.

**II.** **Key Considerations in the Formulation of the Monetary Policy Stance**

  - The Monetary Board (MB) deemed the prevailing monetary policy settings to be appropriate,
with latest baseline inflation forecasts settling within the target range of 3.0 percent ±
1.0 percentage point for both 2019 and 2020, while inflation expectations moderating further.
The MB also noted that while real sector activity moderated in the first quarter of the year,
overall domestic economic activity is likely to remain firm, supported by a projected recovery
in household spending and the continued implementation of the government’s infrastructure
spending program.

  - At the same time, the MB observed that the risks to the inflation outlook are broadly balanced
for 2019 and 2020. Weaker global economic prospects amid a possible easing in global
demand and increased trade tensions continue to temper the inflation outlook. The potential
adverse effects of a prolonged El Niño episode remain a key upside risk to inflation.

  - On balance, therefore, the MB believed that the manageable inflation outlook and firm
domestic growth prospects support keeping monetary policy settings steady for the time
being. A prudent pause allows the BSP to observe and assess the impact of prior monetary
adjustments including the phased reduction in the reserve requirements to be completed by
the end of July.

1 The discussions herein reflect the assessment made by the Monetary Board based on a comprehensive set of economic information available at
the time of the policy meeting. The highlights of the discussions during the 20 June 2019 monetary policy meeting were approved by the Monetary
Board during its regular meeting held on 11 July 2019. The next meeting of the Monetary Board on the monetary policy stance is scheduled on
8 A 2019


-----

**III.   Recent Developments and Inflation Outlook**

The MB considered the following developments in deciding on the monetary policy stance:

**A. Domestic price conditions**

  - Inflation increased in May 2019 due mainly to supply-side factors (food price movements
linked to adverse weather conditions) and base effects. The 3.2-percent inflation print in May
was higher than the 3.0 percent rate in the previous month. This brought the year-to-date
average to 3.6 percent, which remained within the government’s target range of 2-4 percent.
On a geographical basis, inflation also rose in both the National Capital Region (NCR) and areas
outside NCR.

Relative to the previous month’s levels, seasonally-adjusted month-on-month inflation
increased while non-seasonally-adjusted month-on-month inflation was slightly lower.

  - The official core inflation—which excludes certain volatile food and energy items—was slightly
higher at 3.5 percent in May 2019 from 3.4 percent in April 2019. By contrast, alternative
measures of core inflation were mostly unchanged relative to the previous month’s level.
Meanwhile, the number of CPI items above threshold was lower compared to April 2019.

  - The diffusion index of price changes and the number of CPI items above the threshold of
4.0 percent continued to decline in May.

**B.  Inflation expectations**

  - Results of the BSP’s June 2019 survey of private sector economists showed lower mean
inflation forecasts for 2019 and 2020 at 2.9 percent (from 3.0 percent in the May 2019 survey
round) and 3.1 percent (from 3.2 percent), respectively. Similarly, the mean inflation forecast
for 2021 was lower at 3.1 percent (from 3.2 percent).

**C.  Inflation outlook**

  - The latest staff baseline forecasts indicate that average inflation will settle within the
3.0 percent ± 1.0 percentage point target range in 2019 and 2020. Inflation is projected to
average at 2.7 percent for 2019 and 3.0 percent for 2020, slightly lower relative to the
previous meeting’s forecasts of 2.9 percent for 2019 and 3.1 percent for 2020. The downward
revision in the staff inflation forecasts can be attributed to the sharp decline in global crude oil
prices and the peso appreciation, which offset the faster liquidity growth resulting from the
downward adjustments in the policy rate and reserve requirements.

**Baseline Inflation Forecasts**

9 May 2019 20 June 2019

MB Meeting MB Meeting

2019 2.9 2.7

2020 3.1 3.0

  - The risks to the inflation outlook appear to be broadly balanced for 2019 and 2020. Petitions
for electricity rates and transport fare adjustments, the proposed increase in the excise taxes
of alcoholic beverages and cigarettes, and the potential impact of a prolonged El Niño episode

|Baseline Inflation Forecasts|Col2|Col3|
|---|---|---|
||9 May 2019 MB Meeting|20 June 2019 MB Meeting|
|2019|2.9|2.7|
|2020|3.1|3.0|


-----

are the main upside risks to future inflation. Meanwhile, slower global economic growth due
to protectionist policies in advanced economies as well as geopolitical tensions and the
potential renegotiation for lower tariff rates on meat products continue to be the main
downside risks to the projected inflation path.

**D. Demand conditions**

  - The slower expansion of real GDP for Q1 2019 at 5.6 percent from 6.3 percent in Q4 2018,
reflected mainly the impact of the delayed passage of the 2019 national budget. Nonetheless,
the Philippine economy is expected to remain resilient, supported by sustained private
demand and the scaling up of public investment spending.

  - Meanwhile, the preliminary composite purchasing managers’ index (PMI) remained above the
50-point expansion threshold at 51.8 in May, albeit lower than the April PMI which was at
53.8. Meanwhile, the average capacity utilization rate of the manufacturing sector was broadly
steady at 84.3 percent in April 2019, based on the Philippine Statistics Authority’s Monthly
Integrated Survey of Selected Industries (MISSI).

**E.  Supply-side indicators**

Developments in Agriculture

  - Domestic rice prices declined further in April owing to the summer harvest season and the
continued arrival of rice imports of both the government and the private sector, despite the
ongoing weak El Niño episode.

  - The onset of the El Niño phenomenon presents a potential upside risk to food inflation in the
near term. According to the Philippine Atmospheric, Geophysical and Astronomical Services
Administration’s (PAGASA’s) latest climate advisory,[2] a weak El Niño condition is expected to
continue through 2019 to Q1 2020.

Oil Price Developments

  - Average crude oil spot prices generally decreased in May and early June 2019 over possible
weakness in oil demand with the escalation of trade conflict between the US and its trading
partners. However, upside risks continue to temper the oil price decline such as Organization
of the Petroleum Exporting Countries’ (OPEC’s) decision to extend production cuts. Overall,
uncertainties over oil policy and geopolitical direction remain a key factor to the future oil
price path. On the domestic front, prices have generally reflected the downward trend in
global oil prices. Prices of domestic petroleum products have been declining in recent weeks.

Developments in the Utilities Sector

  - The overall electricity rate decreased further in June 2019 due mainly to lower generation
charge from the Wholesale Electricity Spot Market (WESM). In turn, charges from the WESM
went down despite continued tightness of supply conditions in the Luzon grid. Nevertheless,
the decrease in charges from WESM outweighed the increases in generation charges from the
Independent Power Producers (IPPs) and Power Supply Agreements (PSAs) partly due to the
depreciation of the peso.

2
Seasonal Climate Outlook Report as of 22 May 2019


-----

**F. Financial market developments**

  - For the first two weeks of June, the peso appreciated against the US dollar following dovish
remarks from the US Federal Reserve, as well as market optimism ahead of the trade
negotiations between the United States and China on the sidelines of G20 Summit on 28 and
29 June in Osaka, Japan.

**G. Domestic liquidity and credit conditions**

  - Domestic liquidity slightly increased while credit growth was broadly steady. In April, domestic
liquidity grew by 7.0 percent (from 6.1 percent in March) while bank lending grew at a slightly
slower rate by 12.7 percent (from 12.9 percent). The increase in M3 growth was due to the
expansion in net foreign assets. Meanwhile, TDF rates as well as other market interest rates
(deposit and lending rates) have decreased following the 25-bps BSP’s key policy rate
reduction on 9 May 2019, and the phased reduction in banks’ RRR.

**H.  Fiscal developments**

  - The catch-up fiscal spending is expected to buoy the growth momentum in 2019. With the
2019 national budget signed by the President in mid-April, government spending is expected
to resume for the year. The NG recorded a P3.4-billion fiscal deficit for the first four months of
2019, which is ninety-seven percent lower than the deficit recorded in 2018.

**I.  External developments**

  - Global economic activity expands at a slightly slower pace as growth in new business
moderated. Similarly, US manufacturing activity eased due to slower growth in new orders.
Meanwhile, manufacturing activity in Japan contracted as both output and new orders fell.
Subdued international trade flows also weighed on global economic growth in April.

  - The IMF continues to view the balance of risks to the global outlook as being on the downside.
Policy uncertainty such as the state of regulatory and fiscal policies in the US, spillovers from
tighter global financial conditions, and geopolitical risks as the primary downside risks to global
growth over the medium term.

The downward revision of the International Monetary Fund of its global economic growth
projections in April reflected the slowdown in global activity. Meanwhile, the potential
escalation of trade tensions between the US and China on global trade and investments could
result in further downward adjustments to world growth projections.


-----

