-----

-----

**FOREWARNING**
This document is provided for the reader’s convenience
only. The translation from the official Spanish version was
made by Banco de México’s staff. Discrepancies may arise
between the original document in Spanish and its English
translation. For this reason, the original Spanish version is
the only official document.


**1. PLACE, DATE AND PARTICIPANTS**

**1.1 Place:** Meeting held by virtual means.

**1.2. Date of Governing Board meeting:** June 24,
2020.

**1.3. Participants:**
Alejandro Díaz de León-Carrillo, Governor.
Irene Espinosa-Cantellano, Deputy Governor.
Gerardo Esquivel-Hernández, Deputy Governor.
Javier Eduardo Guzmán-Calafell, Deputy Governor.
Jonathan Ernest Heath-Constable, Deputy

Governor.
Arturo Herrera-Gutiérrez, Secretary of Finance and
Public Credit.
Gabriel Yorio-González, Undersecretary of Finance
and Public Credit.
Elías Villanueva-Ochoa, Secretary of the Governing
Board.

Prior to this meeting, preliminary work by Banco de
México’s staff analyzing the economic and financial
environment as well as the developments in inflation
and the determinants and outlook for inflation, was
conducted and presented to the Governing Board
(see Annex).

**2. ANALYSIS AND RATIONALE BEHIND THE**
**GOVERNING BOARD’S VOTING**

**_International environment_**

**All members mentioned that the COVID-19**
**pandemic and the measures adopted to prevent**
**its spread have affected world economic activity**
**considerably. Some** members added that these
have had an important impact on employment. One
member emphasized the repercussions on

manufactures, on processes integrated into global
value chains, and person-to-person services. He/she
pointed out that the damage has been immediate and
abrupt, both to supply and demand.

**Some members stated that sanitary measures have**
proven to be somewhat effective in reducing
contagion, with differentiated results across

jurisdictions. In this context, they noted that the main


advanced economies started reopening their

activities. One member stressed that Latin America
has become the epicenter of the crisis, given that,
among other factors, the high degree of informality
and poverty hinder compliance of social distancing
measures.

**Most members stated that the contraction of**
**economic activity observed during the first**
**quarter intensified during the second, although**
**in May certain indicators for various economies**
**exhibited some improvement. One** member
expressed that the deterioration during the second
quarter is likely to be lower than previously
anticipated. Another member argued that retail sales
along with certain leading indicators in advanced
economies, such as the purchasing managers’ and
consumer confidence indexes, remain at levels much
lower than those registered prior to the pandemic.

**All members pointed out that in this context**
**multilateral organizations and analysts have**
**once again revised their economic expectations**
**for 2020 downwards. Some** members mentioned
that falls in world GDP of between 4.9 and 6% are
anticipated. One member stated that it is reasonable
to expect that the world’s economic recovery will be
slower than previously estimated.

**Most members underlined that a recovery is**
**expected during the second half of the year and**
**in 2021, although said expectations are subject**
**to a high degree of uncertainty. Among risks to**
**world** **economic** **activity,** **most** **members**

**mentioned a second outbreak of infections.**
**Some** members added the risk that fiscal relief
measures are insufficient or are withdrawn

prematurely. One member noted the significance of
the latter risk for economies showing considerable
levels of indebtedness. **Some members mentioned**
the possibility of additional episodes of turmoil in
international financial markets. **Some members**
added the possibility of political and social instability
associated with the deterioration of socioeconomic
conditions. One member mentioned the resurgence
of trade disputes and the presidential elections in the
U.S. In this context, some members pointed out that
the balance of risks for world economic growth
remains biased to the downside.

**Some members mentioned that weak global demand**
has brought about contractions in commodity prices,
especially of energy products. **One member stated**
that this has affected public revenue and emerging
economies’ terms of trade. Another member pointed
out that although these prices are still at low levels as
compared to the beginning of the year, their quotes

1


-----

have improved and market instruments suggest
stability in the future.

**Most members mentioned that in advanced**
**economies headline and core inflation are below**
**their central bank’s targets. Some members stated**
that in most economies, including emerging ones,
inflation has declined due to a lower demand for a
wide range of goods and services. They pointed out
that this occurred despite the supply constraints and
the increases in the prices of food and medical
services. **One member added that a low inflation**
trajectory is anticipated at the global level, while
**another one added that in emerging economies**
expectations drawn from market instruments remain
at low levels.

**In view of the described environment, most**
**members highlighted that central banks in**
**advanced and emerging economies have eased**
**their monetary policy stances. The majority of**
**members** **added** **that** **different** **monetary**

**authorities** **have** **expanded** **their** **asset**

**purchasing** **programs** **and** **their** **financing**

**schemes to promote the well-functioning of their**
**financial systems. Likewise, most members**
**stated** **that** **different** **central** **banks** **have**

**expressed their readiness to maintain easing**
**measures for as long as necessary or even to**
**strengthen them. Some members** stressed that the
Federal Reserve projections estimate the federal
funds target range to remain between 0 and 0.25%
at least until 2022. **One member added that said**
central bank announced the possibility of

implementing a yield curve control scheme. Another
member noted that in most emerging economies
central banks have continued to ease their monetary
stances and that real interest rates in these countries
are currently close to 0% or are even at negative
levels.

**Most members stated that various countries have**
**adopted important fiscal stimulus measures to**
**mitigate the adverse effects on employment and**
**on households’ and firms’ incomes. One member**
expressed that certain advanced economies, by
having a reserve currency and well-developed
institutions, have managed to promote a significant
and broad range of relief measures for employment
and guarantee programs for businesses and
households. He/she added that in emerging
economies a greater heterogeneity is observed
regarding the amount and the type of implemented
measures.

**All members highlighted that, since the last**
**monetary** **policy** **decision,** **global** **financial**


**markets have exhibited a positive behavior,**
**reflecting the effects of the fiscal, monetary and**
**financial stimulus measures adopted by the**
**advanced economies and the gradual reopening**
**of their productive activities. Most members**
**highlighted the lower risk aversion, the increase**
**in stock market indexes, the appreciation of**
**currencies against the US dollar, a certain**
**reduction in government bond yields, and an**
**increase in commodity prices. Some** members
recalled that initially the pandemic had propitiated an
increase in risk aversion, a deterioration of financial
conditions and a recomposition of investors’
portfolios. One member pointed out that, despite the
recent improvement, different analysts have warned
about a possible overvaluation of equity markets and
that certain studies indicate an increase in the rate of
default of high-yield bonds.

**Most members stated that financial markets in**
**emerging** **economies** **showed** **a** **positive**

**performance as well. However, the majority of**
**members specified that equity markets continue**
**registering outflows,** which, according to **one of**
them, denotes a persisting sentiment of risk aversion.
**Some mentioned that inflows in fixed-income**
instruments were observed. Nonetheless, **one**
member considered that the demand for such
instruments remains weak, as well as the fragility and
the low depth in financial markets of emerging
economies, which have been affected by the
important economic contraction as well as by the fall
in commodity prices and other revenues from
abroad. He/she underlined that during this period of
higher uncertainty, these economies registered
exchange rate and interest rate pressures, increases
in risk premia, falls in stock market indexes and
capital outflows. He/she added that agencies have
downgraded the credit ratings of multiple sovereign
issuers and firms, exacerbating the financial shock
and the risk aversion process in a pro-cyclical
fashion. **Another member mentioned that the fiscal**
front in emerging economies continues to be a risk
factor, since a deterioration both in the balances as
well as in the debt to GDP ratio is expected, due to
the budgetary pressures arising from the stimulus
programs and decreased economic activity.

**Most members mentioned that global financial**
**conditions will remain subject to the evolution**
**and the effects of the pandemic, and therefore**
**the environment of uncertainty is expected to**
**persist. One** member noted that the dynamics of
contagion associated with the pandemic can
deteriorate and affect once again economic activity
and markets, with the consequent impact on firms

2


-----

and households’ solvency as well as on the lesssound financial intermediaries.

**_Economic activity in Mexico_**

**All members made reference to the severe**
**deterioration of economic activity in Mexico.**
**Most members pointed out that it contracted**
**significantly during the first quarter of the year**
**and that, according to available information, the**
**impact of the pandemic intensified in April. Some**
members stated that an important fall is estimated for
the second quarter. **One member indicated that it**
would be deeper than expected since, because of the
duration of the pandemic, the reopening of economic
activities has been more gradual than anticipated.
He/she considered that, although limited available
information and high uncertainty make an accurate
analysis of the recent performance of economic
activity difficult, different indicators show a smaller
contraction, or even a slight recovery, at the
beginning of May, although starting from very low
levels, mainly as a result of the gradual reopening of
the economy.

**Most members pointed out that the lockdown**
**measures have affected aggregate demand. One**
member stated that, at the end of the first quarter,
consumption and investment contracted 1.2 and
9.5%, respectively. He/she added that these are
estimated to have continued declining as a result of
uncertainty and the large loss of employment.

**Most** **members** **highlighted** **that** **different**

**indicators that fell in April, such as the National**
**Association of Self-Service and Department**
**Stores (ANTAD, for its acronym in Spanish)**
**sales,** **light** **vehicles** **sales** **and** **gasoline**

**consumption, showed certain improvement in**
**May. One** member added that during the latter
month, spending on credit cards registered an annual
fall of 34%. As for external demand, some members
indicated that imports and exports decreased
considerably in April. One member mentioned that
automotive exports fell 79%.

**From the supply side, most members indicated**
**that in April industrial production contracted**
**29.6% in annual terms, reflecting disruptions in**
**global value chains and production shutdowns.**
**Some** members pointed out that manufacturing
production and construction decreased 35 and 38%
in annual terms, respectively, and highlighted the
weakness of the services sector. **One member**
underlined the contraction in entertainment,

accommodation and food preparation services.


**As** **to** **the** **labor** **market,** **most** **members**

**emphasized** **the significant fall in employment**
**figures. The majority of members pointed out**
**that, according to INEGI data, considering both**
**formal** **and** **informal** **workers,** **job** **losses**

**amounted to 12.5 million in April.** **One member**
indicated that over 10 million correspond to the
informal sector and that most jobs lost had incomes
of two minimum wages or less, which indicates that
the most vulnerable sector of the population has
been particularly affected. **Some members pointed**
out that during the first five months of the year around
one million IMSS-insured jobs were lost. **One**
member added that withdrawals from personal Afore
accounts due to unemployment reached historical
maximum levels. **Another member added that,**
according to INEGI’s Telephone Survey of

Occupation and Employment, the national

unemployment rate is currently at 4.7%.

**Most members highlighted the rise in the number**
**of underemployed workers as well as in the**
**population that is not economically active, but is**
**available for work. One member expressed that the**
lower labor participation partially explains why the
unemployment rate did not increase so much.
**Another member pointed out that, if individuals that**
are “available” for work are considered as part of the
economically active population, the “concealed”
unemployment rate would be 25.4% of the labor
force. He/she added that if underemployed workers
are included as well, the rate for the indicator known
as the labor gap would reach 50.6%. One member
underlined that the number of individuals either
unemployed, available for work or underemployed,
increased by over 20 million between March and
April. Another member argued that, considering the
number of businesses that have closed down
permanently, based on the number of those that
have withdrawn their registration at the IMSS, it can
be concluded that a large part of the current
unemployment is permanent, since these are not
jobs that may be regained during the reactivation of
the economy.

**Most** **members** **stated** **that,** **although** **the**

**reopening of certain economic sectors and**
**regions in May and June will foster a slight**
**recovery of economic activity, the impact has**
**been considerable and uncertainty persists. The**
**majority of members added that indicators of**
**manufacturing orders and of business and**
**consumer confidence are at low levels. One**
member indicated that implementation of the
USMCA and the anticipated recovery of the US
economy should support investment, but that this

3


-----

would hardly be sufficient to raise it to the required
levels, given the perception by the corporate sector
of an important worsening of the business climate.
He/she asserted that in the next months investment
is unlikely to support the economic recovery
significantly. Another one mentioned that economic
activity is expected to improve gradually during the
second half of the year, as the pandemic is brought
under control and the economy is reopened.

**All members underlined that the growth outlook**
**has deteriorated. Most members indicated that**
**for 2020 there are even projections of a two-digit**
**contraction. Some members specified that the IMF**
has recently adjusted its forecast from -6.6 to
-10.5%. One member added that the consensus of
analysts’ forecasts has been adjusted from -7.5
to -8.3%. Another member mentioned that there is a
broad dispersion in the projections, which reflects
high uncertainty, and that downward revisions for
2020 have not been offset by the corresponding
upward adjustment in expectations for 2021, which
point to a modest recovery. One member stated that
a very deep recession is currently being observed,
with a slow and complex “U”-shaped recovery, due
to the severe deterioration of investment and
consumption. He/she added that the possibility of a
second COVID-19 outbreak, or that the sanitary and
economic measures are simply insufficient, has
increased the risk of a “W”-shaped economic
recovery. **Another member pointed out that the**
duration and depth of the economic contraction
depends on the suspension of economic activities
established by the authorities as well as on selfimposed restrictions by the productive agents, which,
in turn, will depend on progress in the development
of a therapy or a vaccine against the virus.

**Most members agreed that the balance of risks**
**for growth remains significantly biased to the**
**downside. The majority of members stressed the**
**risk of a new COVID-19 outbreak. One** member
cautioned that it could lead to financial and solvency
problems. Some members emphasized the risk that
the health measures that have been adopted to
contain the epidemic are not sufficient. One member
indicated that a high rate of contagion has been
observed in Mexico. Another member noted that the
estimated date on which the health crisis will reach
its peak in Mexico has been repeatedly delayed,
which combined with the experience in other
countries suggests that the risk of new outbreaks
once the process of economic reopening deepens is
high. On the other hand, some members mentioned
the lack of a balanced policy approach, particularly
on the fiscal front, to foster the economic recovery.


**One** member underlined that the potential

implications to the productive apparatus can have a
prolonged effect on employment and consumption
levels.

**Most members agreed that economic slack has**
**widened significantly. Some members added that**
the recent decline in growth forecasts allows to
anticipate that the negative output gap will continue
widening. One member emphasized that the output
gap is at levels unseen since the 2008-2009 financial
crisis.


**Most members mentioned that annual headline**
**inflation rose from 2.15 to 3.17% between April**
**and the first fortnight of June 2020 due to**
**increases in both its non-core and core**
**components. Most members agreed that the**
**recent performance of inflation is associated with**
**demand- and supply-related shocks derived from**
**the pandemic. Some** members stated that the
weakness of domestic demand has been reflected in
lower price variations of different goods and services.
**One member pointed out that for several months**
headline inflation has been close to its target, mainly
as a result of fluctuations in the non-core component,
since core inflation has not declined. **Another**
member recalled that in May headline inflation
remained below the target for the second

consecutive month. One member pointed out that the
referred shocks have led to a recomposition of
relative prices, which has led to higher food prices to
the detriment of the most vulnerable households, a
phenomenon that is not adequately reflected in the
CPI, considering the weights used in its

measurement.

**Delving into the evolution of non-core inflation,**
**most members emphasized that energy prices**
**contracted in annual terms,** although some
members stated that these have increased recently.
**Most members noted the increase in fruit and**
**vegetables prices. One** member pointed out that
such increase is due to a comparison base effect and
to transitory factors. He/she considered that the
effect of low energy products’ prices prevails over the
rebound in fruit and vegetables prices.

**As to core inflation, most members highlighted**
**the rise in food merchandise prices, due to**
**possible supply problems and to a reallocation of**
**household’s spending in light of the health**
**emergency. Some members underlined that core**
inflation remains at high levels. **One member**

4


**_Inflation in Mexico_**


-----

considered that the persistence of this component,
despite the economic contraction and the higher
levels of economic slack, suggests that increases in
some line items such as food merchandises, have
outweighed the reductions observed in non-food
merchandise and services prices. Another member
pointed out that social distancing is interrupting the
provision of several services, whose price variations
are decreasing. One member noted that three of the
five major core inflation components registered
annual rates of change below 3% in the first fortnight
of June: housing, non-food merchandises and
services other than education and housing. He/she
added that educational services prices registered an
annual inflation above the inflation target, which is
explained by the fact that said prices tend to be fixed
in August, and that thus, it will not be until that month
that an adjustment will be observed in said indicator.
He/she considered that the only component with a
really unfavorable behavior is that of food

merchandises, which has increased due to a
reallocation of household spending and to

disruptions in the supply of certain goods.

Nevertheless, he/she pointed out that at least part of
these effects may possibly disappear once

consumption and supply of said merchandises return
to normal.

**Most members noted that headline inflation**
**expectations for the end of 2020 remain at levels**
**near the target, and those for the medium and**
**long terms have remained relatively stable,**
**although at levels above 3%. One member stated**
that headline inflation expectations for 2020
increased from 2.90 in April to 3.07% in May.
**Another member added that medium- and long-term**
core inflation expectations also lie close to 3.5%.
He/she highlighted that it is surprising that core
inflation expectations for the next five to eight years
have increased to such level in the course of this
year, which suggests the risk of them becoming
unanchored. He/she noted that, although he/she
does not agree with these projections, they reveal the
uncertainty that prevails regarding the behavior of
inflation and, particularly, the potential of new shocks
on prices, as well as the risk of the peso exchange
rate being subject to pressures, due to external or
domestic factors. **One member pointed out that**
inflation expectations drawn from both surveys and
market instruments increased slightly after the
publication of the latest monetary policy decision and
the latest Quarterly Report. Thus, he/she argued that


it is essential that the central bank communications
do not validate a pessimistic outlook on the economy
since this affects the perception of private agents.

As to the expected trajectory for inflation, **another**
member pointed out that the central bank baseline
scenario expects that it will lay around the target
within the horizon in which monetary policy operates.
He/she added that, if the adequate performance of
both global and domestic financial markets and of the
peso exchange rate continues, it may contribute to a
trajectory slightly below the one published in the
latest Quarterly Report. **One member stated that**
annual inflation would lie at levels close or even
below the target for the remainder of 2020. He/she
mentioned that the lower oil prices, the weakness of
aggregate demand, a stable exchange rate, and a
low pass-through would contribute to this. Similarly,
**another member mentioned that headline inflation**
shows an important decline since last year and shortterm inflation expectations lie at around 3% for the
end of the year, mainly motivated by the widening of
the output gap in negative territory. **One member**
considered that it is not foreseeable that headline
inflation will converge to the target during the rest of
2020 or the beginning of 2021, given the possible
behavior of non-core inflation. He/she added that, in
the absence of further shocks, core inflation should
start to reflect in that span of time the impact of the
wide negative output gap. He/she pointed out that it
is reasonable to anticipate that headline inflation will
converge to the target during the second half of 2021,
although inflation expectations show that private
sector forecasters are not incorporating such
scenario.

Regarding the risks for inflation, **some members**
highlighted the downward pressures stemming from
a greater than expected impact of the wider negative
output gap and from downward inflationary pressures
worldwide. As to upward risks, **some** members
mentioned additional episodes of foreign exchange
depreciation, as well as logistical and supply-related
problems concerning certain goods and services.
**One member added the possibility of the increase in**
labor costs in previous months affecting inflation.
He/she noted that although inflation remains at low
levels, there are upward pressures on items that
affect lower-income households. He/she also

highlighted that uncertainty worsens due to

measurement challenges stemming from the impact
of the lockdown. He/she stated that difficulties in
price collection may imply challenges to the

5


-----

comparability of indicators and lower information
quality.

**Most members pointed out that the balance of**
**risks for inflation remains uncertain.** In this
regard, one member noted that the supply and
demand shocks faced are passed on to the price
formation process through different channels that
generate both upward and downward pressures;
thus, the net effect is uncertain. **Another member**
emphasized that the outlook for the global and
domestic economy remains uncertain and subject to
bouts of high volatility. In this regard, he/she
considered that the balance of risks for inflation visà-vis the updated outlook remains uncertain. He/she
mentioned that the final result of factors that could
put downward or upward pressures on inflation will
depend on the intensity of the effect of each of them,
in an environment of deep economic weakness both
globally and domestically. He/she added that, if the
financial shock remains contained, the effects of the
significant widening of the negative output gap could
predominate in a longer-term horizon. **Another**
member expressed his/her view that, in light of the
uncertainty about the evolution of the pandemic and
economic activity, and of pressures on prices in both
directions, downward pressures prevail over upward
pressures on inflation, and that it is very likely that
they will continue to do so.


**_Macrofinancial environment_**


**Most members noted that, since the latest**
**monetary policy decision, there has been an**
**improvement in the performance of domestic**
**financial markets. Some members highlighted that**
this was partly due to the measures adopted by
Banco de México. **One member mentioned that**
external factors, particularly a greater optimism about
the performance of advanced economies due to the
gradual resumption of productive activities, have also
contributed importantly to said results. **Most**
**members pointed out that the peso exchange**
**rate** **appreciated** **and** **interest** **rates** **on**

**government securities, particularly for short**
**terms,** **have** **decreased** **moderately.** **Some**

members added that the sovereign risk continued to
adjust downwards and that the stock market showed
an improvement.

**Nevertheless, most members noted that risks**
**persist and capital outflows have continued,**
**although at a slower pace vis-à-vis what was**
**observed some weeks ago. Some** members
pointed out that accumulated figures indicate
outflows higher than USD 13 billion in fixed income.
In this regard, one member underlined that total


government securities held by non-residents

currently amount to around USD 90 billion. Another
member added that cumulative figures for the year
show zero flow in the case of equity instruments.
**Some members warned that trading conditions**
remain deteriorated in the FX and fixed income
markets. One member stated that the Mexican peso
remains among the emerging economies’ currencies
with the largest annual depreciation and that the
balance of the net foreign exchange-rate position
continued to widen negatively. He/she mentioned
that the steepening of the yield curve suggests that
there are still concerns about idiosyncratic factors. As
to risks for domestic financial markets, **some**
members highlighted the persisting challenges over
the situation of Pemex and public finances, as well
as the institutional weakening. Regarding external
risks, one member mentioned that those stemming
from the pandemic, the relationship between the
United States, China and other countries, and the US
presidential election stand out.

**Most members highlighted that, in this adverse**
**environment, perseverance in strengthening the**
**macroeconomic fundamentals and adopting the**
**necessary actions, regarding both monetary and**
**fiscal policies, will contribute to a better**
**adjustment of domestic financial markets and of**
**the economy as a whole. One member added that**
the adverse shocks that the economy is facing must
be mitigated to contain the impact on employment
and to preserve productive capacity. The above
within a framework that maintains the sustainability
of public finances, a low and stable inflation, as well
as a sound and well-capitalized financial system.

**Some** members noted that in April budgetary
revenues were below the programmed amount, and
that even after considering the use of resources from
the Budget Revenue Stabilization Fund (FEIP, for its
acronym in Spanish) and other extraordinary
revenues, public finances are expected to show a
significant deterioration during the year. In particular,
**one member highlighted that the shortfall in oil**
revenues including oil hedges, and tax revenues
excluding those from the excise tax (IEPS, for its
acronym in Spanish), would be between 2.2 and
3.0% of GDP at the end of 2020. He/she mentioned
that such shortfall would be partially offset with the
use of non-recurring revenues from the FEIP and
with the recovery of financial assets from funds and
trusts.

**Most members expressed concern on Pemex’s**
**situation. In particular, one member warned that the**

6


-----

shortfall in public revenues may widen in the face of
additional capitalization requirements by the stateowned company, due to its financial problems, the
sharp fall in its sales and the continuation of nonprofitable projects, the financial burden and risk of
which concentrate on the federal government.
**Another member highlighted that the need to design**
a long-term solution for Pemex’s problems has
increased. He/she added that, in the absence of
specific measures in said direction, as well as in
general to permanently strengthen government
revenues, it would not be convenient to seek greater
support from fiscal policy to face the pandemic,
taking into account the expected decline in the FEIP
balances and the resulting increase in the
vulnerability of public finances. Although he/she
acknowledged that there is also the option of an
important reallocation of public spending, he/she
considered that no support for adjustments of such
nature is perceived.

As for sovereign credit rating revisions and possible
additional downgradings, **one member warned that**
these have resulted in tighter financial conditions for
both government and firms. He/she stated that the
recently observed corporate debt issuances continue
to be insufficient to roll-over short-term debt that has
being maturing during the year and that, for this
reason, firms have resorted to commercial banks.
He/she stated that even though credit channels
continue to function in an orderly manner and do not
show warning signs, the delinquency rates of
consumption and corporate portfolios in the segment
of small- and medium-sized firms (SMEs) have risen.
He/she mentioned that according to the latest
Financial Stability Report, at the beginning of the
pandemic the banking system overall was in a solid
position; however, some smaller banks could face
problems. He/she added that without decisive fiscal
supports, firms and households’ situation could
rapidly deteriorate regardless of the availability of
resources and the level of interest rates.

When analyzing the longer-term macroeconomic
situation, another member stated that the outlook for
investment, which is fundamental for the potential
growth of the economy, is worrisome. He/she warned
that investment has been following a downward trend
since mid-2018 and is currently at levels similar to
those at the beginning of 2011. He/she mentioned
that although the pandemic recently influenced this
behavior, the main determinants have been the
situation of public finances and an environment


which is considered unfavorable for private

investment by the business sector. He/she

highlighted that, for the first time since 2011, Mexico
is no longer part of the list of the main 25 foreign
investment destinations in a survey conducted by a
consulting firm. He/she underlined the business
sector’s persisting concern for the country’s rule of
law and insecurity situation, the deterioration of the
institutional framework, and the orientation of some
public policies, among other aspects.

**_Monetary policy_**

**Taking into account the referred risks for**
**inflation,** **economic** **activity** **and** **financial**

**markets, and based on the foreseen scenarios**
**and on the room for maneuvering that on balance**
**these provide to monetary policy, all members**
**agreed to lower the target for the overnight**
**interbank interest rate by 50 basis points to a**
**level of 5%.**

**One member pointed out that monetary policy faces**
challenges in two dimensions: the deep economic
contraction associated with the pandemic and its
effects on inflation, and the impact of the financial
shock of global risk aversion on the peso exchange
rate and investment portfolios. The above

considering that domestic financial markets are
highly integrated to international markets, where the
Mexican peso is one of the few emerging economies’
currencies that is fully convertible, with 80% of its
volume traded among non-residents, which implies
low operating costs for holding short- or long-term
positions in pesos. He/she highlighted that, to the
extent that the relative importance of global risk
factors decreases, idiosyncratic elements such as
the economic and financial soundness, the growth
outlook, and remaining an attractive destination for
investment, will gain relevance once again to avoid
abrupt adjustments in portfolios. In this context,
he/she argued that the monetary policy stance
should consider both the economy’s cyclical position
and its influence on inflation, as well as the financial
conditions required for macroeconomic stability and
an orderly adjustment in financial markets and in the
financial system. He/she added that, considering that
the financial and economic activity shocks operate at
different horizons, it is important to mitigate the
financial shock in the best possible way, in order to
have greater room for maneuver to face the impact
of the shock on economic activity. He/she stated that
to the extent that an orderly adjustment of financial
markets is achieved, it will be possible to maintain a
domestic inflation process in line with the global trend
towards lower inflation.

7


-----

As for the determinants of capital flows to emerging
economies, some members pointed out that insofar
as global risk aversion decreases, idiosyncratic
factors may gain relevance. Some members argued
that in this context the spread between domestic and
external interest rates may gain greater importance
in offsetting idiosyncratic risks and avoiding net
capital outflows. **One noted that there is recent**
evidence that this is already happening. **Another**
member noted that a considerable number of
emerging economies have reduced their interest rate
spread more than Mexico, without jeopardizing their
financial markets or inflation targets. He/she added
that there is evidence showing that capital flows also
depend on growth expectations, and therefore to the
extent that a lower interest rate contributes to growth,
it could contribute to maintain or attract greater
capital flows. He/she stated that the increase in longterm asset holdings by the US Federal Reserve
implies a _de facto decrease of its interest rate,_
meaning that it is not necessarily correct to measure
the interest rate spread vis-à-vis the federal funds
rate. In this regard, he/she argued that a less
restrictive monetary policy could contribute to reduce
the risk of a very deep economic fall, which would
contribute to a better performance of financial
markets. One member noted that several indicators
show that, with the monetary policy decisions taken
in the last months, the interest rate spread adjusted
by exchange rate volatility vis-à-vis other emerging
economies has narrowed considerably. He/she
stated that this is important for an economy as open
to capital flows as that of Mexico, and where its
currency is frequently used to hedge risks in other
emerging economies due to its high liquidity. He/she
warned that this brings to the fore the limitations of
making direct comparisons between interest rate
levels in Mexico and other emerging economies.
He/she also pointed out that, unlike Mexico, in most
major emerging economies headline and core
inflation are below their respective central banks’
targets. He/she also highlighted that, given the
inflation levels and the high volatility of the peso
exchange rate, the latter may have significant
implications for the attainment of the inflation target
in Mexico, despite its low pass-through.

**Most members considered that monetary policy**
**should continue to incorporate all available**
**information** **and** **consider** **the** **persisting**

**environment of uncertainty. Some members**
stated that all challenges and dilemmas that
monetary policy is facing must be identified and a
wide range of scenarios must also be considered.
**One member argued that, in light of the downward**
revisions to economic growth for this year, the wider


economic slack, the appreciation of the peso and the
recent evolution of inflation, there is some room to
continue easing monetary policy. He/she noted that
the challenge is how to manage such room. In this
regard, he/she emphasized that in face of the global
and domestic uncertainty no scenario, neither benign
nor of additional deterioration, can be ruled out; thus,
monetary policy should be conducted with extreme
caution, continuing with a gradual approach,
monitoring the latest information to update forecasts
and maintain room for maneuver to take the
necessary actions in a timely and prudent manner. In
this context, he/she added that it is essential to
monitor the persisting risks, some of which have
already started to materialize. Among the risks to be
considered, in addition to the aforementioned,
he/she highlighted: i) the volatility stemming from
domestic or external factors that may affect the peso
exchange rate and its impact on inflation forecasts;
ii) the persistence of core inflation at high levels,
despite the increased amount of economic slack and
the uncertainty about the net effect of supply- and
demand-related shocks, and iii) idiosyncratic risks, in
particular, weak public finances for 2020 and 2021
and the vulnerable financial situation of Pemex, in a
context in which the loss of the investment grade of
the sovereign credit rating is not ruled out. Another
member stated that, although there appears to be
additional room to reduce the policy rate, it is to be
expected that risks are also increasing and thus any
adjustment in such direction should be based on that
assumption. In this regard, he/she highlighted that in
addition to the important tightening of interest rate
spreads relative to other emerging economies, and
the volatility to which the peso is subject, it is
essential to consider that the balance of risks for
inflation remains uncertain; that long-term inflation
expectations continue above the target; that core
inflation is not yielding; and that the possibility of an
unanchoring of long-term expectations for this
component has increased.

**One** member argued that in terms of the absolute
monetary policy stance, slack conditions offer room
for further monetary easing. He/she stated that in the
face of a crisis of unprecedented magnitude, a much
laxer monetary policy stance would support the weak
economic activity. He/she added that in terms of the
relative policy stance, lower risk premia open up the
possibility for a smaller spread. Nonetheless, he/she
pointed that said room could face limitations in the
future, since such premia could be underestimating
global risks. He/she pointed out that possible
medium-term negative effects on the macrofinancial
framework, resulting from easing the monetary policy
that is needed in the short term, should also be

8


-----

considered. He/she highlighted that a terminal rate
will eventually be attained and an excessive
reduction in the interest rate could discourage
savings, domestic and foreign, which are scarce in
the country. In particular, foreign capital has shown,
even before the increase in risk aversion due to the
pandemic, a decline in its enthusiasm for investing in
this country. He/she underlined that an excessively
low interest rate could affect bank savings, the
exchange rate and could distort the prices of other
financial assets, which in the medium term could
have implications for financial stability.

The same member stated that the adjustment of
interest rates will depend on the evolution of risks
and on the behavior of the economic cycle. He/she
added that given the economic outlook, the lack of
fiscal support and the fragile foundations for the
decline in inflation, the strategy will be to consider
daily incoming information as the best guide in the
future. He/she stated that the scope of monetary
policy and the room for maneuver must be taken into
account to sensibly respond to the uncertainty.
Among the referred scope, he/she mentioned the
implementation of programs to provide liquidity,
increase the flexibility of the regulatory framework,
loosen prudential measures, and other tools to
strengthen the functioning of the financial system.
He/she considered that so far the response to
uncertainty is to continue the process of monetary
easing by lowering the reference rate in a fixed
amount, at a constant speed, which markets can fully
anticipate.

**Another** member considered that in light of the
significant economic contraction that is foreseen and
the challenges that this implies, the central bank
must act cautiously but firmly and use all the
instruments at its disposal. This implies for the real
interest rate to possibly be taken to levels close to
zero or even negative before the end of the year, as
long as the inflation rate remains close to target.
He/she indicated that the central bank must be willing
to act in case signs of a significant deterioration of
economic-financial conditions arise, and that this
includes taking actions in unscheduled dates.

**Most members considered important to continue**
**implementing measures to strengthen the credit**
**provision channels, provide liquidity and foster**
**the well-functioning of the financial system.**
**Some members considered that said measures**
could be more effective with a lower policy rate. One
member stated that the policy rate has an impact on
economic activity through various channels,


including the credit channel. He/she added that in the
current juncture, the availability of credit is crucial to
prevent solvent firms from going bankrupt due to
liquidity problems, and therefore the central bank
measures to facilitate lending to small- and mediumsized firms are appropriate. However, he/she
considered that if these are not accompanied by a
sufficiently low interest rate, economic agents will not
have incentives to acquire credit and their demand
will remain limited. He/she mentioned the importance
of avoiding that the Central Bank actions in one
dimension (credit facilities) be limited by its actions in
another dimension (interest rates). Another member
added that the persistence of risk aversion and
pressure in financial markets point to the need to
ensure adequate liquidity levels in markets and lax
monetary conditions.

**Some members pointed out the importance of Banco**
de México focusing on fulfilling its primary mandate.
**One** member stated that monetary policy’s best
contribution during the recovery phase is to fulfil this
mandate and thus avoid households’ purchasing
power from further deteriorating. He/she mentioned
that the central bank needs to monitor the
circumstances that reduce the purchasing power of
low-income households and that worsen the severe
loss of income of the unemployed population.
**Another member stated that monetary policy’s best**
contribution to strengthening public finances is to
focus on fulfilling its mandate, as this leads to
sustained reductions in interest rates along the yield
curve and ultimately fosters economic growth.
He/she argued that if the support to public finances
were to be perceived as part of monetary policy’s
reaction function, markets would rapidly consider it
as a situation of fiscal dominance, which would affect
the central bank’s credibility and the level of mediumand long-term interest rates, with substantial
negative effects on the fiscal accounts and on the
Mexican economy.

**One** member pointed out that the central bank
communications must highlight the need for
maintaining inflation at low levels, especially in the
items of greater relevance for the population, such as
food merchandise, in order to prevent inflation
expectations from becoming unanchored. **Another**
member pointed out that the monetary policy
statement must emphasize that, by taking into
account new downward revisions to growth

expectations, the policy decision is consistent with
the convergence of inflation to the target within the

9


-----

time frame in which monetary policy operates.
He/she added that it must emphasize that Banco de
México will remain attentive to incoming information
to continue acting, as it has done so far, with
timeliness and caution.

**3. MONETARY POLICY DECISION**

Taking into account the referred risks for inflation,
economic activity and financial markets, major
challenges arise for monetary policy and for the
economy in general. Based on the foreseen
scenarios, and considering the room for

maneuvering that on balance these provide to
monetary policy, with the presence of all its
members, Banco de México’s Governing Board
decided unanimously to lower the target for the
overnight interbank interest rate by 50 basis points to
a level of 5%.

The Governing Board will take the necessary actions
on the basis of incoming information and considering


the large impact on productive activity as well as the
evolution of the financial shock that we are currently
facing, so that the policy rate is consistent with the
orderly and sustained convergence of headline
inflation to Banco de México’s target within the time
frame in which monetary policy operates.

Perseverance in strengthening the macroeconomic
fundamentals and adopting the necessary actions,
regarding both monetary and fiscal policies, will
contribute to a better adjustment of domestic
financial markets and of the economy as a whole.

**4. VOTING**

Alejandro Díaz de León-Carrillo, Irene EspinosaCantellano, Gerardo Esquivel-Hernández, Javier
Eduardo Guzmán-Calafell and Jonathan Ernest
Heath-Constable voted in favor of lowering the target
for the overnight interbank interest rate by 50 basis
points to a level of 5%.

10


-----

**ANNEX**

The information in this Annex was prepared for this
meeting by the staff of Banco de México’s General
Directorate of Economic Research and General
Directorate of Central Bank Operations. It does not
necessarily reflect the considerations of the

members of the Governing Board as to the monetary
policy decision.

**A.1. External conditions**

**A.1.1. World economic activity**

The COVID-19 pandemic and the measures adopted
to prevent its spread have considerably affected
world economic activity. The contraction of economic
activity observed in the first quarter intensified during
the second, although some indicators from various
economies exhibited some improvement in May
(Chart 1). Headline and core inflation in the main
advanced economies are below their respective
central bank’s targets. In this context, monetary
authorities have lowered interest rates to historically
low levels and have used their balance sheets to
foster an orderly functioning of financial markets.
Likewise, several countries have implemented
important fiscal stimulus measures to mitigate the
adverse effects on employment and on households’
and firms’ income.

Several multilateral organizations and analysts have
again revised downwards their economic

expectations for 2020, incorporating a bigger
contraction of economic activity, with a recovery in
2021. Given that the economic impact stems from the
pandemic dynamics, such expectations continue to
be subject to a high degree of uncertainty. Other risk
factors present are the possibility of an escalation of
trade and geopolitical conflicts among some major
economies; the possibility of a deterioration of
households’, firms’ and financial institutions’ financial
situation; and a worsening of the social conflicts
recently registered in different countries.


10

0

-10

-20

-30

-40

-50


50

45

40

35

30

25

20

15

10

5

0


**Chart 1**

**Global: Purchasing Managers’ Index (PMI)**

**Production Component**

Diffusion index, s. a.

55

50

45

40

35

Manufacturing

30

Services

25 May

20

2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020

s. a. / Seasonally adjusted figures.
Source: Markit.

In the United States, available indicators point to a
sharper fall in GDP growth during the second quarter
of the year, reflecting a greater weakness in private
consumption and business investment, generated
mainly by lockdown measures, which had a
particularly severe impact in April (Chart 2). Although
some activity and leading indicators, such as retail
sales, industrial production, and housing starts,
recovered slightly in May, after having plummeted in
April, most remain below the levels observed prior to
the pandemic.

**Chart 2**

**United States: Real GDP and its Components**

|Chart 2 United States: Real GDP and its Components Annualized quarterly percentage change and contributions in percentage points, s. a.|Col2|Col3|Col4|Col5|
|---|---|---|---|---|
|Private consumption expenditures Residential investment Change in private inventories Net exports Nonresidential investment Government consumption expenditures Total|||||
|I II III IV 2016|I II III IV 2017|I II III IV 2018|I II III IV 2019|I II 2020|


s.a. / Seasonally adjusted figures.
Note: Second quarter figures were drawn from GDP Now.
Source: Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA), Federal Reserve Bank of
Atlanta.

11


-----

In April, US industrial production fell 12.5% (at a
monthly rate), the highest drop in the history of this
indicator. This reflected the closing of activities in
most sectors, with the nearly total shutdown of
manufacturing activities standing out. In May,
industrial activity improved marginally, registering a
monthly growth of 1.4%, driven by a slight recovery
in manufacturing activity due to the gradual
reopening of most productive sectors. Although
certain available indicators to June, such as the
Purchasing Managers’ Index (PMI) of the

manufacturing sector and the manufacturing indices
of the Federal Reserve Banks of Philadelphia and
New York, suggest that such reactivation trend will
continue, industrial activity is expected to continue
exhibiting lower levels during the second quarter of
the year vis-à-vis those observed prior to the
pandemic.

Although in May the non-farm payroll increased and
the unemployment rate decreased in the United
States, the labor market in that country continued to
show a sharp deterioration. In particular, 2.5 million
new jobs were created in May, only partly reversing
the 22.6 million jobs that were lost in March and April.
In turn, the unemployment rate was 13.3% in May,
after having registered a rate of 14.7% in April 2020,
nearly 10 percentage points above its February’s
level. On the week ending on May 9, current
unemployment insurance claims reached the highest
level since they first started to be registered in 1967.
Although they have been decreasing since that date,
they still remain at historically high levels.

In the euro area, after GDP growth contracted at a
seasonally adjusted annualized quarterly rate of
13.4% in the first quarter of the year due to the
measures implemented to contain the COVID-19
spread, timely indicators point to an even further
contraction during the second quarter. In particular,
available indicators to April, such as retail sales and
industrial production, contracted significantly.

Nevertheless, available leading indicators to May
and June reflect a slight improvement as a result of
the gradual reopening of activities. Despite this
adverse environment, the unemployment rate rose
slightly from 7.1% in March to 7.3% in April, still
registering relatively low levels. This is partly
explained by the implementation of several job
retention schemes in the region.

In Japan, GDP contracted at a seasonally adjusted
annualized quarterly rate of 2.2% in the first quarter
of the year due to the negative impact of the
pandemic on domestic and external demand. Some
indicators available to April and May suggest that the


deterioration of economic activity may extend to the
second quarter, even despite the gradual

normalization of certain activities observed at the end
of May. Nevertheless, the unemployment rate
remains at low levels, increasing from 2.5% to 2.6%
between March and April.

In emerging economies, the latest information
indicates that economic activity may deteriorate
further during the second quarter of the year,
although with differences among countries. In China,
economic activity indicators slightly recovered in
May, registering increases in industrial production, a
rebound of fixed investment, and a lower contraction
of retail sales. Nevertheless, recent coronavirus
outbreaks in that country’s capital have increased the
uncertainty about the possibility of implementing new
mobility restrictions that may affect economic activity.
For its part, most Latin American economies may be
significantly affected by restrictions on productive
activity to contain the COVID-19 spread as well as by
idiosyncratic factors, among which those of

Argentina and Brazil stand out.

Since Mexico’s previous monetary policy decision
international commodity prices adjusted upwards,
although they have accumulated considerable losses
during the year. In particular, crude oil prices have
been supported by production cuts by Organization
of Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC) members
and other producers. The easing of lockdown
measures in some countries and the decrease in US
crude oil inventories have also contributed to the
recovery of said prices. In the last weeks industrial
metal prices have increased due to the gradual
restart of industrial production worldwide. Finally,
grain prices increased slightly due to expectations of
greater global demand and restrictions on grain
exports that remain in place in Russia.

**A.1.2. Monetary policy and international financial**
**markets**

In most advanced economies, headline and core
inflation continued to decrease due to the low energy
product prices and the lower pace of economic
activity (Chart 3). Thus, inflation rates in these
economies remain far below their respective central
banks’ targets, standing close to zero in some cases
and even below that level in others. In addition,
inflation expectations drawn from both financial
instruments and surveys remain at low levels. In
most emerging economies, headline and core
inflation also registered lower levels in April, mainly
reflecting the impact of lower economic activity
levels. In this environment, several central banks of

12


-----

advanced and emerging economies adopted

historically low interest rates and have used their
balance sheets to foster the well-functioning of their
financial markets. Looking ahead, expectations
drawn from market instruments continue to anticipate
that central banks will maintain highly

accommodative monetary policy stances (Chart 4).


**Chart 3**

**Selected Advanced Economies: Headline**

**Inflation**

Annual percentage change

3.5 United States 1/
Euro area

3.0 Japan

Canada

2.5 United Kingdom

2.0

1.5

1.0

0.5

0.0


-0.5


-1.0

2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020

1/ Refers to the Consumer Price Index (CPI).
Source: Haver Analytics.

**Chart 4**

**Reference Rates and Implied Trajectories in**

**OIS Curves***

Percent

3.0% **― US Federal Reserve***

**― Bank of England**
**― Bank of Japan**

2.5% **― Bank of Canada**

**― European Central Bank deposit rate**
**― OIS implicit trajectory 22 Jun 2020**

2.0% **--- OIS implicit trajectory 11 May 2020**

1.5%

1.0%

0.5%

0.0%

-0.5%

End of End of End of

-1.0% 2019 2020 2021

2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022

OIS: Fixed floating interest rate swap where the fixed interest rate is the
effective overnight reference rate.
** In the case of the US observed reference rate, the average interest rate
of the federal funds target range is used (0.0% - 0.25%).
Source: Prepared by Banco de México with Bloomberg data.

Some of the monetary policy decisions by the main
central banks that stood out during the period are:

i) In its June meeting, the US Federal Reserve (the Fed)
left unchanged its range for the federal funds rate at
0%-0.25% and reiterated that it expects to maintain the
funds target range at its current level until the economy


overcomes the recent events. In addition, it highlighted
that to foster credit to households and firms it will
increase its holdings of Treasury securities and
residential and commercial mortgage-backed bonds at
least at the current pace in order to support the wellfunctioning of markets. Prior to its decision, the Fed
also announced an extension to its Main Street Lending
Program to allow that a larger number of small- and
medium-sized firms receive economic support. The
median of projections of the Federal Open Market
Committee (FOMC) reflected expectations of a
contraction of GDP growth in 2020 and a rebound in
2021. Such projections also anticipate lower headline
and core inflation levels and higher unemployment
rates for 2020, 2021 and 2022 as compared to the prior
projections published in December 2019. In this
context, the medians of FOMC projections suggest that
the reference rate will be left unchanged until 2022.
Only two members are anticipating an increase in that
year. In this environment, both market variables as well
as the consensus of forecasters consider that the Fed
will leave the reference rate unchanged by the end of
2020 and 2021.

ii) In its June meeting, the European Central Bank (ECB)

left its policy rates unchanged, maintaining its
refinancing rate, key deposit facility rate and key
lending facility rate at 0.0, -0.5 and -0.25%,
respectively. At this meeting, it announced an increase
in its pandemic emergency purchase program (PEPP),
from €750 billion to €1,350 billion, extending it to June
2021 or until the Monetary Policy Committee considers
that the crisis phase is over. In addition, it pointed out
that bond maturities associated with the PEPP would
be reinvested until the end of 2022. The ECB also left
its asset purchase program unchanged. Likewise, it
restated that interest rates will remain at their current
levels or below until inflation attains its symmetric target
in a sustainable manner. Finally, that central bank
highlighted that, with the adjustments to its monetary
policy stance, it would promote bank financing to the
private sector.

iii) In its unscheduled meeting of May and its June

meeting, the Bank of Japan left its short-term policy
interest rate unchanged at -0.1% and its long-term
interest rate (indexed to its 10-year bond) at around
0%. Nevertheless, as part of its special program to face
the coronavirus impact, in its May meeting it announced
an additional measure to provide funds to small- and
medium-sized firms for up to ¥30 trillion. In June it also
increased two of the special corporate operation
facilities, estimating that they would amount to ¥110
trillion (approximately USD 1 billion). The Bank of
Japan’s Governor pointed out that interest rates may
remain at the current levels until 2023, warned that the
COVID-19 has had a greater-than-expected impact on
the economy, and noted that that central bank is
prepared to expand its actions if necessary.

iv) The Bank of England left its policy rate unchanged at

0.10%, while announcing an increase in government

13


-----

bond purchases for £100 billion, increasing the total
size of its asset purchase program to £745 billion. It
anticipates that this level will be reached at the end of
the year, which, given the stabilization of liquidity
conditions, would imply a lower pace of purchases visà-vis previous months. Looking ahead, that central
bank mentioned that it will continue to monitor market
conditions, take additional measures to drive economic
activity, and ensure the sustained return of inflation to
its 2% target.

v) In its June meeting, the Bank of Canada left its

reference rate unchanged at 0.25%. In a context
where financing conditions improved as of March,
that central bank reduced the frequency of its
repurchase (repo) operations and purchase of
bankers’ acceptances. It also pointed out that it
remains ready to adjust the characteristics of its
repurchase program if the development of
financial markets requires it. It confirmed its
commitment to continue with its mass asset
purchases until economic recovery resumes a
sustainable path. Likewise, in its statement it
emphasized that any additional measures will be
adjusted to provide the necessary monetary
stimulus to attain the inflation target.

Since Banco de México’s previous monetary policy
decision, several central banks of emerging
economies announced additional cuts to their
reference rates, with those of Brazil, Colombia,
Hungary, Indonesia, Romania, South Africa and
Turkey standing out.


International financial markets exhibited a positive
behavior during the period after Banco de México’s
last monetary policy decision, largely driven by the
gradual reopening of economic activity in the major
advanced countries and the publication of certain
economic figures that revealed a slight recovery visà-vis the historic lows reached in March and April.
Additionally, the fiscal, monetary and financial
stimulus measures adopted by advanced economies
continued to provide a significant support to financial
markets. In this environment, a climate of lower risk
aversion and volatility in stock exchange, foreign
exchange, and fixed income markets was observed.
The US dollar weakened against most currencies
and stock indexes rose, while interest rates of
government bonds registered limited adjustments in
general (Chart 5). Nevertheless, since mid-June,
financial markets have exhibited volatility once again
due to concerns of a possible second wave of
coronavirus outbreaks –particularly in light of the
increase in new cases in China, the United States
and Japan– and debate over a possible

overvaluation of stock markets. In this context,
emerging economies continued to register capital
outflows, while most of their currencies appreciated
against the US dollar and their stock markets
registered improvements (Chart 6).

**Chart 5**

**Change in Selected Financial Indicators**

**from May 11 to June 22, 2020**

Percent, basis pointsPercentage, basis points


30%

20%


75

50


10%

0%


25

0


-25

-50


-10%

-20%


United States
Canada
United
Kingdom
France


-30%


-75


1/ MSCI Emerging Markets Index (includes 24 countries).
2/ DXY: Weighted average of the nominal exchange rate of the six main
world-traded currencies (calculated by Intercontinental Exchange, ICE) with
the following weights: EUR (57.6%), JPY (13.6%), GBP (11.9%), CAD
(9.1%), SEK (4.2%), and CHF (3.6%).
3/ J.P. Morgan Index constructed from a weighted average of the nominal
exchange rate of emerging economies’ currencies with the following
weights: TRY (8.3%), RUB (8.3%), HUF (8.3%), ZAR (8.3%), BRL (11.1%),
MXN (11.1%), CLP (11.1%), CNH (11.1%), INR (11.1%), and SGD (11.1%).
Source: Bloomberg and ICE.

14


-----

Looking ahead, the behavior of international financial
markets will depend to a great extent on the
implementation of measures to contain the COVID19 spread and the capacity to mitigate the negative
impact of the pandemic on economic activity. In
addition to the above, other risk factors that may lead
to new episodes of tightening in global financial
conditions persist, including the high valuations of
certain financial assets; the increase in sovereign
and corporate debt levels; the resurfacing of political
tensions between the United States and China; and
the US election process.

**Chart 6**

**Emerging Economies: Financial Assets**

**Performance from May 11 to June 22, 2020**

Percent, basis points


As for the peso exchange rate, it traded in a wide
range of 21.50-24.30 MXN/USD and appreciated
5.27% during the period (Chart 8). This took place in
a context where both realized and implied trading
conditions improved, although they remained at
relatively deteriorated levels vis-à-vis those of
January.

**Chart 7**

**Mexican Markets’ Performance**

Percent, pesos/US dollar and index


9.5

9.0

8.5

8.0

7.5

7.0

6.5

6.0

5.5

5.0

4.5


26.0

25.0

24.0

23.0

22.0

21.0

20.0

19.0

18.0


4.5

4.0

3.5

3.0

2.5

2.0

1.5


48,000

46,000

44,000

42,000

40,000

38,000

36,000

34,000

32,000


M Bond


Inflation indexed bonds


Range in year Range since last monetary policy decision May-11-20 Last level


Range in year Range since last monetary policy decision May-11-20 Last level


Source: Prepared by Banco de México.

**Chart 8**

**Mexican Peso Exchange Rate**

**with Moving Averages**

Pesos/US dollar


Note: Interest rates correspond to interest rate swaps for 2-year/10-year Note: Interest rates correspond to interes rate swaps for 2-year/10-year maturities,
maturities. In the case of Argentina, rates in US dollars are used since they
are the most liquid ones and those that reflect more adequately the
performance of the fixed income market in that country.
Source: Bloomberg.

**A.2. Current situation of the Mexican economy**

**A.2.1. Mexican markets**

Since Banco de Mexico’s previous monetary policy
decision to date, the prices of financial assets in
Mexico followed a positive behavior, in line with the
dynamics observed in emerging markets overall
(Chart 7). This took place in an environment where a
decline in risk aversion was observed as a result of
the slowdown in COVID-19 infection rates and the
gradual reopening of economic activity in developed
countries. Nevertheless, an environment of high
uncertainty and caution by investors continues to be
perceived due to the additional adverse effects that
may stem from the pandemic and the risk of renewed
outbreaks in some regions.


Source: Prepared by Banco de México.

Interest rates of government securities decreased for
all maturities, the most noteworthy being those in the
short end of the yield curve (Chart 9). The yield curve
of real-rate instruments exhibited decreases in all
nodes. It is worth noting that such dynamics took
place in a context where trading conditions improved
at the margin.

15


25.50
25.00
24.50
24.00
23.50
23.00
22.50
22.00
21.50
21.00
20.50
20.00
19.50
19.00
18.50
18.00
17.50
17.00


-----

**Chart 9**

**Nominal Yield Curve on Government Securities**

Percent, basis points

7.40 25

6.90 8

6

#¡REF!

6.40 -8

5.90 -25

5.40 -42

4.90 -58

4.40 -75

May 11, 2020 Jun 22, 2020 Change (May 11, 2020 to Jun 22, 2020)

Trading range over the period

Source: PIP.

As to expectations regarding the path of the
monetary policy target rate, information implied by
the Interbank Equilibrium Interest Rate (TIIE) swap
curve discounts with a 60% probability a 50-basis
point cut for the monetary policy decision of June
(Chart 10). Likewise, private sector forecasters
surveyed by Citibanamex are also expecting a 50basis point cut. For the end of 2020, market variables
are anticipating a target level of around 4.00%, while
the median of surveyed forecasters expects a target
level of 4.50%.

**Chart 10**

**Banxico Overnight Interbank Rate Implied in**

**TIIE IRS Curve**

Percent

8.50
8.25
8.00
7.75
7.50
7.25
7.00
6.75
6.50
6.25
6.00 Banxico overnight interest
5.75 rate (policy rate)
5.50

Rest of the period

5.25
5.00
4.75 Last figure
4.50
4.25 Last monetary policy
4.00 decision
3.75
3.50

S   D   F M   A   O   J   A   J   S   D   F   M   A   O  D

2018   2019              2020           2021

Source: Prepared by Banco de México with Bloomberg data.


**A.2.2. Economic activity in Mexico**

During the first quarter of 2020, productive activity
contracted significantly, partly reflecting the marked
weakness of the world economy and resenting in the
last part of the period the initial impact of the
measures adopted in Mexico to contain the
COVID-19 spread (Chart 11). Available information
indicates that the effects of the pandemic intensified
in April. Although the reopening of some sectors and
regions in May and June will promote a certain
recovery of economic activity, the impact has been
considerable and uncertainty persists.

**Chart 11**

**Gross Domestic Product**

Quarterly percentage change, s. a.

2

1

0

-1

-2 Q-I

I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV I

2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020

s. a. Seasonally adjusted figures.
1/ The figure for the fourth quarter of 2019 refers to INEGI’s GDP flash
estimate.
Source: Mexico’s National Accounts System (SCNM, for its acronym in
Spanish), INEGI.

At the beginning of the second quarter of 2020, there
was a significant contraction of Mexican

manufacturing exports, in a context where both
Mexico and other countries suspended several
productive activities considered non-essential in light
of the pandemic spread. Such contraction resulted
from an overall reduction in this type of exports to
both the United States and the rest of the world, with
a significant fall in automotive exports standing out
(Chart 12).

16


-----

**Chart 12**

**Total Manufacturing Exports**

Indices 2013 = 100, s. a.


180

160

140

120

100

80

60

40

20

J

2013


A J O J

2014


A J O J

2015


A J O J

2016


A J O J

2017


A J O J

2018


A J O J

2019


A J O J

2020


A


s. a. / Seasonally adjusted series and trend series based on data in nominal
US dollars. The former is represented by a solid line and the latter by a
dotted line.
Source: Prepared by Banco de México with data from the Tax
Administration Service (SAT, for its acronym in Spanish), the Ministry of the
Economy (SE, for its acronym in Spanish), Banco de México, the National
Institute of Statistics and Geography (INEGI, for its acronym in Spanish),
Mexico’s Merchandise Trade Balance, and the National System of
Statistical and Geographical Information (SNIEG, for its acronym in
Spanish).

In March 2020, the downward path of private
consumption that was observed during the first two
months of the year intensified considerably. This
mainly reflected the contraction in the consumption
of services due to the initial effects of the measures
implemented to reduce the pandemic spread in the
country. Timely information suggests that, at the
beginning of the second quarter, significant
additional effects on this aggregate were registered.
In particular, in April the sales of manufacturing
industries more related with domestic consumption
declined considerably. In turn, despite the
improvement in light vehicle sales observed in May,
this indicator remained at low levels after the strong
contraction exhibited in April. The weakness of gross
fixed investment intensified considerably in March.
Within such indicator, the negative trend of
investment in machinery and equipment deteriorated
further, while construction spending maintained an
unfavorable performance, persisting at particularly
low levels. Indicators related to this aggregate, such
as capital goods imports, point to a greater
deterioration of investment in the early part of the
second quarter of 2020.

As for production, the downward path of services
intensified further at the end of the first quarter, as a
result of the initial impact of the pandemic and the
measures adopted to contain its spread, while in April
the downward trend of industrial activity intensified
significantly, reaching its lowest level since 1996
(Chart 13). The fall in tertiary activities in March was
explained mainly by the negative contributions of


accommodation and food services; arts,
entertainment and recreation and other services;
transportation and mass media information services;
retail and wholesale trade; and educational and
health care and social assistance services. Within
the secondary activities, both manufacturing and
construction contracted significantly in April (Chart
14) largely due to the shutdown of most activities in
these sectors during said month, as they were not
considered to be essential by the authorities. Mining
once again remained weak, which can be associated
with both a significant decline in metallic and nonmetallic minerals and a moderate decrease in crude
oil extraction.

**Chart 13**

**Economic Activity Indicators**

Indexes 2013 = 100, s. a.

120 140

Total IGAE 1/

115 Industrial production 2/ 130

Services IGAE 1/

110 120

Agriculture IGAE 1/

105 110

100 100

95 90

90 80

85 70

80 60

75 March 50

April

70 40

J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A

2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020

s. a. / Seasonally adjusted and trend series. The former is represented by a
solid line and the latter by a dotted line.
1/ Figures up to March 2020.
2/ Monthly industrial activity indicator figures up to April 2020.
Source: Mexico’s National Accounts System (SCNM, for its acronym in
Spanish), INEGI.

**Chart 14**

**Industrial Activity [1/]**

Indexes 2013 = 100, s. a.

130

120

110

100

90

Total

Mining (22.3%)

80

Manufacturing (49.7%)

70 Construction (23.3%)

Utilities (4.7%)

April

60

J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A

2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020

s. a. / Seasonally adjusted and trend series. The former is represented by a
solid line and the latter by a dotted line.
1/ Figures in parentheses correspond to their share in the total in 2013.
Source: Mexico’s National Accounts System (SCNM, for its acronym in),
INEGI.

17


-----

As to the economy’s cyclical position, slack
conditions widened at the beginning of the first
quarter of 2020 (Chart 15) and are foreseen to have
continued widening during the second quarter, with a
balance of risks for growth remaining significantly
biased to the downside. According to the results of
INEGI’s _Telephone Survey_ on Occupation and
_Employment_ (ETOE, for its acronym in Spanish)
there was a significant decline in employment in
April, which was reflected in a considerable exit of
people from the labor force and a significant increase
in the unemployment rate (Chart 16). The fall in
employment was due to a greater fall in informal visà-vis formal employment. Likewise, in May, IMSSinsured job creation continued to show a negative
performance, registering a monthly decrease of
344,000 jobs with not-seasonally-adjusted figures
and accumulating a loss of formal employment of
slightly above one million jobs between March and
May. Finally, the strong fall in production resulting
from the temporary shutdown of activities in
manufacturing sectors deemed non-essential as part
of the measures to contain the COVID-19 outbreak,
as compared to the relatively minor decline in total
real earnings, led in April to an increase of unit labor
costs in the manufacturing sector far above any other
observed since it was first measured in 2007 (Chart
17).

**Chart 15**

**Output Gap Estimates [1/]**

**Excluding Oil Industry [4/ ]**

Potential output percentages, s. a.

8

Global Economic Activity Indicator 2/

6 Gross Domestic Product 2/

95% Confidence Interval 3/

4

2

0

-2

-4

-6

-8

-10

Q-I

March

-12

J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M

2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020

s. a. / Calculations based on seasonally adjusted figures.
1/ Output gap estimated with a tail-corrected Hodrick-Prescott filter; see
Banco de México (2009), “Inflation Report (April-June 2009)", p.74.
2/ First quarter of 2020 GDP figure and March 2020 IGAE figure.
3/ Output gap confidence interval calculated with a method of unobserved
components.
4/ Excludes both oil and gas extraction, support activities for mining, and
petroleum and coal products' manufacturing.
Source: Prepared by Banco de México with INEGI data.


EAP: Economically Active Population.
n. s. a. / Not seasonally adjusted.
*/ The April 2020 figure, drawn from the Telephone Survey on Occupation
and Employment (Encuesta Telefónica de Ocupación y Empleo, ETOE),
cannot be fully compared to ENOE figures and is shown only as a reference.
Source: Prepared by Banco de México with data from ENOE up to March
2020 and from the ETOE up to April 2020.

**Chart 17**

**Productivity and Unit Labor Costs in the**

**Manufacturing Sector [1/]**

Indices 2013 = 100, s. a.

170

Unit labor costs

160 Productivity

150

140

130

120

110

100

April

90

J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A

2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020

s. a. / Seasonally adjusted and trend series. The former is represented by a
solid line and the latter by a dotted line.
1/ Productivity based on hours worked.
Source: Prepared by Banco de México with seasonally adjusted data of the
Manufacturing Industry Monthly Survey and industrial activity indicators of
Mexico’s National Accounts System (Sistema de Cuentas Nacionales de
México, SCN), INEGI.

In April 2020, domestic financing to firms grew at a
real annual rate for the second consecutive month, in
contrast with the contraction exhibited during the first
months of this year. Thus, once again an increase
was observed in bank credit to firms, particularly
large-sized firms, although said increase was smaller
than that registered in March. In April, the domestic
corporate debt market contracted significantly. As for
credit to households, the mortgage segment grew at
a rate similar to that of March, while the consumption
segment continued to contract as has been doing
since that month. As for interest rates, those of firm
financing decreased in April, in line with the cut to the

18


6.0

5.5

5.0

4.5

4.0

3.5

3.0

2.5


**Chart 16**

**National Unemployment Rate**

Percent of EAP, n. s. a.

ENOE

ETOE April 2020

4.7

April*

J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A

2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020


-----

overnight funding interest rate, while, according to
figures to March, interest rates of mortgages
decreased. Regarding portfolio quality, firm and
mortgage delinquency rates remained at low levels,
while those related to consumption rose for the
second consecutive month, thus increasing their
already high levels.

As a result of the contingency stemming from the
COVID-19 pandemic, the risk that the loanable funds
market deteriorates over the next months persists,
both because some creditors may have difficulties in
meeting their obligations and because some credit
institutions may decide to restrict financing as a
precautionary measure. Given this complex outlook,
in April Banco de México announced measures
aimed at strengthening credit provision to micro,
small- and medium-sized firms and individuals
affected by the pandemic. In this regard, in June the
central bank published the operating rules for the
provision of resources to credit institutions in order to
channel financing to the aforementioned agents.

**A.2.3. Development of inflation and inflation**
**outlook**

Between April and the first fortnight of June 2020,
annual headline inflation increased from 2.15 to
3.17%, which is explained by an increase of 88 and
14 basis points in the incidence of its core and noncore components, respectively (Chart 18 and Table
1).

**Chart 18**

**Consumer Price Index**

Annual percentage change

13

12 CPI

11 Core

Non-core

10

9

8

7

6

5

4

3

2

1

0

-1 F1 June

-2

-3

J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M

2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020

Source: Prepared by Banco de México with data from INEGI.

Annual core inflation increased from 3.50 to 3.66%
between April and the first fortnight of June 2020,
although within it there were both upward and
downward pressures stemming from the effects of
the health crisis on several spending items. On the
one hand, the annual rates of change of food
merchandise prices increased from 5.78 to 6.48% in


this period, while those of non-food merchandise
prices increased from 2.34 to 2.37%, although this
item, excluding clothing and footwear, rose from 2.81
to 3.54% (Chart 19). In contrast, significant
reductions were observed in clothing and footwear
prices, with their annual rate of change declining from
1.00 to -1.04% between April and the first fortnight of
June 2020. The annual rate of change of services
prices decreased from 2.84 to 2.76% in the
abovementioned period and lies at levels below
those observed prior to the beginning of the
pandemic, possibly due to the lower relative demand
they are facing in the context of the health crisis
(Chart 20).

**Chart 19**

**Merchandise Core Price Subindex**

Annual percentage change

8

7

6

5

4

3

2

1

0

Food, beverages and tobacco

-1 Clothing, footwear and accessories

Non-food merchandise excluding clothing, footwear and accessories F1 June

-2

J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M

2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020

Source: Prepared by Banco de México with data from INEGI.

**Chart 20**

**Merchandise and Services Core Price Subindex**

Annual percentage change

7

Merchandise

6 Services

5

4

3

2

1

F1 June

0

J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M

2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020

Source: Prepared by Banco de México with data from INEGI.

Between April and the first fortnight of June 2020,
annual non-core inflation increased from -1.96 to
1.63% (Chart 21 and Table 1). This result was mainly
due to the increase in energy product and fruit and
vegetable prices, which were partially offset by the
decline in livestock product prices.

19

|CPI|Col2|Col3|Col4|Col5|
|---|---|---|---|---|
|Core Non-core|||||
||||||
||||||
||||||
||||||
||||||
||||||
||||||
||||||
||||||
||||||
|F1 June|||||
||||||


-----

20

15

10

5

0

-5

-10

-15


**Chart 21**

**Non-core Price Subindex**
Annual percentage change

Non-core


-15 F1 June

J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M

2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020

Source: Prepared by Banco de México with data from INEGI.

As for inflation expectations drawn from Banco de
México’s Survey of Private Sector Forecasters,
between April and May the medians for headline and
core inflation for the end of 2020 increased from 2.90


to 3.07% and from 3.34 to 3.50%, respectively.
Those for the medium and long term headline
inflation remained at 3.50%. As to the median for
core inflation expectations for the medium term, it
remained at 3.50%, while that for the long term rose
from 3.45 to 3.49%. Finally, breakeven inflation
decreased during the same period, although it
continued to exhibit volatility, and, so far in June, it
has had an important rise.

Among the risks for inflation, the following stand out.
To the downside: a greater than expected impact of
the widening of the negative output gap and lower
inflationary pressures worldwide. To the upside:
additional episodes of foreign exchange
depreciation; and logistical and supply-related
problems concerning certain goods and services, as
well as higher costs associated with the adoption of
sanitary measures. In this context, the balance of
risks for inflation remains uncertain.


**Table 1**

**Consumer Price Index and Components**

Annual percentage change

**1st fortnight**
**Item** **April 2020** **May 2020**
**June 2020**

**CPI** **2.15** **2.84** **3.17**

**SubyacenteCore** **3.50** **3.64** **3.66**

**Merchandise** **4.11** **4.30** **4.49**

Food, beverages and tobacco 5.78 6.58 6.48

Non-food merchandise 2.34 1.88 2.37

**Services** **2.84** **2.93** **2.76**

Housing 2.86 2.67 2.53

Education (tuitions) 4.57 4.51 4.47

Other services 2.47 2.83 2.61

**No SubyacenteNon-core** **-1.96** **0.35** **1.63**

**Agricultural and livestock products** **8.52** **9.79** **8.42**

Fruits and vegetablesFruits abd vegetables 9.35 17.83 15.28

Livestock productsLivestock 7.83 3.36 3.10

**Energéticos y Tarifas Aut. por GobiernoEnergy and government-authorized prices** **-9.35** **-6.51** **-3.28**

Energy productsEnergy -15.20 -11.34 -6.55

Government-authorized pricesTarifas Autorizadas por Gobierno 4.81 4.65 4.18

Source: INEGI.


20


-----

-----

-----

