-----

-----

**FOREWARNING**
This document is provided for the reader’s convenience
only. The translation from the official Spanish version was
made by Banco de México’s staff. Discrepancies may arise
between the original document in Spanish and its English
translation. For this reason, the original Spanish version is
the only official document.


**1. PLACE, DATE AND PARTICIPANTS**

**1.1 Place:** Meeting held by virtual means.

**1.2. Date of Governing Board meeting:** May 13,
2020.

**1.3. Participants:**
Alejandro Díaz de León-Carrillo, Governor.
Irene Espinosa-Cantellano, Deputy Governor.
Gerardo Esquivel-Hernández, Deputy Governor.
Javier Eduardo Guzmán-Calafell, Deputy Governor.
Jonathan Ernest Heath-Constable, Deputy

Governor.
Arturo Herrera-Gutiérrez, Secretary of Finance and
Public Credit.
Gabriel Yorio-González, Undersecretary of Finance
and Public Credit.
Elías Villanueva-Ochoa, Secretary of the Governing
Board.

Prior to this meeting, preliminary work by Banco de
México’s staff analyzing the economic and financial
environment as well as the developments in inflation
and the determinants and outlook for inflation, was
conducted and presented to the Governing Board
(see Annex).

**2. ANALYSIS AND RATIONALE BEHIND THE**
**GOVERNING BOARD’S VOTING**


**_International environment_**


**All members pointed out that the COVID-19**
**pandemic and the measures adopted to prevent**
**its spread have affected world economic activity**
**considerably. In this context, some members noted**
that the confidence of economic agents decreased.
**One member argued that the disruption of global**
production chains and the fall in consumption and
investment contributed to the above. **Another**
member mentioned that production shutdowns have
a larger effect on economies that are more open and
integrated to global value chains, because the
different phases of the pandemic hinder

synchronized production, as well as tourismdependent regions. He/she mentioned that

economies’ external demand has been affected by
such situation, while domestic demand has been
affected by lower households and firms’ income
which, in addition to the lockdown measures, has


reduced spending. He/she added that all of the
above is leading to a significant fall in employment,
which will widen the economic contraction.

**Most members pointed out that available**
**information for the first quarter started to show**
**evidence of an economic impact of large**
**magnitude. Some members highlighted the strong**
contraction of economic activity in the euro area and
the United States. One member underlined that the
most worrisome indicator is the US unemployment
rate, which exceeded 14% in April. He/she explained
that although China’s industrial production

decreased in February, it recovered slightly in March.

**Most members noted that the environment**
**described above has led to downward revisions**
**to economic expectations —unprecedented in**
**the last decades— which include a strong**
**contraction in 2020. Some members pointed out**
that the most significant global GDP contraction of
this episode is expected for the second quarter of the
year. Some members mentioned that drops in GDP
not seen since the Great Depression are anticipated.
**One member highlighted the large magnitude of the**
revisions and the abrupt nature of the economic
impact.

**Most members underlined that a recovery is**
**expected during the second half of 2020, which**
**would extend to next year. However, most**
**members emphasized that this is subject to**
**considerable risks, such as: i) the uncertainty on**
**the duration and severity of the effects of the**
**lockdown measures, ii) the time needed to**
**normalize productive activities, and iii) the**
**possibility of new COVID-19 outbreaks.** **Some**
members mentioned additional risks, such as the
resurfacing of tensions between China and the
United States, as well as others of political and
geopolitical nature. **One member highlighted the**
danger of a double dip recession. **In this context,**
**most members pointed out that the balance of**
**risks for the global economic outlook remains**
**biased to the downside.**

**Most members mentioned that the impact on**
**economic activity has resulted in a sharp fall in**
**commodity prices, especially of crude oil.** **One**
member added that the latter registered historically
low prices.

**Most members pointed out that worldwide**
**inflation continued to decline significantly, to**
**levels below the central banks’ targets. One**
member stated that inflation expectations have
decreased. **Another member noted that although**
inflation continues to register positive figures, the
possibility of additional declines, and even of

1


-----

episodes of deflation, represent risk factors for the
recovery of the world economy.

**All members stated that in light of the described**
**environment, several central banks lowered their**
**interest rates significantly.** **One** member pointed
out that most advanced economies have nominal
interest rates around 0% or negative, and that
emerging economies overall set them near or below
observed inflation, thus leading to real rates close to
0% or even negative. He/she underlined that, out of
17 emerging economies analyzed, nine have a target
rate below or equal to 3%, five have rates between 3
and 5%, while Mexico, Russia and Turkey have rates
above 5%. However, he/she stated that expected
inflation for the end of the year in Russia and Turkey
is high, while in Mexico it is already below 3%. For
this reason, he/she mentioned that the real interest
rate in Mexico is currently the highest among the
group of seventeen emerging countries analyzed.
He/she added that, for emerging economies,
average expectations for policy rates for the end of
2020 continued to decrease, laying at 3%.

**Most members pointed out that numerous**
**central banks have also implemented other**
**extraordinary measures to foster the well-**
**functioning of their financial systems.** **One**
member highlighted that practically all central banks
have emphasized in their statements the need to
intensify the monetary stimulus to speed up the
economic recovery process. **Another member**
added that these measures’ intent is for households
and firms to be able to face their temporarily lower
incomes as a result of the pandemic, as well as to
avoid a credit contraction. As for the referred
measures, **one** member underlined the risk that
certain vulnerabilities that could jeopardize financial
stability may arise or increase, as well as the
challenges that could stem from certain legal
difficulties in some regions.

**Most members stated that numerous countries**
**have implemented fiscal stimulus measures to**
**mitigate the adverse effects of the pandemic.**
**Some members noted that such stimuli have been**
greater than those implemented during the global
financial crisis. **One** member specified that various
authorities have approved direct relief measures and
credit-guarantee programs. **Another** member

stressed that there is the risk that these measures
are insufficient to avoid a deeper and longer than
expected recession.

**Most members mentioned that this adverse**
**environment has led to a greater risk aversion, a**
**deterioration of global financial conditions, and**
**to a recomposition of investors’ portfolios**
**towards lower-risk assets.** **Some** members


pointed out that as compared to the beginning of the
year, stock markets of advanced economies have
fallen considerably. **One member noted that there**
were outflows from equity markets and high-risk
corporate debt in the aforementioned economies.
**Another member added that these economies’**
currencies depreciated against the US dollar and
that the spreads between corporate and sovereign
bonds remain at high levels.

**Most members highlighted that this environment**
**has also led to unprecedented capital outflows**
**from emerging economies, especially of fixed-**
**income instruments. Most members added that**
**these economies registered a depreciation of**
**their currencies and volatility in their foreign**
**exchange markets.** **One member explained that**
falls in commodity prices and other sources of
external income intensified capital outflows. He/she
argued that, in this context, rating agencies have
downgraded several sovereign and corporate credit
ratings, thus contributing to reinforce the financial
shock and the risk aversion process in a pro-cyclical
fashion. As for inflationary pressures stemming from
foreign exchange adjustments, **another member**
mentioned that these are contained in most
economies, as suggested by the reduction in
breakeven inflation.

**Most members acknowledged that the actions**
**adopted by advanced economies to provide**
**liquidity and restore financing, as well as the**
**announcements** **about** **a** **possible** **gradual**

**reopening in some countries, have contributed**
**to a more stable behavior of international**
**financial markets in the last weeks. One member**
noted that although risk aversion decreased, it still
remains at high levels. Another member stated that
financial markets remain volatile.

**Most members mentioned that global financial**
**conditions will remain dependent on the outlook**
**for the effects of the pandemic. The majority of**
**members highlighted the risks of a more**
**pronounced slowdown and a resurfacing of**
**trade, political, and geopolitical tensions. One**
member added that it is possible that the
recomposition of investors’ portfolios towards safehaven assets will continue and that bouts of extreme
financial volatility in emerging economies will take
place. Another member considered that the balance
for financial risks is biased to the downside.

**_Economic activity in Mexico_**

**All members pointed out that timely information**
**shows that during the first quarter of the year**
**economic** **activity** **in** **Mexico** **contracted**

**significantly, which already incorporates effects**

2


-----

**associated with the pandemic. Most members**
**noted that the economy was already weak prior**
**to the pandemic. Most members mentioned that,**
**according to its flash estimate for the first**
**quarter of the year, GDP fell 1.55% vis-à-vis the**
**previous quarter, the largest fall since the 2008-**
**2009 financial crisis.** **Some members mentioned**
that this contraction reflects the impact of the
lockdown measures, the deceleration of external
demand, and the disruption in value chains. **One**
member considered that the effects of the lockdown
and the subsequent fall in employment have not
been fully reflected yet. He/she added that indicators
based on information drawn from the payments
system anticipate monthly falls of -4.5 and -9.5% for
March and April, respectively.

**Most** **members** **noted** **that** **the** **lockdown**

**measures have affected aggregate demand and**
**that various indicators point to a contraction of**
**consumption and investment in March and April.**
**Most members added that exports, including the**
**automotive ones, decreased, while imports**
**maintained their negative trend. Some members**
highlighted the contraction of imports of final goods
and of machinery and equipment. From the supply
**side, most members mentioned that several**
**indicators suggest a contraction of services and**
**of the industrial sector. Some** members stressed
that business opinion surveys of various sectors, as
well as the Purchasing Managers’ Index (PMI) of the
manufacturing and non-manufacturing sectors, have
decreased to the lowest levels since records exist.
**One member highlighted that indicators of tourism**
and recreation services show that these sectors are
being the ones most affected by the lockdown
measures. **Another member added that in the first**
quarter the industrial sector contracted and that
manufacturing production decreased, while primary
activities increased.

**The majority of members stated that, although**
**the magnitude and duration of the effects of the**
**pandemic are still unknown, these are expected**
**to intensify during the second quarter.** **One**
member pointed out that some rebound is expected
starting in the third quarter, given the announcement
that activities will resume, although the extent of said
recovery is uncertain. **Another member added that**
these effects are expected to persist during the
second half of the year.

**Most members mentioned that the labor market**
**has been affected by the effects of the health**
**crisis. Most members highlighted that 555,000**
**formal IMSS-insured jobs were lost in April. One**
member noted that in the year ending that month,
456,000 jobs were lost, and that the loss has


disproportionally affected those workers that are
paid up to two minimum wages, thus increasing the
social cost of this health crisis. In addition, he/she
highlighted the considerable increase of the
underemployment rate. Another member added that
a reduction of 130,000 jobs had already been
observed in March. He/she added that the
unemployment rate already reached 4.15% and that
a significant increase in withdrawals of funds from
individual retirement accounts for unemployment
reasons was observed. One member underlined that
between March 13 and April 30 over 750,000 formal
jobs were lost, which indicates that, in less than two
months, more formal jobs were lost than in twelve
months during the worst part of the 2008-2009 crisis.
He/she also mentioned that a significant loss of
informal jobs should also be added. **Another**
member stated that a fall of more than one million
formal jobs is foreseen for this year. Some members
mentioned that measurement challenges of labor
indicators are anticipated, given that the National
Institute for Statistics, Geography, and Information
(INEGI, for its acronym in Spanish) is facing
restrictions to conduct household surveys under the
present juncture.

**Most members pointed out that growth forecasts**
**for 2020 continue to be revised downward. Some**
members mentioned that the consensus of private
sector forecasters went from -6.7 to -7.5%,
anticipating a moderate recovery in 2021. **One**
member mentioned an expectations survey

conducted among economists, in which the median
is at -8.0% with a mode of -9.0%, and that other
information sources are anticipating a double-digit
contraction. He/she considered that micro, small-,
and medium-sized firms will be the most affected and
that the informal sector will be impacted in terms of
income and labor opportunities, adding that greater
levels of poverty are foreseen in all its dimensions.
He/she pointed out that, although this is a worldwide
trend, Mexico is considered to be one of the
countries that will be affected the most. **Another**
member explained that contention measures and
uncertainty about the pandemic will continue to
impact the consumption of services. He/she added
that the lower employment and its effects on the
wage bill will provide less support to consumption.
He/she also stated that investment is expected to
continue deteriorating.

**Most members agreed that the balance of risks**
**for growth is significantly biased to the downside**
**and considered that it is subject to uncertainty,**
**given that the duration and depth of the effects**
**of the pandemic are unknown. Some** members
pointed out that mitigation measures and consumer
confidence will depend on the development of a

3


-----

vaccine and an effective treatment. Said members
highlighted the following risks: i) a prolonged impact
on production due to the suspension of economic
activities and the lack of supplies; ii) an increase in
contagions or a second pandemic wave, which
would lead to financial and solvency problems, and
iii) lower households’ and firms’ incomes and a
negative impact on employment. **One member**
mentioned a possible permanent damage to the
productive apparatus and to employment. **Some**
members considered that the absence of a
comprehensive support approach, particularly given
the modest fiscal response, can lead to a slower
recovery. **One** member added the absence of
adequate incentives for private investment, a
situation that has intensified recently due to the
adjustments in the regulatory framework for the
private sector’s participation in the electric sector.
**Another member emphasized that this is worsened**
by the environment of legal uncertainty for private
investment.

**In this context, most members pointed out that**
**slack conditions widened considerably and that**
**they are expected to continue doing so. One**
member mentioned that the negative output gap is
expected to reach levels not recorded since the
2008-2009 crisis.


**_Inflation in Mexico_**


**All members mentioned that headline inflation**
**decreased, stressing that in April it stood at**
**2.15%. Most members pointed out that this was**
**due to the decline of non-core inflation, as a**
**result of a lower annual change of energy prices,**
**particularly of gasoline.**

**Most members mentioned that core inflation**
**declined between March and** **April. Most**

**members underlined the increase in the rates of**
**change of food merchandise prices. The majority**
**of members pointed out that this is due to both**
**demand- and supply-related factors. Some**
members considered that core inflation continues to
show a resistance to decline. **One** member
considered that, although in aggregate terms annual
non-food merchandise and services inflation is
below 3%, core inflation is subject to generalized
pressures. He/she stated that the trimmed mean
indicator for this variable exhibits readings that are
almost identical to those of the untrimmed variable.
Likewise, he/she highlighted that in the case of
services, after excluding the housing, education,
tourism and telecommunication components, the
growth rate of prices of the corresponding indicator
is above 4%. **Another member stressed that the**
core component registered its lowest level in 12
months and that most components declined


considerably, showing lower persistence than the
one observed last year. He/she underlined that
services registered 2.84%, a level not seen since
2016 and that non-food merchandise registered
2.34%, the lowest rate since 2015. He/she added
that the depreciation of the peso exchange rate has
not affected the prices of non-food merchandise
significantly, despite the fact that a significant share
of them is imported. He/she added that housing
prices registered an annual inflation of below 3%.
He/she also pointed out that only two components of
core inflation, education services and food

merchandise prices, registered an annual inflation
above that figure. Nevertheless, he/she underlined
that in education services a slight decline with
respect to previous months can be observed, while
food merchandises are undergoing a peculiar and
possibly transitory increase in their demand. In
addition, production of some of these goods has
been limited due to the lockdown measures, exerting
upward pressures in their prices. **One member**
stressed that, according to academic studies, the
lockdown leads to radical changes in consumption
patterns and that the disruption in some value chains
reflects extreme changes within the price index, as
shown by the increase in the subindex of food
merchandise and the significant fall in tourism
services prices.

**Most members pointed out that short-term**
**headline inflation expectations have decreased.**
**Some members** stated that, for the end of 2020,
these are slightly below 3%. One member added that
core inflation expectations also declined. **Most**
**members mentioned that medium- and long-term**
**expectations** **for** **headline** **inflation** **have**

**remained relatively stable, although above the**
**3% target. One member pointed out that these are**
within the variability interval and that they are
expected to remain there. **Another member**
indicated that the inflation risk premium implied in
market instruments has declined. **One member**
stated that there are marked contrasts for the
different terms of this indicator, which highlights that
it has limitations in assessing inflation expectations
under circumstances like the current ones in financial
markets, which are characterized by low liquidity
levels and a deterioration of trading conditions
overall.

**Most members highlighted that inflation is**
**anticipated to converge to Banco de México’s**
**target in the time frame in which monetary policy**
**operates. Some members considered** that inflation
will be below the target by the end of the year. One
member estimated that it will remain below 3% for
the remainder of 2020. He/she indicated that this is
supported in part by the prospects that energy prices

4


-----

will remain relatively low, due to a weak global
demand for commodities. He/she pointed out that the
increase in agricultural and livestock product prices
observed in previous months has already started to
reverse, and noted that prices of food products would
decrease once the lockdown measures are lifted.
**Another member indicated that inflation is expected**
to increase in the following months and that it could
attain levels above Banco de México’s target in the
second half of the year. He/she mentioned that the
recovery of energy prices will exert upward
pressures on the non-core component. He/she
added that core inflation would be affected by an
exchange rate that is more depreciated than was
foreseen, and by supply shocks. Nevertheless,
he/she stressed that given the significant contraction
of demand in 2020, of a recovery that is foreseen to
be moderate in 2021, and of consequent

expectations of a wide negative output gap for both
years, it is reasonable to anticipate that headline
inflation will converge to its target in 2021, in an
environment of both upward and downward
pressures and of high uncertainty.

**As to risks for inflation,** **most members**
**mentioned downward pressures stemming from**
**the considerable widening of the negative output**
**gap and from the fall in energy prices.** **One**
member pointed out that social distancing is
disrupting the provision of certain services, the price
variation of which may decrease. **Another member**
added the declines in agricultural and livestock
prices and problems in measuring inflation, due to
the change in the representative consumption
basket during the pandemic. Among upward risks,
**most members emphasized the possibility of a**
**greater or more persistent depreciation of the**
**exchange rate and possible disruptions in**
**production chains and in the distribution of**
**certain goods and services. Some** members
highlighted the pressures on food merchandise
prices. In particular, **one of them emphasized that**
these pressures may be of such magnitude that they
may exceed the effects of the economic slackness
on prices. He/she added the base effect of non-core
inflation due to the low levels that have been recently
observed, a reversal in energy prices, and a greater
pressure on agricultural and livestock product prices.
**Another member stated that although it has been**
argued that the exchange rate depreciation is an
upward risk, it has not materialized in Mexico or in
other emerging economies yet, in which inflation has
declined. He/she added that although it has been
argued that there could be cost pressures stemming
from higher intermediate input prices, the IMF
reported that annual inflation of commodities
reached -31% in April, which represents an important
deflationary force. One member pointed out that the


effects of the lockdown on consumption patterns and
on value chains, as well as the difficulties in
collecting price data, make the reading of the price
index more complicated, and that certain upward and
downward pressures should therefore be analyzed
carefully.

**In this context, most members considered that**
**the balance of risks for inflation remains**
**uncertain. One member noted that this derives from**
the following: i) possible changes in consumption
patterns and their effects on the price formation
process, ii) the magnitude and duration of the fall in
aggregate demand, iii) the disruption in global value
chains and a possible shortage of certain goods, iv)
the persistence of adverse conditions in financial
markets that cause disorderly adjustments, and v)
possible second-order effects if the exchange rate
depreciation is perceived to be permanent. Another
member stated that uncertainty over the referred
balance of risks is high, considering that the
significant contraction in demand will exert

downward pressures on inflation, while supply
shocks and the exchange rate depreciation could
pressure it upwards. He/she pointed out that the
outcome will depend on the intensity of each of the
abovementioned pressures, as well as on the
interaction among them. Meanwhile, **one member**
considered that the magnitude of the economic
contraction and the consequent widening of the
negative output gap ought to have a greater impact
than the exchange rate on the price setting process.
In this situation, he/she considered that both upward
and downward risks for inflation are well-balanced.
**Another member considered that inflation data of**
April, in particular the evolution of the core inflation
components and the fall in non-core inflation,
suggest that downward pressures on inflation are
prevailing over upward ones.

**_Macrofinancial environment_**

**Most members highlighted that unprecedented**
**capital outflows have been registered and that**
**foreign investors have reduced their government**
**bond holdings by over MXN 250 billion. One**
member indicated that this was caused not only by
the global environment, but also by idiosyncratic
factors. Another member pointed out that since the
previous monetary policy decision, capital outflows
have continued, although at a slower pace. **One**
member considered that the recomposition of
investors’ portfolios has contributed to generate tight
financial conditions. **Another member highlighted**
that the stock of foreign investment holdings in
government bonds still represents close to USD 90
billion.

5


-----

**Most members stated that over the last weeks**
**the performance of Mexican financial markets**
**has improved. Nevertheless, the majority of**
**members mentioned that deteriorated trading**
**conditions persist. Some members indicated that**
debt and foreign exchange markets continue to show
reduced depth and a shortage of liquidity. **One**
member added that this has distorted interest rates
in certain nodes of the yield curve. Some members
mentioned that sovereign risk has adjusted slightly
to the downside, although **one member considered**
that concerns over different risk factors remain high.
On the other hand, some members underlined that
the stock market index increased nearly 6% in the
last month. **One member pointed out that marginal**
inflows by foreign investors to the stock market were
observed. **Another member mentioned that said**
market and credit default swaps (CDS) continue to
show a significant deterioration with respect to the
levels observed at the beginning of the year.

**Most members mentioned that lower interest**
**rates of government securities for all terms were**
**observed. Most members specified that said**
**reductions were influenced by the actions**
**implemented by Banco de México. One** member
highlighted that during the last month interest rates
decreased by over 100 basis points in some nodes
of the yield curve. Another member pointed out that
factors of concern, a steep yield curve, and the
liquidation of positions, persist.

**As for the exchange rate, all members mentioned**
**the significant depreciation observed this year.**
**Most members underlined that it remains high,**
although some of them indicated that it has recently
traded in a narrower range. One member pointed out
that in the last few months the exchange rate has
traded in a wide range and that trading spreads and
intraday volatility have remained high, with

unfavorable levels of liquidity and depth. In addition,
he/she pointed out that in the derivatives market, a
net short position in short-term instruments is
maintained. He/she highlighted that the Mexican
peso remains among the emerging market

currencies with the highest annual depreciation.
He/she added that said deterioration is similar to that
observed in the 2008-2009 financial crisis and more
pronounced than during the Taper Tantrum and the
2016 US presidential elections. **Some members**
stated that financial conditions will continue to be
subject to the outlook for the effects of the pandemic.

**Most members pointed out that this negative**
**environment contributed to the downgrade of**
**sovereign and Pemex’s credit ratings. Some**
members noted that two rating agencies maintained
a negative outlook for Mexico. **One member**


mentioned that they warned about further

adjustments in the near future and that some market
participants debate over when the sovereign will lose
its investment grade rating. As to Pemex, **some**
members expressed that it was affected by the fall in
oil prices. **One member mentioned that in the first**
quarter of the year it registered an historic loss of
MXN 562 billion, and that it requires a high
capitalization. He/she stated that although the
exchange rate depreciation had the greatest impact
on the company, its structural issues have gained
relevance in the context of low oil prices, the
confirmation of its loss of investment grade, and low
margin for maneuver in public finances. **Another**
member stated that the International Monetary Fund
had noted that one of the main risks is the need for
additional financial support for Pemex. One member
pointed out that if its business model is not
reformulated, Pemex will continue to draw resources
from the public treasury.

**Most members mentioned that in view of the**
**anticipated deficit increase and the fall in GDP,**
**public debt is expected to increase as a fraction**
**of GDP. One member added that this indicator will**
also increase due to the exchange rate depreciation.
**Another member mentioned that a shortfall of public**
revenue is foreseen for this year. He/she noted that
even taking into consideration the use of resources
from the Budget Revenue Stabilization Fund (FEIP),
the oil hedge revenues, and a lower programmable
spending, the primary deficit would amount to 0.8%
of GDP. He/she mentioned that in the medium term
revenue collection will depend on the recovery of
public and private investment to levels above the low
values registered in recent years. He/she added that
the referred credit rating revisions have contributed
to a greater tightening of financial conditions for both
the government and Mexican firms. In this regard,
he/she emphasized that recently government bonds
have been issued in US dollars with an additional
premia, and at a higher cost than the issuances in
January. He/she added that the shortage of new
issuance and of refinancing operations by the
corporate sector reflects tight financial conditions
and investors’ risk aversion towards Mexican
issuers.

**In view of the current situation, most members**
**highlighted the importance of fiscal support**
**measures** **that** **do** **not** **jeopardize** **the**

**sustainability of public finances. In this regard,**
**some** considered that measures to support the
productive apparatus and to mitigate the effects of
the pandemic have been insufficient. **Most**

**members acknowledged that there is little room**
**for maneuver due to the sovereign debt**
**downgrades, as well as the fragility of public**

6


-----

**finances** **and** **of** **Pemex.** **Some** members

mentioned that the economic contraction and the
higher deficit expected for this year limit the room for
maneuver even more. One member considered that
there is limited space to issue additional debt and to
implement a countercyclical fiscal policy.

Nevertheless, he/she noted that additional

reductions in the interest rate could contribute,
although to a limited extent, to reduce the financial
cost of the government and to free up space for fiscal
stimulus. Meanwhile, **another member considered**
that Mexico still has good access to international
markets and that the current space should be
utilized.

**Given the limited fiscal space, most members**
**considered that efforts should be directed to a**
**reallocation of the budget according to efficiency**
**criteria.** **One** member specified that said

reallocation should be directed towards spending
with an effect on the labor market in the short term.
**Another** member stated that there are some
margins for maneuver, such as the reallocation of
public spending from controversial large-scale
projects to priorities arisen as a result of the
pandemic.

**In light of an adverse juncture, most members**
**highlighted the need to generate public policies**
**that provide certainty to private investment,**
**along with the importance of maintaining solid**
**macroeconomic fundamentals. One** member
stated that the latter contributes to an orderly
adjustment of Mexican financial markets and of the
economy as a whole. He/she mentioned the need for
a strategy to mitigate the negative shocks, which at
the same time maintains low and stable inflation as
well as a solid and well-capitalized financial system.
**Some members** expressed their concerns about the
uncertain environment for investment. In particular,
they mentioned the recent modifications in the rules
for private sector participation in electricity

generation using renewable sources. **One pointed**
out that this measure affects the process of
competition and free market participation. He/she
added that these actions come in addition to others
that modified contracts’ legal conditions after
investments had been made, such as the

cancellation of Mexico City’s New International
Airport (NAIM, for its acronym in Spanish), the
Federal Electricity Commission’s (CFE, for its
acronym in Spanish) litigation over gas pipelines, the
cancellation of the green-energy certificate system,
and the suspension of the construction works for a
new brewery plant. **Another member considered**
that the health crisis, together with idiosyncratic
factors, can reduce Mexico’s potential growth to
levels not seen in many years, which would imply


high economic and social costs. Therefore, this calls
for strengthening communication and collaboration
links with the private sector in order to create an
environment conducive to investment. He/she added
that to overcome the challenges originated by the
crisis and to foster economic growth in the long run,
a balanced policy approach is required. He/she
emphasized that this is important given the
deterioration of economic fundamentals in Mexico.

**_Monetary policy_**

**Taking into account the foreseen impacts on**
**inflation, economic activity and financial markets**
**resulting from COVID-19 and considering the**
**room for maneuver that on balance these grant**
**to monetary policy, all members agreed to lower**
**the target for the overnight interbank interest**
**rate by 50 basis points to a level of 5.50%.**

**Most members pointed out that some emerging**
**economies that have lowered their policy rates**
**rapidly, have suffered a depreciation of their**
**currencies, even despite having intervened in**
**their foreign exchange markets. One member**
added that in some of these economies long-term
interest rates also increased, in a context in which
they are decreasing in most other economies.
He/she emphasized that the adoption in Mexico of a
more aggressive monetary policy approach aimed at
stimulating the recovery would imply incurring in high
risks in exchange for a modest impact on economic
activity for well-known and substantiated reasons.
**Another member considered that although calls for**
implementing more aggressive actions to ease
monetary policy have emerged, following a gradual
strategy is essential in view of the environment of
high uncertainty and the relevance recently gained
by idiosyncratic factors, which represent risks for
financial and macroeconomic stability.

**Some members considered** that the present context
grants a margin for lowering the policy rate further.
Some members added that lower interest rates will
contribute to a more effective functioning of Banco
de México’s previously announced facilities to foster
credit provision. One member argued that in view of
an unprecedented recession, an inflation near the
lower range of the variability interval, and in the
verge of undergoing a massive unemployment crisis,
it is important to continue easing monetary policy.
He/she pointed out that given the relative and
absolute monetary policy stances, there is room for
a significant easing of monetary policy and that the
low levels of inflation provide a margin for such an
adjustment. He/she added that although uncertainty
about its expected path persists, this factor should
not be over-dimensioned and should be given less

7


-----

emphasis given the plummeting of economic activity
and the loss of millions of jobs, about which there
already is certainty. He/she added that at the global
level monetary policy is very lax, which contributes
to compensate for the increases in risk premia.

**Another** member stated that the interest rate must
be taken to more accessible levels in a relatively
close horizon. He/she added that the cost and
access to credit for micro, small-, and medium-sized
firms —which are the ones that generate most of the
jobs— are seriously affected during economic crises.
He/she mentioned that if the effect of monetary
policy on credit was limited, it would be necessary to
resort to more drastic interest rate adjustments.
He/she mentioned that the reductions to the policy
rate that have already been implemented and which
have decreased the interest rate spread with respect
to the US Federal Reserve, have not led to a
disorderly increase of the Mexican peso exchange
rate, which means that there are other more
important factors behind the behavior of said
variable. He/she added that the target rate has been
lowered at the same time that inflation expectations
have declined. He/she stated that all of the above
seems to indicate that looking ahead there is ample
space to continue lowering the policy rate without
generating inflationary pressures or jeopardizing the
attainment of the inflation target.

**One** member argued that the monetary policy
decision must not only assess the dilemmas
associated with the outlook for inflation in an
environment characterized by a significant economic
contraction, but also consider those associated with
the financial shock in terms of both its global and
idiosyncratic components. In particular, he/she
mentioned that for a relatively small and open
emerging economy, the process for determining the
monetary policy stance should consider both the
economy’s cyclical position and its influence on
inflation, as well as the financial conditions that are
being faced and its role in macroeconomic stability,
including maintaining low and stable inflation. In
particular, he/she highlighted: i) that it must be
ensured that the yield curve adjusts in an orderly
manner, without affecting long-term interest rates
and maintaining inflationary risk premia at low levels;
ii) that some of the effects of the lockdown and of the
suspension of economic activities need to be
considered, given that in the current environment the
reduction of interest rates might have a lower or
lagged effect on aggregate demand in the very short
term, since the traditional channels of households
and firms’ spending are not operating normally, and
iii) that although in the steepest phase of the financial
and risk aversion-related shock, interest rate
spreads were not relevant in the portfolio


adjustments that took place, in the following phases
they could gain more relevance. He/she stated that
there are elements of stability in domestic financial
markets, and for the financial system as a whole, that
must be considered in order not to induce or worsen
an adjustment of portfolios. He/she mentioned that
this is relevant for Mexico, as it stands out among
emerging economies for having financial markets
that are highly integrated to international ones and
for having a fully convertible currency, where 80% of
the volume is traded among non-residents.
Considering all of the above, he/she stated that it is
necessary to identify the different challenges and
dilemmas that monetary policy faces, assess the
scenarios that materialize, and based on these
elements define the most convenient adjustments to
the monetary policy stance.

**Another member considered that in the presence of**
a global shock and a substantial increase in risk
aversion, the signals stemming from certain points of
reference that are usually important for monetary
policy implementation are now less obvious, which
underlines the need for a cautious approach. In this
regard, he/she highlighted less clarity regarding the
impact of the interest rate spread with other
economies. He/she argued that, similarly, in addition
to the difficulties that are usually involved in
estimating the neutral interest rate, it is likely that its
use in the assessment of the monetary policy stance
is limited in the current juncture. He/she emphasized
that there is a greater than usual degree of
uncertainty as to its magnitude and to the direction
of the short-term deviations it may be showing
versus its long-term level. The above, due to the lack
of clarity regarding the relative importance of
opposing effects on the neutral rate stemming from
the various factors that are currently affecting the
economy, among them the high level of uncertainty
and the tightening of external financial conditions,
which are probably combined with a lower potential
growth.

**Most members stated that the outlook for**
**monetary policy continues to be uncertain and**
**complex. One member considered** that the degree
of uncertainty regarding the evolution of the main
macroeconomic aggregates, of financial markets
and the external environment, and thus of inflation,
is unusually high. He/she mentioned that, under
these conditions, it is necessary to act with prudence
and take advantage of the margins to reduce the
interest rate to the extent that the trajectory of
inflation allows it. Another member pointed out that
although tensions in domestic financial markets have
moderated, several warning indicators persist.
He/she mentioned that the historical capital outflows
as well as the increase in sovereign risk and the

8


-----

depreciation of the Mexican peso, are evidence of
lower appetite for domestic assets.

Regarding future monetary policy decisions, **one**
member pointed out that it is necessary to send a
signal that monetary policy will continue easing
depending on how the crisis evolves and of the
possible deterioration of the economic and financial
conditions. He/she mentioned that the speed at
which the policy rate is lowered depends on: i)
maintaining inflation at low levels and within the
target; ii) the economic outlook, particularly, the
effects of the pandemic; iii) the volatility of financial
markets; iv) the risk that a very rapid reduction in
interest rates leads to greater capital outflows, and
v) idiosyncratic shocks such as a possible fiscal
imbalance, a greater deterioration of credit ratings,
increases in risk premia or other negative shocks to
business confidence and governance. He/she added
that decisive policy rate adjustments are needed in
order to situate the monetary policy stance in a lax
position and continually assess the possibility of
making additional adjustments, even in unscheduled
meetings. He/she added that monitoring the current
situation constantly will allow for prompt and effective
action. **Another member considered that although**
he/she agrees that the evolution of the inflation
determinants should allow for a further easing of
monetary policy in the near future, in his/her opinion
providing a more precise guide on the future path of
monetary policy is complicated and even unwise in a
context of such high uncertainty. One member was
of the opinion that under the current juncture, the
most prudent monetary policy would be to
significantly lower the policy rate so that the real
interest rate lays below its neutral rate as soon as
possible, without ruling out the possibility of
transitioning to a real interest rate close to cero or
even negative. He/she added that not doing the
aforementioned or postponing it for too long would
be an unwise decision, as it would affect the
domestic economy in a moment of crisis, it would
harm financial markets and jeopardize price stability.

**Most members mentioned the relevance of**
**implementing of the measures aimed at fostering**
**an orderly behavior of financial markets,**
**strengthening the credit channels, and providing**
**liquidity in order to continue enabling the sound**
**development of the financial system. Some**
members added that said measures also aim at
preventing disruptions in the payments system. One
member added that they are intended to allow firms
and households to have access to the financing they
need in the face of a temporary reduction in their
income. He/she mentioned that the announced
measures amount to MXN 800 billion, equivalent to
3.3% of GDP. Another member highlighted that said


measures need to be reinforced in three ways: i) by
clearly communicating their scope and that they are
being set within the limits imposed by the law; ii) by
instrumenting them rapidly and effectively, and iii) by
assessing their effects so that, if necessary, their
duration and amount are increased in all extension
and intensity, or even some additional measures are
designed. He/she emphasized that immediate
measures such as regulatory improvements, the
easing of rules and regulations and a better
governance do not have an impact on the fiscal
deficit, but they do have an impact on the incentives
for firms’ to resort to the financial system in search
for increased credit to maintain their working capital.
He/she pointed out that in addition to the latter,
Banco de México, within its capacity and legal
powers, must continue collaborating with the public
and private sectors for the sake of the economic
recovery. However, the financial sector must also be
very proactive so that these resources are channeled
easily to firms. In this regard, Banco de México must
coordinate itself closely with the private and public
sectors so that the implemented policies are more
effective. He/she indicated that it is of utmost
importance to respond to the economic emergency
within the powers of the Central Bank and to its
maximum capacity to support the population and the
economy. He/she mentioned that this requires acting
decisively within the margin that its primary mandate
allows it, by communicating the need to adopt a more
accommodative policy stance considering the lag
with which monetary policy operates. He/she added
that the present crisis requires thinking innovatively
and acting boldly. He/she considered that for this
reason it is important to send a message of unity
and commitment to solve the crisis. **One member**
considered that, to allow that the facilities announced
by Banco de Mexico foster credit provision in a more
effective manner, it is necessary to move towards
interest rates that are below their neutral level, in a
relatively short horizon. He/she argued that,
otherwise, the coverage of these measures will be
rather limited.

**3. MONETARY POLICY DECISION**

Taking into account the referred risks for inflation,
economic activity and financial markets, major
challenges arise for monetary policy and for the
economy in general. Considering the room for
maneuvering that on balance monetary policy has as
a result of these implications, and with the presence
of all its members, Banco de México’s Governing
Board decided unanimously to lower the target for
the overnight interbank interest rate by 50 basis
points to a level of 5.5%.

9


-----

The Governing Board will take the necessary actions
on the basis of incoming information and considering
the large impact on productive activity as well as the
evolution of the financial shock that we are currently
facing, so that the policy rate is consistent with the
orderly and sustained convergence of headline
inflation to Banco de México’s target within the time
frame in which monetary policy operates.

Perseverance in strengthening the macroeconomic
fundamentals and adopting the necessary actions,
regarding both monetary and fiscal policies, will


contribute to a better adjustment of domestic
financial markets and of the economy as a whole.

**4. VOTING**

Alejandro Díaz de León-Carrillo, Irene EspinosaCantellano, Gerardo Esquivel-Hernández, Javier
Eduardo Guzmán-Calafell and Jonathan Ernest
Heath-Constable voted in favor of lowering the
overnight interbank interest rate by 50 basis points
to 5.5%.

10


-----

**ANNEX**

The information in this Annex was prepared for this
meeting by the staff of Banco de México’s General
Directorate of Economic Research and General
Directorate of Central Bank Operations. It does not
necessarily reflect the considerations of the

members of the Governing Board as to the monetary
policy decision.

**A.1. External conditions**

**A.1.1. World economic activity**

The COVID-19 pandemic and the measures adopted
to prevent its spread have considerably affected
world economic activity (Chart 1). This has led to
unprecedented revisions to the economic outlook,
which incorporate a strong contraction of productive
activity in 2020. In turn, this has resulted in a sharp
fall in commodity prices, especially of crude oil. This
environment led to a significant deterioration of
global financial conditions, to a recomposition of
investors’ portfolio towards lower risk assets, and to
the greatest contraction ever recorded of holdings of
emerging economies’ assets, especially of fixedincome instruments.

In this juncture, several central banks have
significantly reduced interest rates and implemented
other measures to foster the well-functioning of their
financial markets. Likewise, several countries have
implemented fiscal stimulus measures to mitigate the
adverse effects on employment and on households’
and firms’ incomes. Such actions, along with the
seeming reduction of contagion in some of the major
economies, have recently resulted in an

improvement of global financial conditions.

Nevertheless, international financial conditions will
continue to be subject to the outlook for the
pandemic’s effects, as well as to risk factors such as
political and trade tensions between the United
States and China.


**Chart 1**

**World GDP Growth**

Annual percentage change, s. a.

10

5

0

-5

-10

-15 World

Advanced economies
Emerging and developing economies
Q1

-20

2001 2003 2005 2007 2009 2011 2013 2015 2017 2019

s. a. / Seasonally adjusted figures.
Note: The sample of countries used accounts for 85.6% of world GDP
measured by purchasing power parity. Forecasts are used for certain
countries of the sample.
Source: Prepared by Banco de México with data from Haver Analytics, J. P.
Morgan and International Monetary Fund (IMF).

In the United States, during the first quarter of the
year GDP growth contracted at a seasonally adjusted
annualized quarterly rate of 4.8%, after having grown
2.1% during the fourth quarter of 2019 (Chart 2). This
contraction mainly resulted from the effects on supply
chains caused by the pandemic and from the
measures adopted to contain its spread. In particular,
spending on private consumption, particularly on
services, fell, while investment in equipment and
structures continued to decrease. The negative
impact of these aggregate demand components was
partially offset by the positive contribution of
residential investment, public spending, and net
exports, the last as a result of a strong contraction of
imports. It is worth noting that consumer and
business confidence indices, as well as other
available indicators to April, suggest that the
stagnation of economic activity will intensify
considerably during the second quarter of the year.

11


-----

**Chart 2**

**United States: Real GDP and its Components**

Annualized quarterly percentage change and

contributions in percentage points, s. a.

6

4

2

0

-2

-4

Public spending Net exports

-6 Inventories Non-residential investment

Residential investment Private consumption

Total

-8

I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV I

2016 2017 2018 2019 2020

Source: Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA).

During the first quarter of 2020, US industrial
production registered its greatest fall since mid-2009,
decreasing at an annualized rate of 7.4%. Industrial
activity is expected to remain weak during the second
quarter of the year, as suggested by some available
indicators to April, such as the Purchasing Managers’
Index (PMI). In particular, the falls in PMI and ISM’s
new orders components, from 42.2 to 27.1 and from
45.7 to 27.7 points, between March and April,
respectively, stood out.

US labor market indicators showed a significant
deterioration in April given the measures to contain
the COVID-19 spread. In particular, the contraction
of the non-farm payroll went from 870,000 jobs in
March to 20.5 million in April, the latter being the
largest fall ever registered. In turn, the

unemployment rate increased from 4.4% in March
2020 to 14.7% in April. In relation with the above,
unemployment insurance claims have continued to
increase since the start of the pandemic, surpassing
22 million on the week ending on April 25.

In the euro area, GDP growth contracted at a
seasonally adjusted annualized quarterly rate of
14.4% during the first quarter of the year, as a result
of the weakness in consumption and investment
stemming from the measures implemented to contain
the COVID-19 spread. Despite this contraction, the
unemployment rate increased only from 7.3% to
7.4% between February and March. Available
leading indicators, such as the PMI, declined once
more in April, reflecting the effects of the pandemic
on several economies of this region. In particular, the
services sector index reached its lowest level ever
recorded.


In Japan, available information suggests a

contraction of GDP during the first quarter of the
year. In particular, industrial production contracted
sharply in March due to the negative impact of the
pandemic on domestic and external demand,
particularly for manufacturing. Some indicators fell
significantly during the same month, especially the
PMI of the services sector and the Consumer
Confidence Index, which reached their lowest levels
ever registered. The above took place in a context
where the state of emergency was extended to the
beginning of June, thus suggesting that this economy
will remain weak in the short term.

It is worth noting that the evolution of the pandemic,
as well as the periods of adoption of contention
measures, have led to a deterioration of labor
markets in different advanced economies (Chart 3).
Thus, the unemployment rate in some of these
economies has already started to increase

significantly and such reductions are expected to
intensify in some countries in the short term.

**Chart 3**

**Selected Advanced Economies: Unemployment**

**Rate**

Percent, s. a.

16

15 March

April

14 February

13

12

11

10

9

8

7

6

5

4

3

2 United States Euro area

Japan Canada

1 United Kingdom

0

2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020

s. a. / Seasonally adjusted figures.
Source: Haver Analytics.

12


-----

In emerging economies, the latest information
suggests that the deterioration of economic activity
will extend to the second quarter of this year. This is
particularly evident in regions such as Latin America,
where the COVID-19 started to spread faster since
March and where social distancing measures
continue to be implemented. As for China, after the
incipient recovery registered in March, the PMI of the
manufacturing sector decreased slightly in April,
while that of the services sector increased slightly,
reflecting a gradual normalization of activities after
the lockdown was lifted.

International commodity prices have registered an
erratic behavior since the end of April. In particular,
after WTI oil prices fell by 56 USD per barrel on April
20 reaching -37.6 USD per barrel due to the
expiration of WTI crude oil future contracts for May
delivery, the fall in global oil demand and
expectations of a sharp reduction of storage capacity
in Cushing, Oklahoma, prices have slightly recovered
as a result of the new production cuts by Saudi
Arabia and other Arab countries, although they
remain low. Grain and industrial metal prices have
recently registered some volatility due to uncertainty
about world demand and the renewed tensions
between the United States and China due to
allegations regarding the origin and spread of
COVID-19.

**A.1.2. Monetary policy and international financial**
**markets**

In most advanced economies, headline and core
inflation decreased mainly as a result of the fall in
energy product prices. The decline in economic
activity due to the pandemic has already started to
be reflected in lower prices of certain goods and
services. Inflation in these economies has thus been
well below the targets of their respective central
banks. In addition, inflation expectations drawn from
both financial instruments and surveys remain at low
levels. In most emerging economies, headline and
core inflation also reached lower levels in March,
mainly reflecting the effects of the lower economic
activity.

In this environment, several central banks of
advanced and emerging economies have continued
to implement accommodative monetary policy
stances, and in some cases, continued to lower their
policy rates and to implement extraordinary

measures to promote the well-functioning of their
financial markets. Looking ahead, expectations
drawn from market instruments continue to anticipate


that central banks will maintain highly

accommodative monetary policy stances (Chart 4).

**Chart 4**

**Reference Rates and Implied Trajectories in**

**OIS Curves***

Percent

3.0% **― US Federal Reserve***

**― Bank of England**
**― Bank of Japan**

2.5% **― Bank of Canada**

**― European Central Bank deposit rate**
**― OIS implicit trajectory 11 May 2020**

2.0% **--- OIS implicit trajectory 20 Apr 2020**

1.5%

1.0%

0.5%

0.0%

-0.5%

End of End of End of
2019 2020 2021

-1.0%

2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022

*/ OIS: Fixed floating interest rate swap where the fixed interest rate is the
effective overnight reference rate.

- In the case of the US observed reference rate, the average interest rate of
the federal funds target range is used (0.0% - 0.25%).
Source: Prepared by Banco de México with Bloomberg data.

Some of the monetary policy decisions by the main
central banks that stood out during the period are:

i) In its April meeting, the US Federal Reserve left

unchanged both the federal funds rate, at a range
of 0%-0.25%, as well as its asset purchase
program. It also expanded the coverage of some
of the previously announced facilities to foster the
well-functioning of financial markets. The Fed
confirmed that it expects to maintain the funds
target range at its present level until the economy
overcomes the recent events, and emphasized its
commitment to use all available tools to support
the US economy, adding that it will continue to
purchase assets in the amounts needed to
support the well-functioning of markets as well as
to continue the repurchase agreement

operations. The Fed also pointed out that it will
continue to monitor the implications of incoming
information on economic activity, public health,
the global economy and inflation. In this
environment, both market variables and the
consensus of forecasters foresee that this central
bank will maintain the federal funds rate
unchanged for the rest of 2020.

ii) In its April meeting, the European Central Bank

(ECB) left its policy rates unchanged, maintaining
its refinancing rate, key deposit facility rate and
key lending facility rate unchanged, at 0.0%,

13


-----

-0.5%, and -0.25%, respectively. At this meeting, standing out. In addition, the Central Bank of India
it announced the temporary allotment of adjusted its loan facilities to support mutual funds,

additional long-term loans and a series of and the Central Bank of Malaysia (BNM) announced
improvements in the conditions of its long-term the injection of financial resources to ensure liquidity
refinancing operations (TLTROs-III), which in financial markets.

include the reduction of interests applied to these
operations, the early start of the loan assessment Since Banco de Mexico’s latest monetary policy
period, and the easing of requirements for such decision, international financial markets exhibited a
operations. In addition, the ECB announced a more stable behavior. This can be associated with
new series of emergency longer term refinancing the actions adopted by the largest advanced
operations in response to the pandemic, known economies to provide liquidity and restore the wellas pandemic emergency longer term refinancing functioning of financial systems. The above in
operations (PELTROs). addition to the slowdown observed in the number of

contagions and deaths in the main advanced

iii) In its May meeting, the Bank of England left economies in the last weeks, which led several

unchanged its policy rate at 0.1% as well as its countries to start easing social distancing measures.
bond portfolio asset purchase program. This Similarly, news about potential treatments against
decision was taken with a divided vote in which COVID-19, along with stimulus measures
two Monetary Policy Committee members voted implemented by the authorities, led to a less
in favor of increasing the size of such program by pessimistic sentiment, which partly reverted the
£100 billion. In its minutes, the Bank of England movements observed during the year. In this
acknowledged that, given the downward risks for environment, moderate adjustments were observed
economic activity in the medium term, greater in advanced economies’ financial assets. Most main
actions may be required in the future. In this stock indices rose; interest rates of government
regard, in his first meeting as Governor of this securities traded in a narrower range, although with
central bank, Andrew Bailey pointed out that all a downward bias; exchange rates exhibited mixed
options remain possible and that the quantitative adjustments against the US dollar; and corporate
easing (QE) program may be expanded in June. bond spreads also registered mixed adjustments

Chart 5).

iv) In its April meeting, the Bank of Japan left its **Chart 5**

short-term policy interest rate unchanged at **Change in Selected Financial Indicators**
-0.1% and its long-term interest rate (indexed to **from April 20 to May 11, 2020**
its 10-year bond) at 0%. In addition, in light of the Percent, basis pointsPercentage, basis points
severe impact on economic activity and the tightening of financial conditions resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic, it decided to increase 10% **<-- Stock market** **<-- Currencies** **bonds yields -->government 2 year** **bonds yields -->government 10 year** 40
significantly the purchases of commercial paper 5% S&P 500 (U.S.) 20
and corporate bonds, as well as to ease the requirements of the funds provision facility for the EM 1/Nikkei (Japan)FTSE-100 (UK)FTSE MIB (Italy) CADAUDNZD United States

Shanghai (China) DXY 2/

corporate sector due to the health emergency. It 0% DAX (Germany) JPY 0
also committed to increase its government bond purchases, eliminating the annual ¥80 trillion limit CAC 40 (France)IBEX (Spain)Eurostoxx (Europe) EM Currencies 3/CNYCHFEURGBP CanadaGermanyJapanUnited States JapanGermanyUnited CanadaItaly
it had set before, in order to attain its 2% inflation target. -5% United KingdomFrance KingdomSpainFrance -20


v) The Bank of Canada announced details of its

program of asset purchases in the secondary
market. It also revised the terms and conditions of
its term repo transaction facility to include a 90day term in addition to those announced
previously.

Since Mexico’s latest monetary policy decision,
several central banks of emerging economies
announced cuts to their policy rates, with those of
Brazil, Colombia, Malaysia, Russia, and Turkey


1/ MSCI Emerging Markets Index (includes 24 countries).
2/ DXY: Weighted average of the nominal exchange rate of the six main
world-traded currencies (calculated by Intercontinental Exchange, ICE) with
the following weights: EUR (57.6%), JPY (13.6%), GBP (11.9%), CAD
(9.1%), SEK (4.2%), and CHF (3.6%).
3/ J.P. Morgan Index constructed from a weighted average of the nominal
exchange rate of emerging economies’ currencies with the following
weights: TRY (8.3%), RUB (8.3%), HUF (8.3%), ZAR (8.3%), BRL (11.1%),
MXN (11.1%), CLP (11.1%), CNH (11.1%), INR (11.1%), and SGD (11.1%).
Source: Bloomberg and ICE.

As to emerging economies, moderate adjustments
were observed overall in a context of caution among

14


-10%


-40


-----

investors given the adverse effects of the COVID-19
spread. Among these effects, the possibility of a
further downgrading in the sovereign debt rating of
several countries stands out. A moderate

depreciation of most of their currencies was also
observed, while investment flows to these economies
continued to decrease (Chart 6).

Looking ahead, the behavior of international financial
markets will largely depend on the measures taken
to contain the virus spread and the capacity to
mitigate the negative effects of the disease on
economic activity. Likewise, the resurfacing of
political and trade tensions between China and the
United States may generate new episodes of
volatility and risk aversion. Other risks also persist,
such as the possibility of a worsening of geopolitical,
social and political conflicts in various regions of the
world; the risk of greater and more frequent
economic costs due to natural disasters attributed to
environmental factors; and a deterioration of
households’ and firms’ financial situation due to the
weakening of the world economy.

**Chart 6**

**Emerging Economies: Financial Assets**

**Performance from April 20 to May 11, 2020**

Percent, basis points


(Chart 7). This took place in an environment where a
sentiment of caution by investors prevailed towards
the potential adverse effects that may stem from the
COVID-19 spread.

The Mexican peso exchange rate traded in a wide
range, although narrower than in previous weeks, of
23.55-24.97 MXN/USD (Chart 8). Thus, during the
period, the Mexican peso appreciated 0.5% against
the US dollar, without standing out among its
emerging market peers. This took place in a context
where both FX spot and forward outright trading
conditions improved vis-à-vis those of March,
although they remain at relatively high levels.

**Chart 7**

**Mexican Markets’ Performance**

Percent, pesos/US dollar and index


9.5

9.0

8.5

8.0

7.5

7.0

6.5

6.0

5.5

5.0

4.5


26.0

25.0

24.0

23.0

22.0

21.0

20.0

19.0

18.0


4.3

4.1

3.9

3.7

3.5

3.3

3.1

2.9

2.7

2.5


48,000

46,000

44,000

42,000

40,000

38,000

36,000

34,000

32,000


M Bond


Inflation-indexed bonds


Range in year Range since last monetary policy decision Apr-20-20 Last level


Range in year Range since last monetary policy decision Apr-20-20 Last level


Source: Prepared by Banco de México.

**Chart 8**

**Mexican Peso Exchange Rate**

**with Moving Averages**

Pesos/US dollar


Note: Interest rates correspond to interest rate swaps for 2-year/10-year Note: Interest rates correspond to interes rate swaps for 2-year/10-year maturities,
maturities. In the case of Argentina, rates in US dollars are used since they
are the most liquid ones and those that reflect more adequately the
performance of the fixed income market in that country.
Source: Bloomberg.

**A.2. Current situation of the Mexican economy**

**A.2.1. Mexican markets**

Since Banco de Mexico’s previous monetary policy
decision to date, the prices of financial assets in
Mexico showed a stable behavior, in line with the
overall dynamics observed in emerging markets


Source: Prepared by Banco de México.

Interest rates of government securities decreased up
to 105 basis points throughout the entire yield curve,
with medium-term rates registering the greatest

15


25.50
25.00
24.50
24.00
23.50
23.00
22.50
22.00
21.50
21.00
20.50
20.00
19.50
19.00
18.50
18.00
17.50
17.00


-----

adjustments (Chart 9). Worth noting is that such
adjustments took place in a context where trading
conditions improved at the margin.

In this context, on April 21, Banco de México
announced two sets of measures aimed at fostering
an orderly behavior of financial markets,

strengthening credit granting channels, and

providing liquidity for the healthy development of the
financial system. Some of these measures are
intended to diminish the possibility that credit
institutions follow a pro-cyclical behavior, and to
enable conditions that facilitate financial

intermediaries fulfilling their priority role of providing
financing to the economy, so that, in turn, such
financing is channeled to micro, small-, and mediumsized firms as well as to households, which have
experienced a temporary reduction of their income
sources. With the purpose of promoting a proper
functioning of the public debt market, Banco de
México carried out a first government securities swap
transaction, through which it received long-term
(starting at 10 years) instruments and delivered other
3-year maturity instruments for MXN 4,615 million.

**Chart 9**

**Nominal Yield Curve on Government Securities**

Percent, basis points

8.40 0

7.90

30 -25

7.40 6

5

6.90 -50

6.40

5.90 -75

5.40

-100

4.90

4.40 -125

Apr.20 May 11 Change (Apr.20 to May 11)

Trading range over the period

Source: PIP.

As for expectations regarding the path of the
monetary policy target rate, information implied by
the Interbank Equilibrium Interest Rate (TIIE) swap
curve practically discounts a 25-basis point cut for
the monetary policy decision of May, while private
sector forecasters surveyed by Citibanamex are
expecting a 50-basis point cut. For the end of 2020,
market variables are anticipating a target rate of
around 4.00% (Chart 10), while the median of
surveyed forecasters lays at 4.75%.


**Chart 10**

**Banxico Overnight Interbank Rate Implied in**

**TIIE IRS Curve**

Percent

8.50
8.25
8.00
7.75
7.50
7.25
7.00
6.75
6.50
6.25
6.00
5.75
5.50 Banxico overnight rate (policy rate)
5.25

Rest of the period

5.00
4.75 Last figure
4.50

Last monetary policy decision

4.25
4.00
3.75

S   D   F M   A   O   J   A   J   S   D   F   M   A   O  D

2018   2019              2020           2021

Source: Prepared by Banco de México with Bloomberg data.

**A.2.2. Economic activity in Mexico**

Although at the beginning of 2020, and prior to the
COVID-19 spread, Mexico’s productive activity
maintained the stagnation observed for several
quarters, in March the effects associated with the
measures to contain the spread of the pandemic in
the country began to materialize, along with the
sharp weakness of the global economy and certain
disruptions in global value chains that considerably
affected the production of goods and services.
Indeed, according to INEGI’s GDP flash estimate,
during the first quarter of 2020, Mexico’s economic
activity contracted significantly (Chart 11). Although
the magnitude and duration of the effects of the
pandemic are still unknown, they are expected to
intensify during the second quarter and lead to
important contractions of employment.

16


-----

**Chart 11**

**Gross Domestic Product**

Quarterly percentage change, s. a.


2

1

0

-1

-2


I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV I

2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020

s. a. Seasonally adjusted figures.
1/ The figure for the fourth quarter of 2019 refers to INEGI’s GDP flash
estimate.
Source: Mexico’s National Accounts System (SCNM, for its acronym in
Spanish), INEGI.

At the end of the first quarter of 2020, the effects of
the worldwide spread of the pandemic led to a
decline in Mexico’s manufacturing exports. In
particular, automotive exports decreased

significantly in March, in a context where several
assembly plants suspended their activities in the
second half of the month in response to the health
emergency. In turn, the rest of manufacturing exports
continued to exhibit a low dynamism due to the
lackluster performance of exports to the United
States and a strong contraction of those to the rest of
the world (Chart 12). The greater weakness of the
world economy, together with the decline in domestic
production resulting from the effects of COVID-19 on
the supply of inputs, are expected to continue
affecting negatively and significantly the Mexican
export sector, particularly during the second quarter
of the year.


**Chart 12**

**Total Manufacturing Exports**

Indices 2013 = 100, s. a.

170

Total

160 Automotive

Non-automotive

150

140

130

120

110

100

90

March

80

J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J F M

2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020

s. a. / Seasonally adjusted series and trend series based on data in nominal
US dollars. The former is represented by a solid line and the latter by a
dotted line.
Source: Prepared by Banco de México with data from the Tax
Administration Service (SAT, for its acronym in Spanish), the Ministry of the
Economy (SE, for its acronym in Spanish), Banco de México, the National
Institute of Statistics and Geography (INEGI, for its acronym in Spanish),
Mexico’s Merchandise Trade Balance, and the National System of
Statistical and Geographical Information (SNIEG, for its acronym in
Spanish).

In February 2020, the sluggishness that private
consumption had shown during the previous months
continued. Timely information suggests this

aggregate has been significantly affected since in
March by the COVID-19 spread. In particular,
National Association of Self-Service and Department
Stores (ANTAD, for its acronym in Spanish) sales
declined in March, reflecting the mixed impact of
social distancing measures on the types of stores
represented, given that department and specialized
store sales fell significantly, while those of
supermarkets rose considerably as a result of
consumers’ precautionary behavior. In turn, after
having decreased more than 20% at a seasonally
adjusted monthly rate in March, light vehicle sales
contracted further at a rate of close to 50% in April.
In the first two months of the year, gross fixed
investment continued trending downwards, as a
result of the poor performance of both machinery and
equipment and construction. Timely indicators such
as those of capital imports suggest that this item will
also be significantly affected since the end of the first
quarter by the greater uncertainty and the economic
effects of the pandemic.

17


-----

As for production, according to timely indicators,
during the first quarter of 2020 the downward path
that industrial production had been following since
the beginning of 2018 intensified, while in March
services were affected by the pandemic, after the
lackluster growth they registered in 2019 and the
beginning of 2020 (Chart 13). Within secondary
activities, in March manufacturing contracted

significantly, largely associated with the shutdown of
activities in some sectors due to the shortage of
imported inputs, mainly those from China, as well as
to the unfavorable performance of the transportation
equipment sector, mainly due to shutdowns in the
automotive industry as a precautionary measure in
response to the health emergency (Chart 14).
Shutdowns in this industry extended to April, leading
to a fall in final production of almost 100% during that
month. The downward trend followed by construction
intensified, while mining once again exhibited
weakness, reflecting the fall in the metal and nonmetal mineral production item, although an increase
in crude oil extraction continued to be observed. The
stagnation of tertiary activities at the beginning of
2020 was mostly explained by the negative
contributions of transportation and mass media
information services, although other services also
exhibited weakness. Timely indicators show that the
negative performance of services intensified in
March, and is expected to have concentrated on
activities such as arts, entertainment and recreation,
accommodation, and food services.

**Chart 13**

**Economic Activity Indicators**

Indexes 2013 = 100, s. a.

120 140

Total IGAE 1/

Industrial production 2/

115 Services IGAE 1/ 130

Agricultural and livestock products IGAE 1/

110 120

105 110

100 100

February

March

95 90

J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J M

2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020

s. a. / Seasonally adjusted and trend series. The former is represented by a
solid line and the latter by a dotted line.
1/ Figures up to February 2020.
2/ Monthly industrial activity indicator figures up to March 2020.
Source: Mexico’s National Accounts System (SCNM, for its acronym in
Spanish), INEGI.


s. a. / Seasonally adjusted and trend series. The former is represented by a
solid line and the latter by a dotted line.
1/ Figures in parentheses correspond to their share in the total in 2013.
Source: Mexico’s National Accounts System (SCNM, for its acronym in),
INEGI.

As to the economy’s cyclical position, slack
conditions continued to widen considerably towards
the end of the first quarter of 2020, reflecting the
persistent weakness that economic activity has
registered for several quarters and the effects of the
COVID-19 spread (Chart 15), in a context where the
balance of risks for growth is significantly biased to
the downside. As to the labor market, in January –
March 2020, both national and urban unemployment
rates remained at levels above the average for 2019,
although they declined in March, despite the lower
economic activity in that month (Chart 16). Similarly,
the unfavorable performance of IMSS-insured job
creation intensified significantly due to the effects of
the pandemic, leading to the loss of 131,000 jobs in
March and 555,000 in April, with non-seasonally
adjusted figures.

18


**Chart 14**

**Industrial Activity [1/]**

Indexes 2013 = 100, s. a.


130

120

110

100

90

80

70

60


J

2013


A J O J

2014


A J O J

2015


A J O J

2016


A J O J

2017


A J O J

2018


A J O J

2019


A J O J M

2020


-----

**Chart 15**

**Output Gap Estimates [1/]**

**Excluding Oil Industry [4/ ]**

Potential output percentages, s. a.


8

Global Economic Activity Indicator 2/

6 Gross Domestic Product 2/

95% Confidence interval 3/

4

2

0

-2

-4

-6

-8

-10

Q-I

March

-12

J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M

2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020


s. a. / Calculations based on seasonally adjusted figures.
1/ Output gap estimated with a tail-corrected Hodrick-Prescott filter; see
Banco de México (2009), “Inflation Report (April-June 2009)", p.74.
2/ Fourth quarter of 2019 GDP figure and January 2020 IGAE figure.
3/ Output gap confidence interval calculated with a method of unobserved
components.
4/ Excludes both oil and gas extraction, support activities for mining, and
petroleum and coal products' manufacturing.
Source: Prepared by Banco de México with INEGI data.

**Chart 16**

**National Unemployment Rate and Urban**

**Unemployment Rate**

Percent, s. a.

8.5

National unemployment rate

8.0

7.5 Urban unemployment rate

7.0

6.5

6.0

5.5

5.0

4.5

4.0

3.5

3.0

March

2.5

J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M

2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020

s. a. / Seasonally adjusted and trend series. The former is represented by a
solid line and the latter by a dotted line.
Source: National Survey of Occupations and Employment (ENOE, for its
acronym in Spanish), INEGI.

In the first two months of 2020, domestic financing to
private firms continued to decelerate, and even
contracted at an annual rate in real terms in
February. In contrast, bank credit to large-sized
firms, particularly to issuing firms, increased in
March. Since that month, a sharp decline was
observed in the activity of firm’s domestic debt
issuance market. Similarly, household credit

continued loosing dynamism in March. In particular,
consumer credit registered a real annual rate of
change of practically zero. As for interest rates, those
of firm financing decreased, in line with the reduction
of the overnight funding interest rate. In turn, interest


rates of mortgages decreased slightly vis-à-vis those
of December 2019, when such rates decreased
relative to the level observed since the second
quarter of 2017. In the segment of consumer credit,
and with figures to February 2020, interest rates of
credit cards decreased slightly as compared to
previous months. With regards to portfolio quality,
firm and mortgage delinquency rates remained at low
levels, while those related to consumption rose
moderately at the margin.

As a result of the contingency stemming from the
COVID-19 pandemic, there is the risk that the
loanable funds market deteriorates in the next
months, both because some creditors may have
difficulties in meeting their obligations and because
some credit institutions may restrict financing as a
precautionary measure. Given the complex outlook,
Banco de México announced several measures in
April, including those aimed at strengthening the
credit granting channels to micro, small- and
medium-sized firms and individuals affected by the
pandemic, through the provision of resources to
banks and through lending facilities based on
corporate securities collateral.

**A.2.3. Development of inflation and inflation**
**outlook**

Between March and April 2020, annual headline
inflation decreased from 3.25 to 2.15%, as a result of
lower non-core inflation, which even stood at
negative levels due to the significant fall in energy
product prices, particularly of gasolines, in the
context of the COVID-19 pandemic. Annual core
inflation also declined, although in a lesser
magnitude and with a mixed behavior of its
components (Chart 17 and Table 1).

**Chart 17**

**Consumer Price Index**

Annual percentage change

13

12 CPI

11 Core

Non-core

10

9

8

7

6

5

4

3

2

1

0

-1 April

-2

-3

J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A

2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020

Source: Prepared by Banco de México with data from INEGI.

19

|CPI|Col2|Col3|Col4|
|---|---|---|---|
|Core||||
|Non-core||||
|||||
|||||
|||||
|||||
|||||
|||||
|||||
|||||
|||||
|||||
|||||
||||April|
|||||


-----

Indeed, annual core inflation decreased from 3.60 to
3.50% between March and April 2020, reflecting
reductions in services and non-food merchandise
prices, while food, beverages and tobacco prices
increased. In particular, the annual rates of change
of merchandise prices rose during the same months
from 3.83 to 4.11%, driven by the increase of food,
beverage and tobacco prices, possibly due to the
higher relative demand associated with the health
contingency. In contrast, the annual rates of change
of non-food merchandise prices have continued to
decrease, given that the lower relative demand for
certain merchandises, such as clothing, may be
offsetting the effect of the higher relative demand for
others, such as medications and household products
(Chart 18). The reduction from 3.35 to 2.48% in the
annual rate of change of services prices during the
same period (Chart 19) reflects the social distancing
measures stemming from the COVID-19 pandemic,
which have had a downside impact on tourist and
food services prices.

**Chart 18**

**Merchandise Core Price Subindex**

Annual percentage change

8

Food, beverages and tobacco

Non-food merchandise

7

6

5

4

3

2

1

April

0

J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A

2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020

Source: Prepared by Banco de México with data from INEGI.

**Chart 19**

**Merchandise and Services Core Price Subindex**

Annual percentage change

7

Merchandise

6 Services

5

4

3

2

1

April

0

J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A

2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020

Source: Prepared by Banco de México with data from INEGI.


Annual non-core inflation declined from 2.19
to -1.96% between March and April 2020 (Chart 20
and Table 1). This result is mainly explained by the
sharp reduction of energy product prices, which
registered annual rates of change of -6.36
and -15.20% in the same months. The above has
largely reflected the historic falls in international
references due to the price war and lower
international demand in the context of the COVID-19
pandemic. In turn, the annual rates of change of
agricultural and livestock product prices also
decreased from 9.96 to 8.52% during the same
months, due to the reduction in the annual rate of
change of fruit and vegetable prices.

**Chart 20**

**Non-core Price Subindex**
Annual percentage change

20 Non-core

Agricultural and livestock products

15 Energy and government-authorized prices

10

5

0

-5

-10

-15 April

J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A

2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020

Source: Prepared by Banco de México with data from INEGI.

As to inflation expectations drawn from Banco de
México’s Survey of Private Sector Forecasters,
between March and April, the medians for headline
and core inflation for the end of 2020 decreased from
3.64 to 2.90% and from 3.50 to 3.34%, respectively.
Those for headline inflation for the medium and long
terms remained at 3.50%. As for the medians for core
inflation expectations, those for the medium term
remained at 3.50%, while those for the long term
decreased from 3.48 to 3.45%. Finally, breakeven
inflation decreased during the same period, with said
behavior intensifying in the first days of May.

As for the risks to the foreseen trajectory of inflation,
the most important to the downside are a significant
widening of the negative output gap and the effects
of the fall in energy prices. To the upside, a greater
or more persistent depreciation of the peso and
possible disruptions to chains of production and
distribution of certain goods and services. In this
context, the balance of risks for inflation remains
uncertain.

20


-----

**Table 1**

**Consumer Price Index and Components**

Annual percentage change

**Item** **February 2020** **March 2020** **April 2020**

**CPI** **3.70** **3.25** **2.15**

**SubyacenteCore** **3.66** **3.60** **3.50**

**Merchandise** **3.82** **3.83** **4.11**

Food, beverages and tobacco 4.99 5.05 5.78

Non-food merchandise 2.58 2.54 2.34

**Services** **3.48** **3.35** **2.84**

Housing 2.94 2.93 2.86

Education (tuitions) 4.55 4.58 4.57

Other services 3.72 3.47 2.47

**No SubyacenteNon-core** **3.81** **2.19** **-1.96**

**Agricultural and livestock products** **7.82** **9.96** **8.52**

Fruits and vegetablesFruits abd vegetables 11.23 13.47 9.35

Livestock productsLivestock 4.91 7.00 7.83

**Energy and government-authorized prices Energéticos y Tarifas Aut. por Gobierno** **1.01** **-3.13** **-9.35**

Energy productsEnergy -0.54 -6.36 -15.20

Government-authorized pricesTarifas Autorizadas por Gobierno 4.86 4.98 4.81

Source:INEGI.

21


-----

-----

