-----

-----

**FOREWARNING**
This document is provided for the reader’s convenience only.
The translation from the official Spanish version was made
by Banco de México’s staff. Discrepancies may arise
between the original document in Spanish and its English
translation. For this reason, the original Spanish version is
the only official document.


**1. PLACE, DATE AND PARTICIPANTS**

**1.1 Place: Meeting held by virtual means.**

**1.2. Date of Governing Board meeting:** August 12,
2020.

**1.3. Participants:**
Alejandro Díaz de León-Carrillo, Governor.
Irene Espinosa-Cantellano, Deputy Governor.
Gerardo Esquivel-Hernández, Deputy Governor.
Javier Eduardo Guzmán-Calafell, Deputy Governor.
Jonathan Ernest Heath-Constable, Deputy

Governor.
Arturo Herrera-Gutiérrez, Secretary of Finance and
Public Credit.
Gabriel Yorio-González, Undersecretary of Finance
and Public Credit.
Elías Villanueva-Ochoa, Secretary of the Governing
Board.

Prior to this meeting, preliminary work by Banco de
México’s staff analyzing the economic and financial
environment as well as the developments in inflation
and the determinants and outlook for inflation, was
conducted and presented to the Governing Board
(see Annex).

**2. ANALYSIS AND RATIONALE BEHIND THE**
**GOVERNING BOARD’S VOTING**

**_International environment_**

**Most members stated that the global economy**
**began to show a slight recovery in May and June,**
**after having declined sharply in March and April,**
although one member pointed out that timely
indicators for July indicate a moderation in the
recovery rate. **Most members attributed the**
**recovery of the global economy to the partial**
**reopening of activities in certain economies.**
**Some members added the impact of fiscal and**
monetary stimuli. **One member considered that the**
recent performance of economies also reflects: i) the
dynamics of the pandemic, its contagion, and
mortality rate; ii) the relative importance of the most
affected sectors; iii) the flexibility of the labor market;
iv) financial conditions and availability of funding, and
v) the soundness of the financial system.


**Some members underlined that economic activity is**
still far from the levels prior to the pandemic. **One**
member stated that the strongest repercussions
were registered in manufactures, person-to-person
services, and small businesses. Regarding the labor
market, he/she pointed out that in the U.S. the
unemployment rate increased significantly in April
and May, above 14%, and later declined to levels
close to 10%. In contrast, in the euro area, in the
United Kingdom and Japan, the unemployment rate
increased moderately, and the use of job

preservation programs increased.

**Most members pointed out that a strong**
**contraction is anticipated for this year and a**
**moderate growth for 2021, although these**
**projections are subject to high uncertainty.** **One**
member noted that, even though the recovery is
foreseen to continue until the end of this year and
during the next one, the magnitude of sequential
increases is expected to moderate gradually.
**Another member stated that infection rates in**
advanced economies show large differences, which
generates uncertainty regarding expectations of
economic recovery.

**Among risks to global economic activity, most**
**members mentioned unfavorable dynamics of**
**the pandemic. In this respect, they highlighted**
**the upsurge of new cases in different countries.**
**Some** members highlighted the possibility that the
pace of removal of restrictions to economic activity
slows down or that said restrictions are implemented
again. One member mentioned that heterogeneous
results in the health sector could lessen the
momentum and the sustainability of the recovery.
He/she added the risk that the stimulus measures are
withdrawn or reduced prematurely. Although this
would hardly apply to monetary policy, considering
the central banks’ commitment to maintain

accommodative monetary policy stances, he/she
expressed concern over the fiscal measures,
especially in contexts where the room for maneuver
is limited or politicized.

**Most members mentioned the risk of negative**
**effects on financial markets. One** member
highlighted the possible contagion of the crisis to the
financial system and to the sustainability of public
finances, in view of the maximum historical levels of
sovereign and corporate debts. **Another member**
pointed out the possibility of higher delinquency rates
of credits to businesses and households, although in
some economies the relief programs have eased this
risk. He/she added that low commodity prices imply
lower public revenues and a deterioration in the

1


-----

terms of trade in various emerging economies.
He/she noted that, unlike advanced economies that
have a reserve currency, the higher public sector
borrowing requirements in emerging economies will
exert pressure on the availability of financial
resources. Finally, **some members mentioned the**
risk of a resurgence of trade conflicts, as well as
political and geopolitical factors.

**Most members mentioned that headline and core**
**inflation in advanced economies are below the**
**targets of their respective central banks. One**
member pointed out that this derives from the fact
that the reduction in services prices have offset the
rebound in energy prices. **Another member stated**
that in the U.S. and the euro area a recomposition of
spending was observed, with increases in food prices
and falls in the prices of a broad range of services.
He/she mentioned that despite the possible negative
effects on supply, in those cases the weakness of
demand has prevailed. He/she stated that the central
banks in these economies expect inflation to remain
at low levels for a long time. He/she added that the
minimum levels at which short-, medium- and longterm interest rates are in these economies, reflect an
expectation of weakness in demand and its
deflationary effects.

**Some members noted that in various emerging**
economies, inflation also remains at low levels.
However, **one pointed out that some of these**
economies show upward pressures, due to the
higher prices of food merchandise and energy
products, foreign exchange depreciations and other
idiosyncratic factors. In this sense, he/she

considered that there is heterogeneity in the behavior
of inflation at the global level.

**Given** **the** **described** **environment,** **most**

**members emphasized that monetary authorities**
**have maintained accommodative policy stances.**
**They mentioned that different central banks have**
**expressed their willingness to maintain easing**
**measures for as long as necessary and even to**
**reinforce them. Some members highlighted that the**
US Federal Reserve is anticipated to maintain the
federal funds target range between 0 and 0.25% for
a prolonged period and that, if necessary, it would be
ready to expand its asset purchase programs. **One**
member added that the Fed also announced the
extension of some lending and liquidity facilities.
Regarding emerging economies, **another member**
highlighted that in most of them the reference rate is
very close or below the latest inflation figure and that,
on average, interest rates are expected to lie around
2.5% at the end of the year. **Some members also**


highlighted the fiscal stimulus measures adopted in
different countries to mitigate the negative effects on
employment and on households’ and businesses’
incomes. **One member mentioned the agreement**
that in this regard has been recently attained in the
European Union.

**Most members noted the positive performance of**
**global financial markets, reflecting the effects of**
**the fiscal, monetary and financial measures**
**adopted in advanced economies, and the gradual**
**reopening** **of** **productive** **activity** **in** **said**

**economies.** **One** member added that the

improvement is also due to the relatively favorable
evolution of the pandemic, as well as to recovery
indicators and better-than-anticipated corporate
results. **Some members underlined the increase in**
stock indexes, the higher prices of precious metals,
and the depreciation of the US dollar against a broad
basket of currencies. **One member added that the**
dollar even depreciated against emerging

economies’ currencies. However, **some members**
stated that the financial conditions that prevailed prior
to the pandemic have not been achieved. **One**
member underlined that, in light of the mentioned
risks, new volatility episodes may be observed.
He/she added that, despite the relative stability in
financial markets, the recent experience shows that
adjustments stemming from changes in markets’
sentiment can be disorderly.

**Most** **members** **highlighted** **that** **emerging**

**economies’ financial markets also exhibited a**
**favorable performance. One** stated that in these
economies, the financial shock was intensified by the
fall in commodity prices and in other external
revenues, which led to downgrades in the ratings and
outlook of sovereign risk, thus strengthening the
financial shock in a procyclical manner.

Nevertheless, he/she stressed that this shock has
moderated and that portfolio recomposition has been
contained. Another member noted that risk appetite
for fixed income assets has increased, although
equity markets continue registering outflows. **Some**
members noted that, despite this improvement,
restrictive conditions and caution prevail in markets.
**One member emphasized that the gap between**
public sector borrowing requirements and the
demand for fixed-income instruments persists.
**Summing up, most members considered that**
**global financial conditions will remain subject**
**mainly to the effects of the pandemic and that an**
**environment of uncertainty persists.**

2


-----

**_Economic activity in Mexico_**

**Regarding economic activity in Mexico, all**
**members highlighted the deep contraction in**
**view of the effects of the pandemic. In this**
**regard, most members highlighted that during**
**the second quarter the GDP flash estimate fell**
**significantly, by 17.26% as compared to the**
**previous quarter. Some members emphasized** that
this is the sharpest fall on record for this indicator.
**One member stressed that the economy has already**
been contracting for five consecutive quarters. Some
members pointed out that economic activity
registered its deepest contraction in April and that it
bottomed out in May.

On the supply side, some members emphasized the
contraction in the primary, industrial and services
sectors. **One member noted that in April and May,**
over 50% of subsectors registered annual falls of
over two digits, which is higher than the figure
observed in the two worst months of the 2009 and
1995 crisis. He/she highlighted the decline in
industrial production of over 26% between March and
May. He/she indicated that the use of installed
capacity in the manufacturing industry in April and
May fell by over 36% and, in some subsectors, by
over 60%. Another member indicated that during the
second quarter industrial activity and services
dropped by 23.59% and 14.54%, respectively, while
the primary sector contracted only 2.48%.

**On the demand side, most members underlined**
**the weakness of consumption and investment.**
**One member emphasized the monthly contractions**
of 19.6 and 1.7% of consumption during April and
May, respectively. Most members pointed out that
**consumption and investment are foreseen to**
**continue showing weakness, as a result of the**
**pandemic’s evolution, lower household income,**
**and low confidence levels. Some members added**
the lower availability of financing to households and
businesses, although **one** mentioned that

remittances have grown, thus supporting domestic
spending. **Another member argued that the lower**
dynamism of consumption and investment is
accounted for by the fact that their determinants
remain highly deteriorated. He/she considered that,
as the pandemic and the economic recovery have
evolved, it is becoming more evident that the
consequences of the current crisis will go beyond
those generated by the initial supply shock. **As for**
**external demand,** **most members pointed out that**
**in June exports recovered slightly, in view of the**
**US economy reopening. Thus,** **some members**
emphasized that the recovery of external demand


and manufacturing production has been greater than
that of domestic demand and services.

**Most** **members** **pointed** **out** **that** **various**

**indicators point to an economic recovery in June,**
**although starting from low levels, in response to**
**the reopening of some sectors, the loosening of**
**restrictions to mobility and the recovery of**
**external demand. Some** members highlighted that
the most significant rebound has been observed in
the export-oriented industrial sector, while the growth
of services has exhibited a greater lag. One member
noted that industrial production registered a monthly
rebound of 17.9% in June, although it still presents
an annual contraction of 17.5%. **Another member**
mentioned that, although information for July is
limited, available indicators continue to show an
upward trajectory, although from very depressed
levels. **One member pointed out that ANTAD sales**
went from registering an annual contraction of 14.8%
in June to one of 10% in July.

**Regarding the labor market, all members**
**highlighted** **the** **significant** **impact** **on**

**employment,** although some members noted that
recent data indicates a slight recovery. One member
specified that, at the margin, the recovery has been
concentrated in the informal sector. Some members
mentioned that according to INEGI’s Telephone
Survey on Occupation and Employment, between
April and June, 12 million full-time jobs were lost.
**One member stated that, out of these, about 7 million**
individuals were left unemployed and that the rest
were reclassified as underemployed. **Another**
member pointed out that the total number of
unemployed, underemployed or workers who are not
economically active but who are available to work
reached almost 26 million in June, as compared to
12 million during the same month of 2019. **Some**
members highlighted that during the first half of the
year around one million formal jobs were lost. **One**
member mentioned that, in this context, withdrawals
from Afores related to unemployment continued to
increase during June, reaching historical highs.

**Most** **members** **mentioned** **that** **the** **open**

**unemployment rate has increased, although some**
stated that said increase has been moderate, since
a high number of individuals have left the
economically active population. One member argued
that this is due to the difficulty to find employment
amid lockdown policies. He/she pointed out that
when the increase of 7.3 million individuals who are
available to work but economically inactive is
considered as disguised unemployment, the

extended unemployment rate rose from 12% in

3


-----

March to 24.9% in June. He/she added that, when
the underemployed are included in the extended
unemployment, the concept of labor gap is attained,
which registered 40% in June, twice as large as the
figure of March, but below the 53% recorded in May,
which indicates that it has already bottomed out.
He/she warned that, given the definitive closure of
businesses, it is not clear when the lost jobs will be
recovered.

**Most** **members** **highlighted** **that** **growth**

**expectations have continued to deteriorate. They**
**pointed out that even double-digit contractions**
**are anticipated for 2020. One member pointed out**
that, according to Banco de México July’s Survey of
Private Sector Forecasters, the expected contraction
for 2020 increased from 8.8 to 9.9%, and the
expected growth for 2021 rose from 2.8 to 3.0%.

**The** **majority** **of** **members** **underlined** **the**

**uncertainty about economic recovery. They**
**stated that it will depend on the containment of**
**the pandemic, as well as on the development of a**
**vaccine and an effective treatment. Some**
members mentioned that although a recovery is
expected due to the easing of lockdown measures, it
will be gradual and prolonged. **One member noted**
that economic activity will remain depressed for a
long period, with a greater negative impact on the
labor market. He/she highlighted that, given a
recession of a magnitude unseen in 88 years, a
pattern of recovery is still not visible. He/she added
that several scenarios suggest a period of between
two and six years for GDP to recover to the level
observed in 2018.

Among the risks for growth, **some members**
mentioned the possibility that the impact on the
production of goods and services and on firms’ and
households’ incomes will continue. **One member**
added that pressures on public revenue may affect
the sovereign risk outlook and that households’ and
firms’ solvency problems may put pressure on the
financial system. In the external environment, in
addition to the abovementioned global risks, another
member included a slower than expected recovery in
advanced economies, particularly in the United
States. One member underlined that such risks are
intensified by the modest support of fiscal policy and
added that in light of the possibility of new COVID-19
outbreaks, a second episode of contraction cannot
be ruled out. **Another member mentioned that the**
degree of fragility of the economic recovery is high
taking into account the medium- and long-term
damage to businesses and investment, the latter of
which was already affected before the health crisis


emerged. **Most members pointed out that**
**economic growth is subject to significant**
**downward risks.**

**Most members agreed that greater economic**
**slack is expected within the time frame in which**
**monetary policy operates. Some members stated**
that economic slack increased significantly due to the
impact from the pandemic. They added that there is
now a greater slack than that registered in previous
crises, such as those of 2008-2009, 1995 and at the
beginning of the eighties. **One member mentioned**
that while in the worst month of 2009 the output gap
was -7%, in April 2020 it was close to -24%.

**_Inflation in Mexico_**

**Most members mentioned the increase of annual**
**headline inflation, due to increases in both its**
**non-core and core components. Some** members
pointed out that, despite the sharp economic
weakness, the recent path of inflation has recently
surprised to the upside. In this regard, one member
considered that inflation dynamics should be
analyzed, given that headline inflation and its
components have registered levels consistently
above forecasts, despite the wide economic slack
and the peso exchange rate appreciation. He/she
added that, in this context, the disinflationary effect
attributed to the cyclical component of economic
activity should be reconsidered. **Another** member
considered that headline inflation’s increase in July
does not put price stability at risk. He/she stated that
the recent increase should not distract us from the
favorable evolution exhibited by several of its
components.

**The majority of members pointed out that the**
**evolution of non-core inflation has responded**
**mainly to the behavior of energy prices. They**
**highlighted that these prices have increased after**
**having fallen sharply in March and April, which**
**has contributed to the rise of non-core inflation.**
**One member stated that the above has occurred**
after this component registered in April a negative
annual rate of change for the first time in history.
**Another member stated that, despite the increase in**
energy prices, they remain below the level registered
at the beginning of the year. He/she added that the
lower commodity prices, particularly of fuels, and
their effect on production costs have a favorable
impact on inflation.

**All members mentioned that within core inflation,**
**effects in opposite directions are observed, with**
**a decrease in the annual rates of change of**
**services prices and an acceleration in those of**

4


-----

**merchandise, with high annual rates of change in**
**food prices. Most members pointed out that**
**services prices have reflected the weakness of**
**demand. As for merchandise prices, they**
**highlighted that these are being affected by**
**supply and demand shocks and by the exchange**
**rate adjustments. One** member considered that
these effects intensified the inflationary pressures on
international food prices that have been observed
since last year. These upward pressures in
merchandise prices represent a significant

rearrangement in relative prices given the slowdown
of services prices. Another member noted that such
pressures, which concentrated on food

merchandises initially, have spread to non-food
merchandises and considered worrisome that core
inflation is following a higher than expected path,
emphasizing that in July it reached its highest level in
thirteen months.

**Some** members mentioned that the increase in food
merchandise prices may be due to a change in
consumption patterns as a result of the pandemic.
**One member considered that, although they may be**
putting upward pressures on the prices of these
merchandises, disruptions in supply chains are
transitory and that the exchange rate depreciation
may explain only part of these price increases.
He/she argued that such increases may be due to the
existence of firms with market power, which, in face
of an increased demand, may increase their prices
and profit margins. He/she considered that this could
also explain why inflation is greater in Mexico than in
other countries with currencies that have depreciated
in an equal or greater magnitude. He/she added that
these factors act on the supply side and do not imply
sustained shocks on prices, and, therefore, little can
be done by monetary policy to contain them. He/she
also mentioned that a weak demand may be putting
downward pressures on the prices of some
merchandise items, such as clothing and shoes,
which have even registered deflation.

**Most members stated that the recent inflation**
**adjustments contributed to an increase of**
**headline inflation expectations for the end of**
**2020, while those for the medium and long terms**
**have remained at levels above the 3% target. One**
member noted that, after April, expectations for the
end of 2020 have remained above Banco de
México’s target. **Another** member highlighted the
contrast between the median of forecasters’
expectations for 2021 and those of the Central Bank.
He/she added that long-term expectations have
become more firmly entrenched above the target,
given the increasingly lower dispersion around 3.5%


observed for headline inflation and the increase
during this year of core inflation expectations, to
practically 3.5%. He/she considered that prospects of
a relatively high inflation until the second quarter of
2021 may make the reduction of inflation

expectations more difficult. Another member argued
that the general reading of different instruments that
measure expectations is that these are contained
despite the recent increase of inflation. He/she added
that expectations drawn from market instruments lay
at 3.2% for the 1-10 year average.

As for the future path of inflation, one member noted
that Banco de México’s scenario in the short term
reflects the effects of some recently observed price
adjustments. He/she pointed out that such

adjustments have led to increases in core inflation
and, in the case of non-core inflation, some
comparison base effects are expected on energy
prices. Nevertheless, he/she specified that, in the 1224-month forecast horizon, both headline and core
inflation are expected to lay around 3%. **Another**
member stated that supply shocks are foreseen to
fade over time and, in light of the outlook of a very
wide negative output gap, it seems reasonable to
anticipate that inflation will converge to the target
during the second half of 2021. **One member**
considered that the recent rise of inflation does not
imply a major concern for inflation ahead. He/she
mentioned that data for the second fortnight of July is
consistent with these expectations since it shows
signs of stabilization in energy prices and in food
merchandise prices at the margin. Another member
stated that the dynamics within the components of
inflation has led to an upward adjustment of
forecasts. He/she considered that the risk of inflation
failing to converge to the target within the forecast
horizon has increased and that deviations appear to
be increasingly less attributable to transitory factors.
He/she also highlighted that such deviations have a
regressive impact since they mostly affect the lower
income deciles.

**One member noted that the behavior of inflation will**
reflect the effects of adjustments in relative prices
that are taking place and those of the profound
weakness of both global and domestic aggregate
demand. He/she mentioned that these factors are
also occurring in other economies, although in most
of them the impact of a weak demand has prevailed.
He/she stated that, in contrast with Mexico, in
advanced and in a large sample of emerging
economies, headline and core inflation lay at levels
clearly below their target. He/she highlighted that, in
such economies, both inflation and output gaps point
in the same direction.

5


-----

Regarding risks for inflation, **some members**
mentioned to the downside a greater than expected
impact of the negative output gap. As for upside
risks, **some members pointed out the possibility of**
additional episodes of foreign exchange

depreciation. **One member noted that this could be**
due to internal and/or external factors. **Some**
members highlighted the risk of a de-anchoring of
inflation expectations. **One** member stated that if
short-term expectations continue to be revised
upwards, they may affect long-term expectations,
which remain above the target. **Another member**
added that an additional deterioration from the supply
side cannot be ruled out. **One member considered**
that there is a risk that upward pressures on food
merchandise prices persist and that they are not
offset by other price reductions generated by the
economic slack. He/she noted that, likewise, the
downward path of inflation in the past year may
currently exert upward pressures on prices due to a
comparison base effect. **Another** member stated
that the risks are limited due to: i) the deterioration of
aggregate demand is of an unprecedented

magnitude and will persist for an undetermined
number of quarters; ii) the peso exchange rate has
remained relatively stable for almost three

consecutive months, and iii) the outlook for financial
markets, although still uncertain, is better than during
the worst moments of the pandemic. He/she pointed
out that, for all of the above reasons, greater
inflationary pressures associated to these factors are
not anticipated. He/she added that, in line with their
international references, fuel prices are expected to
remain below the level registered at the beginning of
the year, which will continue to exert downward
pressures on the rest of goods and services prices
through their impact on production costs. **In this**
**context, most members agreed that the balance**
**of risks for inflation remains uncertain.**

**_Macrofinancial environment_**

**Most members mentioned that financial markets**
**have exhibited a relatively stable behavior as a**
**result of the lower risk aversion worldwide and**
**the measures adopted by Banco de México. The**
**majority of members highlighted the stability of**
**the peso exchange rate and the reductions in**
**interest rates throughout the entire yield curve.**
**Some** members added that the sovereign risk
continued to decrease moderately and the stock
market exhibited a slight downward adjustment.
**Some members pointed out that foreign investment**
outflows have diminished.


Nevertheless, **some** members highlighted that,
despite such improvements, financial conditions
have still not returned to their normal state. **One**
member underlined that elements that call for caution
persist. Among these elements, he/she mentioned
that trading conditions remain deteriorated; that the
negative balance of the net currency position
continued to widen; and that outflows in fixed income
instruments have accumulated over USD 15 billion
so far this year, a figure that stands out among
emerging countries. Another member stated that the
peso may be subject to pressures in the following
months due to idiosyncratic factors, including
Pemex’s situation, this and other challenges for
public finances, and their impact on the sovereign
credit rating, as well as a difficult external
environment characterized, among other risks, by the
US election process. **One member mentioned that**
the country faces a sentiment of risk aversion due to
the aforementioned election process, as well as to
trade tensions and geopolitical conflicts. **Another**
member noted that the economic growth outlook is a
major determinant of financial markets and thus it is
fundamental that it improves so that markets perform
more favorably. **One member added that, in a**
complex environment, a sound and sustainable
macroeconomic stance that contributes to an orderly
adjustment of financial markets and of the economy
overall is required. The above, in a framework that
maintains the sustainability of public finances, a low
and stable inflation and a sound and well-capitalized
financial system.

**Some** members pointed out that the situation of
public finances is a risk factor. **Some members**
highlighted that they are expected to deteriorate and
that the public debt-to-GDP ratio is anticipated to
increase. One member stated that this would occur
due to the shortage of budgetary revenues which,
even after taking into account the use of
extraordinary resources, such as those from the
Budget Revenue Stabilization Fund (FEIP) and oil
hedges, may lead Public Sector’s Borrowing
Requirements to reach between 5 and 6% of GDP.
**Another** member added that the main fiscal
indicators are anticipated to be more unfavorable
than those reported by the authorities in their latest
report.

**Most** **members** **expressed** **concern** **about**

**Pemex’s situation. One member emphasized that,**
in addition to its operational deterioration, the Stateowned company will face large maturities that will
probably call for an increased fiscal support. Thus,
**some members highlighted the risk of a downgrading**
of the sovereign and Pemex’s credit rating. **One**

6


-----

member pointed out that, according to a recent
survey conducted by an investment bank, most
investors surveyed estimate that the investment
grade would be lost in 2021 or 2022. He/she
highlighted the situation of Pemex and public
finances as the main underlying factor. In this regard,
he/she mentioned that the impact of the pandemic
now adds up to the previously observed difficulties
and that, if timely actions are not adopted, the costs
will probably materialize relatively fast, in light of the
markets’ tendency to anticipate their reaction to this
type of events. Another member highlighted that the
possibility of losing the investment grade has already
led to a tightening of financial conditions, and that, if
it were to materialize, financing costs would increase
even further.

**Most members noted that the impact of the**
**pandemic is already being reflected in financing**
**to firms and households.** **Some members**
mentioned that delinquency rates of certain bank and
non-bank loan portfolio segments have increased,
although one member considered that the measures
implemented by Banco de México have contributed
to adequately absorb the shock. **Another member**
mentioned that the real annual growth rate of
financing has been decreasing and that in June it
was even negative. He/she added that new credit
card loans, car loans and payroll loans have declined
sharply and bank credit to small firms decreased by
more than 10 billion pesos during the first half of the
year. He/she emphasized the reduction of new loans
to firms with less than 100 employees. He/she also
noted that lending conditions are now stricter and
that interest rate spreads have increased, especially
for small- and medium-sized firms.

**Some members pointed out that the proposed**
pension system reform has positive elements for
financial markets and for the Mexican economy in
general. **One** member considered that the

announcement helps to remove a factor of
uncertainty, which was weighing on markets and
sends the right signal that the reallocation of the
government's contribution to lower-income workers
will make it possible to increase the perceived and
real value of a large number of formal jobs, without
increasing firms’ costs. He/she said that, for this
reason, the reform will help to promote labor
formality.

**Some** members mentioned that the current

environment of public policies is unfavorable for
stimulating private investment and that there is no
counter-cyclical fiscal policy to support the productive


sector. One member warned that the above not only
hinders the economic recovery, but also increases
the possibility of long-term damage to productive
activities. He/she pointed out that the consequences
for potential growth can be considerable, especially
in view of the contraction of investment, which fell
16% from July 2018 to March of this year and an
additional 32% in the following two months, and the
need to implement a set of actions focused on
increasing productivity.

**_Monetary policy_**

**Considering the referred risks for inflation,**
**economic activity and financial markets, and**
**based** **on** **the** **foreseen** **scenarios,** **and**

**considering the room for maneuvering that on**
**balance these provide to monetary policy, most**
**members agreed on decreasing the target for the**
**overnight interbank interest rate by 50 basis**
**points to a level of 4.5%. One member voted to**
**lower the target to a level of 4.75%.**

**One** member stated that monetary policy is facing
challenges in two dimensions: the deep economic
contraction and its effects on inflation, and the impact
of the global financial shock. He/she added that in
order to achieve an orderly adjustment of the
economy, as well as low and stable inflation, it is
necessary to promote the sound functioning of
domestic financial markets, especially the foreign
exchange and fixed-income markets, avoiding abrupt
portfolio adjustments and capital outflows. He/she
indicated that this offers a greater margin for
maneuver, since the financial shock operates on a
shorter horizon than the shock to economic activity.
In this context, he/she pointed out that it is necessary
to identify the challenges and dilemmas monetary
policy faces, by incorporating all available

information and considering a wide range of
scenarios.

**Another member considered it important for**
monetary policy to continue its easing cycle, without
ruling out the possibility of reaching a real interest
rate close to zero or even negative. He/she recalled
that in the 2008-2009 financial crisis there was also
a real shock and a financial shock, and that despite
an increase in expected inflation, which surpassed
4%, the Governing Board began a cycle of monetary
easing, which brought the real interest rate to
negative levels in less than 10 months. He/she
mentioned that the accommodative policy stance
was maintained and intensified over the next few
years, allowing the economy to recover, while
financial markets were favored by the improved
economic outlook, which led to an exchange rate

7


-----

appreciation, and there was a sustained decline in
inflation expectations. He/she pointed out that the
magnitude of the estimated output gap currently
implies that it has been affected twice as much as
during 2008-2009. He/she argued that this reflects
the need for a real interest rate which contributes to
improve the outlook on the economic recovery in the
near future and at the same time remains compatible
with price stability. He/she also considered that the
economy would benefit from a less restrictive
monetary policy, without implying putting price
stability at risk. He/she pointed out that, on the
contrary, monetary easing so far implemented by
Banco de México has had a favorable effect on
financial markets, given that the exchange rate has
recovered lost ground and remained relatively stable
over the last quarter. He/she argued that a lower
interest rate would positively affect financing, which
for some firms could make the difference between
closing and surviving. He/she pointed out that,
although firms’ credit risk has increased, this implies
that the risk-free rate should be further reduced to
avoid an increase in their financial costs. He/she said
that he/she does not believe that a more
accommodative stance could lead to higher inflation
or financial instability, but rather may end up being
favorable for financial markets as long as it affects
the economic outlook positively.

**One member highlighted that the issue regarding the**
end point of the monetary easing cycle has gained
relevance, especially in view of the possibility that the
rate will remain at that level for a long period. He/she
added that the economic and social crisis demands
continuing decisively with the accommodative cycle
to stimulate the economy. Nevertheless, the velocity
at which we approach the cycle’s endpoint is key to
prevent premature and undesirable monetary policy
reversions, which could take place upon the
materialization of some of the existing risks. In that
sense, the terminal reference rate and its trajectory
will have to continue being determined according to
the information provided by the circumstances.
He/she pointed out that it is important to avoid
premature and undesirable reversions in monetary
policy, which might occur if some of the existing risks
materialize. He/she added that most analysts
anticipate the reference rate floor to be between 3%
and 4.5%, which suggests that the market expects
the easing cycle will not conclude yet. He/she argued
that this is supported by the good performance of
inflation, the stability of financial markets, and
expectations of a long period in which the economy
will remain depressed. He/she pointed out that the
relative monetary policy stance offers certain room
for maneuver, but it is more limited due to the risks in


international markets. He/she mentioned that

pressures on the Mexican peso and volatility may
arise, since the three-month rate spread adjusted for
exchange rate volatility is already in the average
range of the emerging complex, and given the
greater use of the peso as a FX hedge. He/she
added that a lower yield also encourages capital
outflows. He/she pointed out that as for the absolute
monetary policy stance, the gap between the neutral
and the reference rate, indicates that there is still
room to maintain an expansionary policy. This, as a
result of certain downward pressures on the neutral
rate generated by structural and circumstantial
causes, some of them related to the pandemic.
He/she argued that monetary policy in the short term
must counteract the effects of the pandemic on
economic activity and employment, but always
targeting the stabilization of inflation expectations.
He/she expressed that the most effective defense for
lower-income groups is to protect their purchasing
power and to mitigate the impact on employment.
He/she emphasized that it is necessary to ensure
that inflation remains on a trajectory of convergence
to its target and that short-term inflationary pressures
yield. He/she stressed that otherwise it will be
necessary to reflect more deeply on the scope and
speed of the current downward cycle.

**One** member argued that the behavior of inflation
expectations poses a challenge for the credibility of
the inflation target and for monetary policy. He/she
added that this situation could be the result of the
economy's exposure to external shocks and the
implementation of domestic policies, even in fields
different from monetary policy. He/she indicated that
the risks entailing additional interest rate cuts have
intensified, due to persistent inflationary pressures
and the potential implications of a lower interest rate
differential in an economy that is very open to capital
flows and with a highly liquid currency in global
markets. Regarding this point, he/she stated that in
order to compare the reference rate in Mexico with
those of other emerging economies, the rates
adjusted for foreign exchange risk must be
considered. He/she argued that in the absence of
capital flows that justify it, to determine the reference
rate in Mexico according to its level in other emerging
economies would be like trying to define the
monetary policy of a country based on the inflationary
performance of another. He/she added that the
monetary policy stance in Mexico has played a key
role in containing increases in long-term interest
rates. He/she stressed that these are lower in Mexico
than in several other emerging economies with lower
reference rates. On the other hand, he/she pointed
out that lowering the reference rate to a level of 4.5%

8


-----

would place it below the range estimated for the
neutral rate, although noting that the latter is most
probably being affected upwards by the lower access
to external financing and the increased uncertainty,
and downwards by the likely decrease in potential
growth. He/she stated that even though under these
circumstances it is difficult to make an accurate
assessment of the monetary policy stance based on
this indicator, available information suggests that it is
currently in expansionary territory. He/she

considered that with a reference rate of 4.5%, the
margins for additional reductions, if existent at all,
would be significantly narrower. He/she stated that,
due to the above, monetary policy must be even
more cautious in the following months and, if
available information suggests that there is still room
for an additional easing, the adjustments should be
expected to be more gradual than those observed in
recent months. He/she highlighted that the cautious
approach to monetary policy implementation

adopted by the Central Bank has worked

satisfactorily.

**Another** member indicated that Banco de México
took a proactive role, responding in a timely and
decisive way in face of the enormous challenges that
the pandemic implied, in order to achieve its goals
and its primary objective. He/she highlighted that in
March the pace of monetary easing accelerated. In
this regard he/she highlighted two considerations.
First, given the nature of the shock, the priority was
to guarantee liquidity and the well-functioning of
markets. With this aim, extraordinary measures were
announced, which had to be accompanied by a faster
pace of monetary easing, acknowledging that by
itself it would be insufficient to offset the collapse in
economic activity. Second, there was a high degree
of uncertainty regarding the evolution of inflation
given the presence of factors that were operating in
opposite directions. For such reason, actions were
taken cautiously, following a gradual approach,
taking into consideration incoming information in a
timely way, and guaranteeing the convergence of
inflation to its target within the time frame in which
monetary policy operates. Nevertheless, he/she
argued that the outlook has changed significantly,
with a favorable performance of financial markets
and what appears to be an inflection point for
economic activity. In this context, he/she considered
that the room for maneuver to continue with
monetary easing has diminished given the higher risk
that inflation may not converge to its target during the
time frame in which monetary policy operates, as well
as the greater sensitivity that capital flows to fixed
income assets in Mexico have shown relative to other
emerging economies. This, despite maintaining a


less relaxed absolute and relative monetary policy
stance. He/she mentioned the need to follow a
strategy that allows for an adjustment of monetary
policy as more information becomes available, and
that the message must be that the Central Bank does
not find the trajectory nor the levels of inflation that
are being observed acceptable, in order to foster a
convergence of inflation expectations to levels
consistent with the 3% target.

**The majority of members argued that other**
**measures to accompany the extraordinary**
**measures adopted by the Central Bank, such as**
**guarantee programs, are necessary in order for**
**these to work better. One member mentioned the**
need to maintain the availability of financing for firms
and households, and that Banco de México has
adjusted the announced measures and facilities
accordingly. **Another member pointed out that**
Banco de México has adopted a series of measures
aimed at providing liquidity and intended to avoid a
contraction of credit, and highlighted the guarantee
programs implemented by development banks.
He/she indicated that commercial banks must also
do their part in order for the facilities announced by
the Central Bank to fully achieve their objectives.
He/she added that the soundness of the recovery will
depend significantly on what commercial banks do or
stop doing and highlighted that they must be part of
the solution and not part of the problem. **One**
member added the need to intensify the

implementation and efficacy of Banco de México’s
additional measures. He/she pointed out that the
improved functioning of these facilities must be
guaranteed, by increasing liquidity and providing
more credit at a lower cost. A more relaxed monetary
policy will make the implementation of these
measures more effective and also reduce the
financial burden of firms. **Another member stated**
that the weakness of bank credit highlights the need
for complementing monetary policy actions as well as
the measures to provide financing implemented by
Banco de México with credit guarantees for priority
sectors. He/she also pointed out that although the
financial system overall maintains a sound position,
it is necessary to ensure that financial authorities are
able respond adequately to the potential challenges
faced.

**3. MONETARY POLICY DECISION**

Taking into account the referred risks for inflation,
economic activity and financial markets, major
challenges arise for monetary policy and for the
economy in general. Based on the foreseen
scenarios, and considering the room for

9


-----

maneuvering that on balance these provide to
monetary policy, with the presence of all its
members, on this occasion, Banco de México’s
Governing Board decided by majority to lower the
target for the overnight interbank interest rate by 50
basis points to a level of 4.5%. One member voted
for lowering the target to 4.75%. Looking ahead, the
available room for maneuver will depend on the
evolution of the factors that have an incidence on the
outlook for inflation and its expectations, including
the effects that the pandemic might have on both
factors.

The Governing Board will take the necessary actions
on the basis of incoming information and considering
the large impact on productive activity as well as the
evolution of the financial shock that we are currently
facing, so that the policy rate is consistent with the
orderly and sustained convergence of headline
inflation to Banco de México’s target within the time
frame in which monetary policy operates.

Perseverance in strengthening the macroeconomic
fundamentals and adopting the necessary actions,
regarding both monetary and fiscal policies, will
contribute to a better adjustment of domestic
financial markets and of the economy as a whole.

**4. VOTING**

Alejandro Díaz de León-Carrillo, Gerardo EsquivelHernández, Javier Eduardo Guzmán-Calafell and


Jonathan Ernest Heath-Constable voted in favor of
lowering the target for the overnight interbank
interest rate by 50 basis points to a level of 4.5%.
Irene Espinosa-Cantellano voted in favor of lowering
the target for the overnight interbank interest rate by
25 basis points to a level of 4.75%.

**5. OPINIONS / DISSENTING VOTES**

**Vote. Irene Espinosa-Cantellano.**

Starting in March, we announced measures to
provide liquidity and, complementary to these, we
also increased the pace of monetary policy loosening
to face the shocks generated by the pandemic. Since
then, financial markets have evolved favorably and
economic activity appears to have crossed an
inflection point. Inflation, however, continues to
persist at levels above the target, it remains to the
upside, it has recently exceeded its forecasts, and its
expectations have increased. This behavior, in the
midst of the most severe recession historically,
suggests the need to reconsider the disinflationary
influence attributed to the cyclical component of
economic activity. In addition, despite the relative
monetary policy stance, foreign investors’ capital
outflows stand out when compared with other
emerging economies. This suggests a lesser room
for monetary policy loosening. Consequently, we
must adjust the pace to strengthen the convergence
of inflation and its expectations to the 3% target.

10


-----

**ANNEX**

The information in this Annex was prepared for this
meeting by the staff of Banco de México’s General
Directorate of Economic Research and General
Directorate of Central Bank Operations. It does not
necessarily reflect the considerations of the

members of the Governing Board as to the monetary
policy decision.

**A.1. External conditions**

**A.1.1. World economic activity**

Available information indicates that, after having
declined sharply in March and April, the global
economy began to show a slight recovery in May and
June. Services and manufacturing sectors

purchasing managers' indexes indicate that this
recovery continued in July (Chart 1). In general, the
recovery of economic activity has been driven by the
gradual loosening of lockdown measures and the
significant fiscal, monetary and financial stimuli
implemented by the systemically important

economies. However, there is heterogeneity among
countries in terms of the state of the pandemic's
evolution, the measures to contain it, and the
stimulus policies implemented. Although core
inflation continued to fall in June, in several advanced
and emerging economies headline inflation has
increased slightly, reflecting higher energy and food
prices. Nevertheless, in advanced economies,
headline and core inflation lie below their respective
central bank’s targets.

In this context, the monetary authorities have kept
interest rates at historically low levels and have
continued to use their balance sheets to promote an
orderly functioning of financial markets. Several
countries have also announced additional fiscal
stimulus measures to mitigate the adverse effects of
the pandemic on employment and on household and
firms' incomes. The monetary, fiscal and financial
stimulus measures adopted in advanced economies,
together with the gradual reopening of productive
activities in some of these economies and the
progress made in developing a vaccine against
COVID-19, have contributed to the positive

performance of financial markets, although these
have not yet reached pre-pandemic levels and have
continued to record certain periods of volatility
associated mainly with increases in new cases of
contagion in some of the main economies.


In this environment, multilateral organizations and
analysts anticipate a strong contraction during this
year, followed by moderate growth in 2021,
supported by favorable financial conditions,

accommodative monetary policies, and

expansionary fiscal policies. These forecasts,
however, are subject to a high degree of uncertainty
about the pace and strength of the recovery in view
of the possible tightening of lockdown measures due
to the rise in the number of new infections in some
countries and the possibility of the pandemic having
long-term effects on global supply and demand.

**Chart 1**

**Global: Purchasing Managers’ Index (PMI)**

**Production Component**

Diffusion index, s. a.

60

55

50

45

40

35

Manufacturing

30 Manufacturing (excl. China)

Services

Services (excl. China)

25

July

20

2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020

s. a. / Seasonally adjusted figures.
Source: Markit.

In the United States, during the second quarter of the
year GDP contracted at an annualized seasonally
adjusted quarterly rate of 32.9%, after having fallen
5% during the first quarter (Chart 2). This fall can be
explained by the strong contraction in private
consumption due to the closure of businesses
considered as non-essential during the lockdown
measures. The contraction of private consumption
mainly reflected the decrease in consumption of
services, since the deterioration in consumption of
goods was more moderate. Additionally, investment,
both residential and business, declined as a result of
greater uncertainty about the economic outlook and
lower activity in various productive sectors. Net
exports had a positive contribution to GDP growth,
largely due to a decline in imports. Government
spending made a positive contribution in light of the
sharp increase in federal public spending, although
the latter was partially offset by a drop in state and
local government spending.

11


-----

After having deteriorated sharply in April, certain
indicators, such as retail sales, capital goods’ orders
and new home starts, began to recover in May,
although they are still below pre-pandemic levels.
However, certain timely indicators of consumer
spending point to some weakening in July. As for the
latter, one of the main risks faced by this economy is
that the recovery that began in May could be
interrupted by the possibility of renewed widespread
lockdown measures in response to the upsurge in
new cases of COVID-19 in that country. Another
important risk factor is uncertainty about the
implementation of the fiscal stimulus package
announced by the US president in early August.

As for industrial production, it continued to recover,
growing at a monthly rate of 5.4% in June, after
having expanded 1.4% during the previous month.
This was mainly supported by a rebound in the
manufacturing sector and, to a lesser extent, by the
gas and electricity sector. In particular,

manufacturing production continued to recover
driven by the reactivation of activity in some of its
main sectors, especially the automotive one. In this
context, certain indicators available as of July, such
as the Purchasing Managers’ Index (PMI) of the
manufacturing sector, suggest that this sector will
continue to recover.

Despite having gradually recovered since May, the
labor market continues to show signs of weakness.
In particular, although the unemployment rate
declined from 13.3% in May to 10.2% in July, it
remains well above pre-pandemic levels. Since May,
the non-farm payroll has continued to gradually
recover, with 6.6 million jobs created between June
and July, after having contracted in March and April,
although the pace of recovery moderated in the last
month. Initial and current claims for unemployment
insurance are still at high levels.

In the euro area, GDP declined 40.3% at an
annualized seasonally adjusted quarterly rate during
the second quarter, after having contracted 13.6% in
the first quarter of the year. While most demand and
production indicators showed a recovery in May and
June, other indicators available for July, such as
consumer confidence, exhibited some weakness. In
this context, the unemployment rate increased
moderately from 7.7% in May to 7.8% in June, largely
as a result of the implementation of job retention
schemes, as well as a lower labor force participation
in several countries of the region.


**Chart 2**

**United States: Real GDP and its Components**

Annualized quarterly percentage change and

contributions in percentage points, s. a.

10

5

0

-5

-10

Private consumption expenditures

-15

Residential investment

-20 Change in private inventories

-25 Net exports

Nonresidential investment

-30

Government consumption expenditures

-35 Total

-40 0

I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV I II

2016 2017 2018 2019 2020

s. a. / Seasonally adjusted figures.
Source: Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA),

In the United Kingdom, GDP weakened significantly
more during the second quarter, falling 59.8% at an
annualized seasonally adjusted quarterly rate, after
having contracted 8.5% during the first quarter. This
deterioration was mainly explained by the sharp
contraction in household consumption, business
investment and, to a lesser extent, public spending.
However, more recent figures show that economic
activity has gradually improved since May due to the
lifting of social distancing measures, as reflected by
the rebound in industrial production, construction and
some services, especially those related to retail
sales, restaurants and entertainment. The

purchasing managers' indexes continued to recover
in July, both in the manufacturing and services
sectors.

In Japan, available indicators suggest that the
deterioration of economic activity observed during
the first quarter extended to the second quarter.
However, available figures for retail sales and
consumer sentiment from May onwards point to a
rebound in consumption as the lockdown measures
began to be lifted. Among the main external factors
that have affected the Japanese economy are a
weak world trade and restrictions on tourism. As for
domestic factors, the gradual easing of lockdown
measures from May onwards was reflected in an
improvement in consumer sentiment in July, which
could boost domestic consumption. On the

production side, industrial activity showed a slight
improvement in June, although it remains below prepandemic levels. Additionally, notwithstanding the

12

|Private consumption expenditures Residential investment Change in private inventories Net exports Nonresidential investment Government consumption expenditures Total|Col2|Col3|Col4|Col5|
|---|---|---|---|---|
|I II III IV 2016|I II III IV 2017|I II III IV 2018|I II III IV 2019|I II 2020|


-----

recovery of the purchasing managers' indexes, both
in the service and manufacturing sectors, these
remain in contractionary levels, so uncertainty
persists regarding the pace of economic recovery in
that country.

In emerging economies, economic conditions have
varied considerably depending on the spread of the
pandemic, the effectiveness of the measures to
contain it, and the economic stimuli implemented. In
China, economic activity has continued to recover. In
particular, GDP grew at an annual rate of 3.2%
during the second quarter after contracting by 6.8%
during the first quarter, although more timely
indicators suggest that recently the pace of recovery
has somewhat moderated. Most Latin American
economies continued to be significantly affected by
the lockdown measures and by restrictions on
productive activity enacted to contain the pandemic,
as the latter continues to spread rapidly in several
countries of the region.

Since Mexico’s previous monetary policy decision,
international commodity prices have, in general,
trended upwards, partially offsetting the losses
observed due to the pandemic. In particular, crude oil
prices have been supported by production cuts by
the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries
(OPEC) and other producers, and by the gradual
recovery of demand. The latter as a result of the
gradual recovery of global economic activity,
although concerns that an increase in contagions in
various countries may slow the recovery of world
growth have kept price increases contained.
Meanwhile, in recent weeks, industrial metal prices
have continued to rise due to the gradual restart of
industrial production worldwide and the rebound of
economic activity in China. In addition, prices of
precious metals, such as gold and silver, reached
record highs as a result of their safe haven status and
the environment of low interest rates prevailing in the
major advanced economies, the high uncertainty
about world economic recovery, and a weak dollar.
Finally, grain prices have experienced high volatility
in the face of uncertainty about the outlook for global
supply and demand for grains.


**A.1.2. Monetary policy and international financial**
**markets**

In most advanced economies, headline and core
inflation are below their respective central bank’s
targets. However, headline inflation increased
slightly in the face of the recent rise in energy prices
(Chart 3), while core inflation has continued to fall in
most of these economies, largely due to price
reductions in services in those sectors most affected
by social distancing measures. In this context,
inflation expectations drawn from financial

instruments, albeit recently increasing, remain at low
levels.

In emerging economies, headline and core inflation
showed a more heterogeneous behavior, reflecting a
combination of factors. In fact, while the weakening
of economic activity and the decline in some services
prices generated downward pressures on inflation in
most countries, some economies registered upward
pressures generated by increases in food and energy
prices, by the depreciation of their currencies, and by
idiosyncratic factors.

**Chart 3**

**Selected Advanced Economies: Headline**

**Inflation**

Annual percentage change

3.5 United States
Euro area
Japan

3.0

Canada
United Kingdom

2.5

2.0

1.5

1.0

0.5

0.0

-0.5

June

July

-1.0

2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020

Source: Bureau of Labor Statistics, Eurostat, Bank of Japan, Statistics
Canada, Office of National Statistics.

In this context, the main central banks have
maintained highly accommodative monetary policy
stances, keeping interest rates at historically low
levels, and have continued to use their balance
sheets to foster an orderly functioning of financial
markets (Chart 4). Some of the monetary policy
decisions by the main central banks that stood out
during the period are:

13


-----

i) In its July meeting, the US Federal Reserve left

unchanged its range for the federal funds rate at
0%-0.25% and reiterated that it expects to
maintain this current level until the economy
overcomes the recent events. It highlighted that in
the next months it will increase its holdings of
treasury securities and residential and

commercial mortgage-backed bonds at least at
their current pace. In this meeting, the Federal
Open Market Committee (FOMC) emphasized
that economic activity and employment

rebounded in recent months, although they
remain below the levels registered at the
beginning of the year and highlighted that the
direction of the economy will depend significantly
on the evolution of the pandemic. In this context,
it extended until March 31, 2021 the temporary
foreign currency liquidity swap lines with other
central banks and the temporary repos for
international monetary authorities that allows
them to exchange Treasury bonds for US dollars.
In addition, this institution modified some of its
previously announced programs with the aim of
providing greater access to credit, expanding the
pool of eligible firms, and giving certainty that its
stimulus measures will continue to be available to
address COVID-19. In this environment, both
market variables and analysts' consensus

incorporate that the central bank will maintain the
reference rate unchanged at the end of 2020 and
2021.

ii) In its July meeting, the European Central Bank

(ECB) left its policy rates unchanged, maintaining
its refinancing rate, key deposit facility rate and
key lending facility rate at 0.0, -0.5 and -0.25%,
respectively. It reiterated that these interest rates
will remain at or below their current levels until
inflation forecasts converge to a level sufficiently
close but below the 2% inflation target, and that
this convergence has been consistently reflected
in core inflation dynamics. It also kept its asset
purchase program unchanged and mentioned
that it will continue with the Pandemic Emergency
Purchase Program (PEPP) for a total of €1.35
trillion until June 2021 or until the Committee
considers that the crisis phase has ended. It
reiterated that maturing principal payments from
securities purchased under the PEPP will be
reinvested until at least the end of 2022 and that
it will continue to provide liquidity through its
refinancing operations.


iii) In its July meeting, the Bank of Japan left its short
term policy interest rate unchanged at -0.1% and
its long-term interest rate (indexed to its 10-year
bond) at around 0%, and stated that it will
continue its asset purchase program. Likewise, it
will continue to support financing of firms and
financial market stability through: i) the Special
Funds Supplying Operations in Response to
COVID-19, ii) a broad provision of yens and funds
in foreign currency, and iii) purchases of funds
listed on the stock exchange and real estate. This
institution reiterated that it will not hesitate to take
additional measures if necessary and that it
expects interest rates to remain at or below their
current levels.

iv) The Bank of England kept its reference interest

rate unchanged at 0.10% in its August meeting
and the amount of its asset purchase program at
£745 billion. It indicated that it will continue to
closely monitor the situation, standing ready to
adjust its monetary policy in order to comply with
its mandate, keeping under review the whole
range of actions that could be implemented. It
pointed out that the Committee does not intend to
tighten its monetary policy stance until there is
clear evidence that it is reducing excess
productive capacity and moving towards its 2%
inflation target in a sustainable manner.

v) In its July meeting, the Bank of Canada left its

reference rate unchanged at 0.25%. With respect
to the short-term liquidity programs announced in
March, it indicated that these have had the
anticipated effect, and that since market

conditions have improved, their use has

decreased. As to its forward guidance, it pointed
out that it will keep its reference interest rate at
levels close to zero until the slack has been
reduced, so that the 2% inflation target is reached
in a sustained manner. It stated further that in
order to reinforce this commitment and keep
interest rates low, it continues with large-scale
asset purchases of at least CAD 5 billion per week
in government bonds, continuing this program
until economic recovery is clearly underway.
Finally, it reiterated that it stands ready to provide
further monetary stimulus as needed.

14


-----

**Chart 4**

**Reference Rates and Implied Trajectories in**

**OIS Curves***

**Percent**


against Germany stands out, while the US dollar
continued to weaken against most currencies (Chart
5). Emerging economies, on the other side, recorded
net capital inflows, mainly to fixed income assets,
while their currencies exhibited less volatility and
mixed adjustments against the US dollar and their
stock markets recorded gains (Chart 6).

**Chart 5**

**Change in Selected Financial Indicators**

**from June 22 to August 7, 2020**

**Percent, basis points**


3.0%

2.5%

2.0%

1.5%

1.0%

0.5%

0.0%

-0.5%


**― US Federal Reserve***
**― Bank of England**
**― Bank of Japan**
― Bank of Canada
― European Central Bank deposit rate
― OIS implicit trajectory 07 Aug 2020
--- OIS implicit trajectory 22 Jun 2020


40

20

|% %|― US Federal Reserve* ― Bank of England ― Bank of Japan ― Bank of Canada ― European Central Bank deposit rate|Forecasts|Col4|Col5|Col6|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|% %|― OIS implicit trajectory 07 Aug 2020 --- OIS implicit trajectory 22 Jun 2020|s||||
|% % %||||||
|||||||


End of End of End of

-1.0% 2020 2021 2022

2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022


20%

10%


OIS: Fixed floating interest rate swap where the fixed interest rate is the
effective overnight reference rate.
** In the case of the US observed reference rate, the average interest rate
of the federal funds target range is used (0.0% - 0.25%).
Source: Prepared by Banco de México with Bloomberg data.

Since Banco de México’s previous monetary policy
decision, several central banks of emerging
economies announced additional reference rate
cuts, with those of Colombia, Hungary, Malaysia,
Indonesia, the Philippines, and South Africa standing
out. In addition, some banks maintain various
measures to ensure the supply of liquidity, provide
credit, and foster the sound functioning of financial
markets.

In general, international financial markets continued
to show a positive behavior since Mexico's last
monetary policy decision, although they have not yet
reached pre-pandemic levels and a volatile

environment persists, subject to the evolution of the
health emergency and its effects on global economic
activity. The relative stability was driven by economic
indicators that showed a slight recovery with respect
to previous levels in response to the gradual
reopening of productive activities, the publication of
better-than-expected corporate reports, the

continued fiscal, monetary and financial stimulus
measures adopted in advanced economies, and
certain progress in the development of a vaccine
against COVID-19. In particular, risk aversion
remained stable and there was less volatility in the
stock, FX and bond markets in advanced economies.
Most main stock indexes of these economies
registered gains, some of them recovering most of
the losses registered during the year. Interest rates
on government bonds in advanced economies
showed limited mixed adjustments. A compression in
the yield spreads of European periphery countries


1/ MSCI Emerging Markets Index (includes 24 countries).
2/ DXY: Weighted average of the nominal exchange rate of the six main
world-traded currencies (calculated by Intercontinental Exchange, ICE) with
the following weights: EUR (57.6%), JPY (13.6%), GBP (11.9%), CAD
(9.1%), SEK (4.2%), and CHF (3.6%).
3/ J.P. Morgan Index constructed from a weighted average of the nominal
exchange rate of emerging economies’ currencies with the following
weights: TRY (8.3%), RUB (8.3%), HUF (8.3%), ZAR (8.3%), BRL (11.1%),
MXN (11.1%), CLP (11.1%), CNH (11.1%), INR (11.1%), and SGD (11.1%).
Source: Bloomberg and ICE.

Notwithstanding the relative stability of financial
markets in recent weeks, further episodes of risk
aversion cannot be ruled out. This will largely depend
on the evolution of the pandemic, the process of
vaccine development, approval and distribution, and
the ability of governments to contain further waves of
contagion and mitigate the negative effects on
economic activity. In addition, other risk factors that
could cause new episodes of tightening global
financial conditions persist, including high valuations
of some financial assets, increased sovereign and
corporate debt levels, a new escalation of trade and
political tensions between the United States and
some of its partners, the worsening of geopolitical
and social conflicts in various regions of the world,
and the electoral process in the United States,
among others.

15


0%

-10%


0

-20


-20%


-40


-----

**Chart 6**

**Emerging Economies: Financial Assets**

**Performance from June 22 to August 7, 2020**

Percent, basis points

**Equity** **Interest** **Interest**
**Region** **Country** **Currencies** **CDS**

**markets** **rates 2Y** **rates 10Y**

**Mexico** **0.61%** **-0.31%** **-31** **-21** **-20**

**Latin** **Brazil** **-3.50%** **7.80%** **-25** **-26** **-45**

**America** **Chile** **3.55%** **-0.24%** **3** **-2** **-16**

**Colombia** **-0.85%** **-1.66%** **-22** **-35** **-31**

**Russia** **-6.73%** **7.57%** **1** **-1** **2**

**Poland** **5.18%** **2.23%** **-8** **2** **-9**

**Emerging**

**Turkey** **-6.31%** **-7.93%** **313** **232** **105**

**Europe**

**Czech Republic** **5.79%** **-2.14%** **4** **-1** **-6**

**Hungary** **4.78%** **-3.34%** **-9** **-19** **-19**

**Malaysia** **2.12%** **4.43%** **-35** **7** **-16**

**India** **1.43%** **8.96%** **-13** **20** **-45**

**Asia** **Philippines** **2.18%** **-7.90%** **0** **0** **-9**

**Thailand** **-0.42%** **-2.05%** **9** **-9** **-1**

**Indonesia** **-3.36%** **4.58%** **-57** **-52** **-11**

**Africa** **South Africa** **-1.81%** **4.66%** **-23** **-2** **21**

Note: Except for Mexico, interest rates correspond to interest rate swaps for Note: Interest rates correspond to interes rate swaps for 2-year/10-year maturities,
2-year/10-year maturities, respectively.
Source: Banco de México with PIP and Bloomberg data.

**A.2. Current situation of the Mexican economy**

**A.2.1. Mexican markets**

Since Banco de Mexico’s previous monetary policy
decision to date the prices of financial assets in
Mexico traded in a narrower range, differentiated by
type of asset (Chart 7). Global and domestic financial
conditions are expected to continue to be subject
mainly to the effects of the pandemic.

In the particular case of the Mexican peso, it traded
in a range between 21.96 and 23.08 MXN/USD, with
its movements being more limited with respect to
previous periods (Chart 8). The peso slightly
appreciated 0.61% at the end of the period, while FX,
spot and forward trading conditions remained at
deteriorated levels, although they showed an
improvement over those observed in March.

In line with the swap mechanism established
between Banco de México and the Federal Reserve
on March 19 this year, on June 22 the Exchange
Commission instructed Banco de México to activate
this mechanism and undertake two financing
operations in US dollars for a total of USD 13 billion,
with the aim of renewing maturing positions held
during April and provide additional liquidity in US
dollars.


Range in year Range since last monetary policy decision Jun-22-20 Last level


Source: Prepared by Banco de México.

Nominal government bond yields decreased for all
terms along the yield curve (Chart 9). Likewise, the
yield curve of real-rate instruments decreased at all
nodes. In this environment, breakeven inflation and
inflationary risk implicit in the spreads between these
market instruments registered differentiated

changes, being more significant for short term ones
(Chart 10). These movements occurred in a context
where trading conditions further deteriorated, which
can be associated with the summer season.

16


**Chart 7**

**Mexican Markets’ Performance**

Percent, MXN/USD and index


10.0

9.0

8.0

7.0

6.0

5.0

4.0


26.0

25.0

24.0

23.0

22.0

21.0

20.0

19.0

18.0


48,000

46,000

44,000

42,000

40,000

38,000

36,000

34,000

32,000


M Bond


4.5

4.0

3.5

3.0

2.5

2.0

1.5

1.0

0.5

0.0

Inflation indexed bonds


Range in year Range since last monetary policy decision Jun-22-20 Last level


Source: Prepared by Banco de México.

**Chart 8**

**Mexican Peso Exchange Rate**

**with Moving Averages**

MXN/USD


2020


-----

**Chart 9**

**Nominal Yield Curve of Government Securities**

Percent, basis points

8.00 25

7.50 13

6

7.00 #¡REF! 0

6.50 -13

6.00 -25

5.50 -38

5.00 -50

4.50 -63

4.00 -75

Jun-22th Aug-7th Change (Jun-22th to Aug-7th)

Trading range over the period

Source: PIP.

**Chart 10**

**Breakeven Inflation and Inflation Risk implicit in**

**Government Securities’ Interest Rate Curves**

Basis points

500

475

450

425

400


Furthermore, in order to continue promoting the
orderly behavior of financial markets and providing
liquidity for the sound development of the financial
system, Banco de México announced modifications
to the corporate securities repurchase facility with
respect to the cost, guarantees subject to repurchase
agreements, and the term of the facility for new
issuances, which has generated greater interest from
financial intermediaries.

As to expectations regarding the path of the
monetary policy target rate, information implied by
the Interbank Equilibrium Interest Rate (TIIE, for its
acronym in Spanish) swap curve discounts with a
60% probability a 50-basis point cut for the monetary
policy decision of August (Chart 11). Private sector
forecasters surveyed by Citibanamex are also
expecting a 50-basis point cut. However, analysts’
expectations display a larger variance. For the end of
2020, market variables are anticipating a target level
of around 4.00%, while the median of surveyed
forecasters expects a level of 4.50%.

**Chart 11**

**Banxico’s Overnight Interbank Rate Implied in**

**TIIE IRS Curve**

Percent


375

350


325

300

3 years

275 10 years

250 30 years

225 3-year average

10-year average

200

30-year average

175

150

J        A        J        O        J        A        J

Source: PIP.

As for the evolution of the measures announced by
Banco de México on April 21, the facility for longerterm government securities repurchase agreements
used the total amount initially approved of 100 billion
pesos.


8.50
8.25
8.00
7.75
7.50
7.25
7.00
6.75
6.50
6.25
6.00
5.75
5.50
5.25
5.00
4.75
4.50
4.25
4.00
3.75
3.50


Source: Prepared by Banco de México with Bloomberg data.


17


-----

**A.2.2. Economic activity in Mexico**

According to GDP’s flash estimate published by
INEGI, economic activity contracted deeply during
the second quarter of 2020 (Chart 12), as the
negative effects of the pandemic substantially
intensified. In particular, in April sharp falls in the
main components of aggregate demand, as well as
in the production of goods and services, were
registered. In May economic activity contracted
further, albeit at a more moderate rate. Finally,
various indicators point to a recovery in June starting
from low activity levels, in response to the reopening
of some sectors, the loosening of restrictions to
mobility, and to a certain recovery of external
demand, although an environment of uncertainty
prevails.

**Chart 12**

**Gross Domestic Product**

Quarterly percentage change, s. a.

4

0

-4

-8

-12

-16


**Chart 13**

**Total Manufacturing Exports**

Indexes 2013 = 100, s. a.


180

160

140

120

100

80

60

40

20

0

J

2013


A J O J

2014


A J O J

2015


A J O J

2016


A J O J

2017


A J O J

2018


A J O J

2019


A J O J

2020


A J


-20 Q-II 1/

I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV I II

2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020

s. a. / Seasonally adjusted figures.
1/ The figure for the second quarter of 2020 refers to INEGI’s quarterly
GDP flash estimate.
Source: Mexico’s System of National Accounts (SCNM, for its Spanish
acronym), INEGI.

As for external demand, the effects of the health
emergency on Mexico's manufacturing exports
continued in May, with an additional sharp
contraction to the one observed in April. The strong
reduction of automotive exports resulting from the
shutdown of most operations of assembly and auto
parts companies established in the country stands
out. Subsequently, in line with the reopening of
certain productive sectors since the end of May and
the reactivation of economic activity in other
countries, manufacturing exports registered some
recovery in June, particularly those to the United
States (Chart 13).


s. a. / Seasonally adjusted series and trend series based on data in nominal
US dollars. The former is represented by a solid line and the latter by a
dotted line.
Source: Prepared by Banco de México with data from the Tax
Administration Service (SAT, for its Spanish acronym), the Ministry of the
Economy (SE, for its acronym in Spanish), Banco de México, the National
Institute of Statistics and Geography (INEGI, for its Spanish acronym),
Mexico’s Merchandise Trade Balance, and the National System of
Statistical and Geographical Information (SNIEG, for its acronym in
Spanish).

At the beginning of the second quarter, the effects of
the pandemic on private consumption intensified, as
reflected by the sharp fall in its monthly indicator in
April and a further, albeit more moderate, decline in
May. Timely information suggests that a slight
recovery of this indicator could be observed in June
and July. Particularly, National Association of SelfService and Department Stores (ANTAD, for its
acronym in Spanish) and light vehicle sales grew in
June and July. In April and May, gross fixed
investment weakened significantly further, reaching
its lowest level in the last 20 years. Within this
indicator, investment spending on construction
dropped markedly in April, while in May it showed a
further marginal decline. At the same time,
investment in machinery and equipment continued to
weaken in May, after having deteriorated sharply in
April. Indicators related to this aggregate, such as
capital imports, suggest some progress towards the
end of the second quarter, although remaining at
particularly low levels.

As for production, after the strong contraction in April,
industrial activity fell again in May, although more
moderately (Chart 14). In June, it rebounded, largely
reflecting the loosening of measures to contain the
pandemic and the resumption of various activities.
Within secondary activities, a significant decline was
observed during April-May, both in construction and
almost all manufacturing subsectors, with a sharp fall
in the transportation equipment sector standing out.
In June, construction and manufacturing partially

18


-----

reversed this contraction, although both remained
well below the levels observed before the health
crisis (Chart 15). The weak performance of mining
persisted, partially as a result of the scheduled
cutback in crude oil production in May and June as
part of Mexico's commitments to OPEC, as well as
low levels of the non-oil mining sector. Tertiary
activities were also highly affected in April and May
by social distancing measures and the suspension of
non-essential activities, showing a significant

contraction in those months. This decline was due to
widespread declines in its subsectors, except for the
education and health services aggregate, which
remained at levels similar to those of the previous
quarter.

**Chart 14**

**Economic Activity Indicators**

Indexes 2013 = 100, s. a.

120 140

115 130

110 120

105 110

100 100

95 90

Total IGAE 1/

90 Agriculture IGAE 1/ 80

Services IGAE 1/

85 Industrial production 2/ 70

80 60

75 May 50

June

70 40

J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M J

2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020

s. a. / Seasonally adjusted and trend series. The former is represented by a
solid line and the latter by a dotted line.
1/ Figures as of May 2020.
2/ Figures as of June 2020 from the Monthly Industrial Activity Indicator.
Source: Mexico’s National Accounts System (SCNM, for its acronym in
Spanish), INEGI.


s. a. / Seasonally adjusted and trend series. The former is represented by a
solid line and the latter by a dotted line.
1/ Figures in parentheses correspond to their share in the total in 2013.
Source: Mexico’s National Accounts System (SCNM, for its acronym in),
INEGI.

As to the economy's cyclical position, economic slack
widened significantly during the second quarter of the
year (Chart 16). According to the results of INEGI's
Telephone Survey on Occupation and Employment
(ETOE, for its Spanish acronym), in June several
labor market indicators improved, when compared to
April and May. In particular, the labor participation
rate and employed population, both formal and
informal, increased. The national unemployment rate
also rose significantly, reflecting the increased active
search for employment of people who had left the
labor force due to the health emergency (Chart 17).
In June, the creation of IMSS-insured jobs continued
to perform negatively, with a decline of slightly above
83,000 jobs in June and a minor additional loss in
July, registering a cumulative decline of slightly over
1.1 million jobs between March and July (not
seasonally adjusted figures). Finally, although unit
labor costs in the manufacturing sector decreased in
May (Chart 18), they remained at particularly high
levels, after having rebounded in the previous month
due to the impact on employment and the temporary
shutdowns to production caused by the pandemic
and the suspension of activities.

19


**Chart 15**

**Industrial Activity [1/]**

Indexes 2013 = 100, s. a.


130

120

110

100

90

80

70

60

50


J

2013


M S J

2014


M S J

2015


M S J

2016


M S J

2017


M S J

2018


M S J

2019


M S J M J

2020


-----

**Chart 16**

**Output Gap Estimates [1/]**

**Excluding Oil Industry [4/ ]**

Potential output percentages, s. a.


**Chart 18**

**Productivity and Unit Labor Costs in the**

**Manufacturing Sector [1/]**

Indexes 2013 = 100, s. a.


8

4

0

-4

-8

-12

-16

-20 Global Economic Activity Indicator 2/

Gross Domestic Product 2/

-24 95% confidence interval 3/

Q-II

June

-28

J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S JM J

2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020


170

Unit labor costs

160

Productivity

150

140

130

120

110

100

90

May

80

J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M

2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020


s. a. / Calculations based on seasonally adjusted figures.
1/ Output gap estimated with a tail-corrected Hodrick-Prescott filter; see
Banco de México (2009), “Inflation Report (April-June 2009)", p.74.
2/ GDP figure as of the second quarter of 2020; IGAE figure as of June
2020.
3/ Output gap confidence interval calculated with a method of unobserved
components.
4/ Excludes both oil and gas extraction, support activities for mining, and
petroleum and coal products' manufacturing.
Source: Prepared by Banco de México with INEGI data.

**Chart 17**

**National Unemployment Rate**

Percent of EAP, n. s. a.

6.0


5.5

5.0

4.5

4.0

3.5

3.0

2.5

J

2013


M S J

2014


M S J

2015


M S J

2016


M S J

2017


M S J

2018


M S J

2019


ENOE 5.5

ETOE

4.7

4.2

Jun*

M S J M J

2020


EAP: Economically Active Population.
n. s. a. / Not seasonally adjusted (original series).
*/ The April to June 2020 figures drawn from the Telephone Survey on
Occupation and Employment _(Encuesta Telefónica de Ocupación y_
_Empleo, ETOE), cannot be fully compared to ENOE figures and is shown_
as a reference only.
Source: Prepared by Banco de México with data from ENOE up to March
2020 and from the ETOE from April to June 2020.


s. a. / Seasonally adjusted and trend series. The former is represented by a
solid line and the latter by a dotted line.
1/ Productivity based on hours worked.
Source: Prepared by Banco de México with seasonally adjusted data of the
Monthly Manufacturing Industry Survey and industrial activity indicators of
Mexico’s National Accounts System (Sistema de Cuentas Nacionales de
_México, SCN), INEGI._

In June, domestic financing to firms contracted at an
annual rate, offsetting the increase that had been
observed in April. Although in March and April the
growth rate of bank lending to large firms had
intensified, it reverted in May and June. Bank credit
to smaller-sized firms intensified the contraction
observed throughout the year. The domestic market
for corporate debt continued to show low levels of
activity. Meanwhile, credit to households contracted
in June, mainly as a result of the significant reduction
in consumer credit, as well as the slowdown in
mortgages. Regarding interest rates of bank credit to
private firms, in June they declined, in line with the
reduction in banks' overnight funding rate. However,
a moderate increase is observed in the margins of
intermediation of interest rates of new loans to firms.
At the same time, interest rates of mortgages
decreased in May, while, with figures to April, those
of credit cards increased compared to February.
Regarding portfolio quality, corporate and mortgage
loan delinquency rates remained low, while those for
consumption credits increased for the fourth
consecutive month, thus further adding to their
already high level.

20


-----

In line with the measures announced by Banco de
México to promote an orderly functioning of financial
markets, strengthen the credit channels and provide
liquidity for the sound development of the financial
system, the adjustments announced in July to the
facility that provides resources to banking institutions
to channel credit to micro, small- and medium-sized
firms and individuals affected by the pandemic; as
well as the facility to finance banking institutions
guaranteed by corporate loans, for financing micro,
small- and medium-sized firms, stand out. The
amendments allow participating institutions to carry
out leasing and financial factoring operations with
micro, small- and medium-sized firms, as well as to
grant mortgage and automotive loans to individuals.

**A.2.3. Development of inflation and inflation**
**outlook**

Between June and July 2020, annual headline
inflation rose from 3.33 to 3.62%, which is explained
by an increase of 19 and 10 basis points in the
incidence of its core and non-core components,
respectively (Chart 19 and Table 1).

**Chart 19**

**Consumer Price Index**

Annual percentage change

13

12 CPI

Core

11

Non-core

10

9

8

7

6

5

4

3

2

1

0

-1 July

-2

-3

J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M

2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020

Source: Banco de México and INEGI.

Annual core inflation rose from 3.71 to 3.85%
between June and July 2020. In the context of the
health crisis, there has been an important

recomposition of its components, since upward
pressures have been observed in merchandise
inflation and downward ones in services inflation
(Chart 20). Annual inflation of merchandise prices
thus increased from 4.69 to 5.19% during that period,


reflecting price increases in both food and non-food
merchandises (Chart 21). In contrast, annual inflation
of services fell from 2.65 to 2.40% between June and
July 2020, to a large extent due to price reductions in
tourist services as well as to the lower increases in
housing prices, possibly reflecting the weakness of
economic activity.

**Chart 20**

**Merchandise and Services Core Price Subindex**

Annual percentage change

7

Merchandise

6 Services

5

4

3

2

1

July

0

J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M

2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020

Source: Prepared by Banco de México with data from INEGI.

**Chart 21**

**Merchandise Core Price Subindex**

Annual percentage change

8

7

6

5

4

3

2

1

0

-1 Food, beverages and tobacco Non-food merchandise

July

-2

J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M

2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020

|Chart 19 Consumer Price Index Annual percentage change|Col2|Col3|
|---|---|---|
|CPI|||
|Core Non-core|||
||||
|July|||
||||


Source: Prepared by Banco de México with data from INEGI.

On the other hand, annual non-core inflation
increased from 2.16 to 2.92% between June and July
2020 (Chart 22 and Table 1). This behavior is mainly
explained by a certain rebound of energy prices, after
having dropped considerably in April following the
dynamics of their international references. The above
was partially compensated by lower increases in
agricultural and livestock product prices, particularly
fruits and vegetables.

21


-----

**Chart 22**

**Non-core Price Subindex**
Annual percentage change


20

15

10

5

0

-5

-10

-15


July


J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M

2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020

Source: Prepared by Banco de México with data from INEGI.

Regarding inflation expectations drawn from Banco
de México’s Survey of Private Sector Forecasters,
between May and July the medians for headline and
core inflation for the end of 2020 increased from 3.07
to 3.61% and from 3.50 to 3.73%, respectively. The


medians of medium- and long-term expectations for
headline and core inflation remained at 3.50%.
Finally, breakeven inflation and inflation risk
decreased since the last monetary policy decision,
after having increased in June.

Although the recent increases in headline and core
inflation affect their foreseen trajectories in the short
term, both are expected to be around 3% within the
12-24 month forecast horizon. These forecasts are
subject to considerable risks. To the downside: i) a
greater than expected impact of the widening of the
negative output gap; ii) downward inflationary
pressures worldwide; and iii) social distancing
measures reducing the demand for certain services.
To the upside: i) additional episodes of exchange
rate depreciation; ii) a greater persistence of core
inflation; and iii) logistical and supply-related
problems concerning certain goods and services, as
well as higher costs associated with the adoption of
sanitary measures. In this context, the balance of
risks for inflation remains uncertain.


**Table 1**

**Consumer Price Index and Components**

Annual percentage change

**Item** **May 2020** **June 2020** **July 2020**

**CPI** **2.84** **3.33** **3.62**

**SubyacenteCore** **3.64** **3.71** **3.85**

**Merchandise** **4.30** **4.69** **5.19**

Food, beverages and tobacco 6.58 6.59 6.89

Non-food merchandise 1.88 2.66 3.38

**Services** **2.93** **2.65** **2.40**

Housing 2.67 2.49 2.38

Education (tuitions) 4.51 4.45 4.31

Other services 2.83 2.42 2.02

**No SubyacenteNon-core** **0.35** **2.16** **2.92**

**Agricultural and livestock products** **9.79** **7.69** **5.55**

Fruits and vegetablesFruits abd vegetables 17.83 13.14 8.43

Livestock productsLivestock 3.36 3.45 3.26

**Energy and government-authorized prices Energéticos y Tarifas Aut. por Gobierno** **-6.51** **-1.90** **0.95**

Energy productsEnergy -11.34 -4.57 -0.41

Government-authorized pricesTarifas Autorizadas por Gobierno 4.65 4.17 4.01

Source:INEGI.

22


-----

-----

-----

