-----

-----

**FOREWARNING**
This document is provided for the reader’s convenience only.
The translation from the official Spanish version was made
by Banco de México’s staff. Discrepancies may arise
between the original document in Spanish and its English
translation. For this reason, the original Spanish version is
the only official document.


**1. PLACE, DATE, AND PARTICIPANTS**

**1.1 Place:** Av. Cinco de Mayo no.2, fifth floor, Col.
Centro, Mexico City.

**1.2. Date of Governing Board meeting:** February
12, 2020.

**1.3. Participants:**
Alejandro Díaz de León-Carrillo, Governor.
Irene Espinosa-Cantellano, Deputy Governor.
Gerardo Esquivel-Hernández, Deputy Governor.
Javier Eduardo Guzmán-Calafell, Deputy Governor.
Jonathan Ernest Heath-Constable, Deputy

Governor.
Arturo Herrera-Gutiérrez, Secretary of Finance and
Public Credit.
Gabriel Yorio-González, Undersecretary of Finance
and Public Credit.
Elías Villanueva-Ochoa, Secretary of Governing
Board.

Prior to this meeting, preliminary work by Banco de
México’s staff analyzing the economic and financial
environment, together with the developments in
inflation and the determinants and outlook for
inflation, was conducted and presented to the
Governing Board (see annex).

**2. ANALYSIS AND RATIONALE BEHIND THE**
**GOVERNING BOARD’S VOTING**

**_International_** **_environment_**

**Most members pointed out that the world**
**economy continues to decelerate. In this respect,**
**some members noted the weakness of industrial**
production and international trade. **One** member
stated that the above stemmed from the impact of
trade tensions on such variables and on investment
and business confidence. As to economic activity in
advanced economies, **some** members agreed that
industrial production showed weakness. **One**

member mentioned that growth and job creation in
these economies were associated to the expansion
of the services sector. **Most members stated that**
**labor markets in advanced economies continued**
**showing** **strength,** **with** **historically** **low**


**unemployment** **gaps** **and** **moderate** **wage**

**increases.**

**Most members pointed out that a gradual**
**recovery of the global economy is expected in**
**2020 and in 2021. One** member added that this
would be fundamentally driven by a rebound in
emerging economies. **Another member noted that,**
in a context of loser financial conditions, uncertainty
continues to affect trade, industrial production,
investment, and business confidence. He/she
considered that, given the environment of

uncertainty, a further easing of financial conditions
has led to leveraging of households and businesses,
rather than capital accumulation. He/she added that
this could increase financial vulnerabilities and
reduce the margin of maneuver for monetary policy.

**Most members indicated that some risks to the**
**global economy have subsided, in light of: i) the**
**US-China phase 1 trade agreement; ii) the**
**agreement of withdrawal of the United Kingdom**
**from the European Union; and, iii) the USMCA**
**ratification by the U.S. Nonetheless, they**
**stressed that factors of uncertainty persist, such**
**as the effects of the coronavirus outbreak. One**
member cautioned about its possible impact on
global value chains. Another member specified that
growth forecasts for 2020 for China and for the global
economy already show downward revisions,

although to a lower degree in the case of the global
economy. He/she added that, in view of a lower
demand by China and other economies, commodity
prices, such as energy prices, have decreased,
which could affect producing countries. **Most**
**members** **highlighted** **certain** **political** **and**

**geopolitical risks, such as i) the US electoral**
**process; ii) conflicts in the Middle East; and, iii)**
**the reemergence of tensions between the U.S.**
**and other economies. One member mentioned the**
possibility of complications in the United Kingdom’s
withdrawal from the European Union. **Most**

**members considered that the balance of risks for**
**the world economy is still biased to the**
**downside.**

**Most members noted that global inflation**
**remains low. They stated that in advanced**
**economies headline and core inflations remain**
**below their respective central banks’ targets.**
**One** member noted that the global economic
slowdown has contributed to the above. **Another**
member added that this has taken place in a context
in which labor market strengthening has implied
moderate pressures on wages and prices. **Another**
member mentioned that the lower energy prices

1


-----

could exert downward pressures on global inflation.
Finally, one member considered that the balance of
risks for global inflation is biased to the downside,
although he/she mentioned that in some economies
inflation pressures are starting to emerge, as a result
of the higher food prices.

**Most members underlined that central banks in**
**the** **advanced** **economies** **maintained**

**accommodative monetary stances. One** member
pointed out that in some cases the monetary stimulus
was increased. Most members mentioned that in
**January the Federal Reserve left the target range**
**for the federal funds rate unchanged, and that it**
**highlighted that such rate is at an adequate level**
**to reach its objectives. Some members noted that**
analysts do not expect changes in the federal funds
rate in 2020, although market expectations point to
an additional easing. **One member stated that**
markets do not anticipate increases in the target rate,
as long as a sustained growth in inflation is not
observed. **Another one mentioned that Federal**
Open Market Committee members do not expect
changes in the referred rate in 2020 and anticipate a
25-basis point increment in 2021. **Finally, most**
**members noted the possibility of central banks**
**adopting more accommodative monetary policy**
**stances in view of the risks associated with the**
**coronavirus outbreak.**

**In this context, most members emphasized that**
**global financial conditions have continued to**
**loosen. One added that this has also been due to**
the decline in some of the mentioned risks. **Some**
members noted that globally, stock markets
registered gains and interest rates exhibited
decreases. One member highlighted that in the U.S.
the yield curve has flattened, even showing an
inversion in its shorter maturities, as a reflection of
the risks for US economic activity. **Most members**
**indicated that the good performance of global**
**markets has favored capital flows to emerging**
**economies. However, they mentioned** **that**

**episodes** **of** **volatility** **associated** **to** **the**

**coronavirus outbreak have been observed. They**
**also pointed out that there are factors that could**
**contribute to episodes of risk aversion, such as**
**those already mentioned for world economic**
**activity.**

**_Economic activity in Mexico_**

**All members agreed that economic activity in**
**Mexico has remained stagnant for several**
**quarters. Most members noted that the latest**
**information as of the fourth quarter of 2019**
**suggests a slight contraction for the year as a**


**whole. One member added that this is accounted for**
by: i) an unfavorable global context; ii) the beginning
of a new administration; iii) some controversial public
policy decisions that contributed to generate
uncertainty; and, iv) a tight monetary policy for a
relatively long period. Regarding this point, he/she
mentioned that the high real interest rate in Mexico
has negative implications for consumption and
investment decisions.

**Most members highlighted the weakness in**
**aggregate demand components, emphasizing**
**investment’s** **sluggishness.** **Some** members

mentioned that investment has been affected by the
public budget underspending and the lack of both
legal certainty and domestic and external certainty,
which has had an impact on private investment.
**Some** members highlighted the unfavorable

performance of investment in machinery and
equipment in 2019, although one of them mentioned
that recently it has slightly recovered. **Another**
member mentioned that non-residential construction
has trended downwards since early 2015 and added
that consumption has slowed down since the
beginning of the year. Most members stressed the
**slowdown of manufacturing exports in late 2019.**
**One member added that these were affected by an**
automotive strike and by the industrial weakness in
the U.S.

**On the supply side, most members stressed the**
**negative performance of the industrial sector.**
**One** member pointed out that industrial activity
closed the year below expectations. Some members
highlighted the contraction in construction and
mining, although one member noted that both have
exhibited a slight upward trend after having
deteriorated for several years. Finally, **some**
members stressed the weakness of the services
sector.

Regarding the labor market, **some members**
emphasized the decline in the rate of job creation.
**One member highlighted that as of January 2020**
approximately half of formal jobs were created as
compared to the same period of last year. Another
member indicated that, although the unemployment
rate reached a historic minimum in December 2019,
it is necessary to take into account the higher number
of withdrawals of funds from Afore Pension Funds
Manager accounts due to unemployment, the higher
underemployment rate, and that other indicators of
formal job creation are at levels similar to those
observed in mid-2008, which shows the weakness of
the labor market and the deterioration of the quality
of employment. He/she indicated that the impact of

2


-----

the economy’s weakness on the labor market will
certainly be exacerbated in the next months. Some
members stated that the costs for employment
originated by wage increases not associated with
productivity growth should be considered. **One**
member pointed out that the experience with
minimum wage adjustments and the evolution of
employment in the Northern border free zone and
adjacent municipalities is revealing in such regard.

**Most members agreed that stagnation of**
**economic** **activity** **has** **implied** **that** **slack**

**conditions have continued to widen. One member**
noted that exogenous cost pressures, such as those
related to wages, could hamper the recovery of
production and the narrowing of the negative output
gap.

**Most members mentioned that, based on the**
**most recent information, GDP growth in 2020 is**
**expected to be lower than the figure released in**
**the Quarterly Report July – September 2019. One**
member added that GDP growth is also expected to
be lower in 2021. **Another one added that such**
forecasts are in line with the adjustments made by
international organizations and analysts. **Some**
members stated that the economic expansion in
2020 will be propelled by the USMCA ratification, the
announcement of the energy sector investment plan,
the dissipation of transitory shocks that affected
exports and manufacturing production, as well as a
more efficient public spending, after the first year of
the administration. Nevertheless, they considered
that there are few elements that anticipate a
significant improvement of investment. One member
added that budget spending on fixed investment will
remain at low levels and could even be lower than
those programmed. As for consumption, **some**
members mentioned that it is likely to recover. One
member added that this would be supported by the
expected growth in the wage bill and in remittances.
**Another member considered that, in his/her opinion,**
consumption is expected to lose dynamism.

**Most members considered that the balance of**
**risks to growth remains biased to the downside.**
**Some** members mentioned that this situation has
worsened in light of the above mentioned global
risks. Most members added that economic
**activity is subject to both external and domestic**
**risks. In the external environment, in addition to the**
described global risks, **some members stated that**
considerable challenges are foreseen regarding the
USMCA implementation, given that the increase in
investment and the reconfiguration of value chains
will take time. **One member noted that world trade**


and the integration of global value chains still face
considerable risks in the medium term. **Another**
member highlighted the potential negative impact of
the deceleration of the US economy, and,

particularly, of the stagnation of industrial production
foreseen in that country, on Mexican exports.

**In the domestic environment, most members**
**noted that the persistence of an environment of**
**uncertainty regarding public policies could**
**continue affecting business confidence and**
**investment. In this regard, one member mentioned**
that, in the event of a deterioration of the sovereign
or Pemex’s debt rating, this would decrease the
availability of loanable funds for investment. Finally,
**another member added further reductions in public**
revenue as an additional risk. With respect to upward
risks for growth, **one member mentioned that**
economic activity could benefit from a more favorable
global context. **Another member underlined that**
investment could be boosted by the entry into force
of the USMCA, which could contribute to reverse its
decreasing trend and consolidate North America’s
integration. Meanwhile, **some members considered**
that the positive impact of the USMCA on investment
will be hardly sufficient to boost it, due to the
uncertainty over several policies. **One member**
pointed out that the above is based on the remarks
by specialists and business agents drawn from
different surveys.

**_Inflation in Mexico_**

**All members mentioned that in early 2020 annual**
**headline inflation increased,** although **some** of
them highlighted that at the end of 2019 it stood
below 3%. **Most members underlined that the**
**recent increase** **was mainly associated with the**
**rise in the non-core component. One** member
pointed out that the later was due, among other
factors, to comparison base effects and to pressures
on certain agricultural product prices. **Another**
member highlighted that the monthly inflation rates of
December and January were lower than the average
of previous years and lower than those anticipated by
the market.

**Most members** **stated that core inflation was**
**affected by the increase in the prices subject to**
**the special tax on production and services (IEPS,**
**for its acronym in Spanish) and that it continues**
**to show resistance to decline. The majority**
**considered that its behavior is also due to the**
**evolution of wages.** **Some** members pointed out
that data confirms that the subindexes that are more
labor intensive and more related to wages, have had
the highest increases. **Most members noted that**

3


-----

**core inflation does not appear to have been too**
**sensitive to slack conditions.** **Some** members
mentioned that, in the absence of pressures
stemming from demand, from the peso exchange
rate, or from indirect effects from the non-core
component, it can be argued that one of the main
factors explaining the behavior of core inflation is the
evolution of wages. One member stated that certain
inertia in price setting may be added to the above.
**Another member** highlighted that the prices of food
merchandises and of their related services are the
ones with the highest increases. **One** member
considered that the rise in the core component
mainly concentrated in food merchandises affected
by the IEPS increase, while non-food merchandise
and services price inflation continued to decrease.
He/she underlined the reduction observed in inflation
of services prices observed from April to January,
and in particular of the prices of services other than
education and housing, which are the most likely to
be related with wage dynamics.

**Most members noted that short-, medium-, and**
**long-term headline inflation expectations have**
**remained relatively stable, albeit at levels above**
**3%, while core inflation expectations for the**
**same terms were revised upwards.** **One member**
highlighted that the breakeven inflation and

inflationary risk premium implied in fixed income
instruments has continued to decrease.

**The majority of members mentioned that in light**
**of the recent behavior of the factors affecting the**
**foreseen path of inflation, headline and core**
**inflation are expected to be moderately above the**
**forecasts published in the latest Quarterly**
**Report. Some** members pointed out that this
adjustment will possibly complicate inflation from
attaining the 3% target at the end of the year. Some
members stated that the foreseen path still considers
that inflation will converge to the target within the time
frame in which monetary policy operates, although
**some** members noted that a temporary rebound is
expected. One member explained that this is due to
a comparison base effect and that such increase is
expected to reverse considerably in April. **Another**
member noted that in the following quarters the level
of core inflation will largely depend on the interaction
between, on the one hand, the greater economic
slack and the lower prices of energy goods and, on
the other, the effects of the minimum wage increase,
which may generate cost pressures that affect
employment and prices. He/she stated that, although
the final result is difficult to anticipate since it is
unusual for the economy to face labor cost pressures


during the lower part of the business cycle, a slight
upward revision in core inflation is expected.

**Regarding upside risks to the foreseen trajectory**
**for inflation, most members mentioned core**
**inflation’s** **resistance** **to** **decline** **and** **the**

**possibility that wage increases affect prices.** **One**
member emphasized that minimum wage increases
may maintain or intensify the core component’s
persistence. **Another** member highlighted the
minimum wage increases accumulated in the last two
years and the mean salaries for IMSS-contribution
purposes in 2019. He/she argued that such
increases will possibly continue in 2020 and that
therefore they should not be considered as a
transitory shock but rather as one that will be present
in the medium term. He/she stated that it is not clear
if wage increases may greatly affect inflation,
however, it cannot be concluded either that they will
have no impact at all. The same member noted that
empirical evidence on this regard should be
considered. Most members added as upside risks
**a possible exchange rate adjustment, as well as**
**greater-than-expected increases in agricultural**
**and livestock prices.** **Some** members mentioned
the possibility of non-core inflation reversing to levels
greater than anticipated due to the high variability of
this subindex. One member added that, although the
gasoline pricing policy favors lower levels and
volatility, not all energy good prices are being
controlled. In addition, the majority mentioned the
**risk of a deterioration of public finances. Finally,**
**one member pointed out that the rebound observed**
in January, which is considered transitory, will
probably occur again in February and has the risk of
generating inertia on inflation for the rest of the year.
**Another** member stated that inflation risks have
decreased. He/she noted that the above described
benign global conditions have had a favorable impact
on the peso exchange rate and that the recent
decrease in commodity prices has a favorable impact
on production costs.

**As for downside risks for inflation, most**
**members mentioned: i) a further appreciation of**
**the peso exchange rate in response to greater**
**risk appetite; ii) lower international prices of**
**energy goods due to the coronavirus outbreak;**
**and, iii) greater economic slack.** **One member also**
added the benign behavior of producer prices. In this
context, some members pointed out that uncertainty
continues as to the balance of risks for the foreseen
path of inflation. Others stated that it remains biased
upwards and one member highlighted that risks for
inflation have decreased.

4


-----

**_Macrofinancial environment_**

**Most** **members** **highlighted** **the** **positive**

**performance of domestic financial markets. They**
**mentioned that such performance was due to a**
**favorable environment in international financial**
**markets.** **Some** members added that Banco de
Mexico’s monetary policy stance also contributed to
the good performance of domestic markets. **The**
**majority pointed out that yields on government**
**securities decreased for all terms.** **One** member
highlighted that the greater reductions were in the
longer terms. Another member underlined that both
nominal and real interest rates have fallen. He/she
stated that the components of nominal long-term
interest rates show that, in the last months, shortterm interest rate expectations and term premia have
decreased. One member highlighted that the 10-year
rate is currently 200 basis point below the level
observed towards the end of 2018. Most members
**mentioned that the peso appreciated, showing a**
**better performance than the currencies of other**
**emerging economies. One member noted that the**
stock market improved marginally. **Some** members
emphasized that sovereign risk premia decreased.
**One member argued that the sound macroeconomic**
and monetary policy stance has been key in reducing
such premia. **Another** member mentioned that
sovereign credit default swaps (CDS) are at nearly
half the level observed at the end of 2018. In this
regard, **another** member noted that they are still
traded above those of comparable economies and
incorporate a sovereign rating downgrade. **The**
**majority of members considered that external**
**and** **domestic** **risks** **that** **may** **affect** **the**

**performance of domestic markets persist.** **One**
member expressed that the most important risks
stem from a possible downgrade of Mexico’s
sovereign debt and/or Pemex’s debt rating, of the
evolution of public finances, and of the US
presidential elections.

**Most** **members** **considered** **that** **a** **sound**

**macroeconomic** **policy** **stance** **has** **been**

**maintained and that, to strengthen the country's**
**macroeconomic framework and growth capacity,**
**in addition to a prudent monetary policy, public**
**finances must be consolidated in a sustainable**
**way. The majority** **added that measures that**
**generate confidence and certainty are essential.**
**One** member added that a healthy and wellcapitalized financial system must be maintained, in
addition to reducing both Mexico’s sovereign and
Pemex’s credit risk. He/she also noted that
strengthening the rule of law and increasing
productivity by adopting new technologies and


enhancing human capital is also fundamental.
**Another** member stated that, if the deterioration in
physical capital formation continues, and given the
lack of a more productive human capital stock, there
is a risk of undermining the foundations of mediumand long-term growth, thus affecting potential growth.
**Some members** added that, based on the opinion of
business agents and analysts, among the obstacles
to economic activity are those related to governance
problems (public insecurity, political instability,
impunity and corruption) and uncertain domestic
economic conditions.

Regarding Pemex’s situation, **one member pointed**
out that, although a slight rebound in oil production
has been observed, the target for 2020 appears
optimistic given that investment is lagging behind.
He/she noted that the fulfillment of the approved
balance for 2019 was not the result of a structural
improvement, but rather of the increase in supplier
financing, of lower oil derivatives imports, and of a fall
in physical investment. Another member stated that
the loss of Pemex’s investment grade may generate
financial volatility, although he/she mentioned that
markets to a large extent have already discounted
the risk of a downgrading of its credit rating. Thus,
**some** members argued that questions regarding
Pemex’s medium-term financial viability have not
disappeared. They explained that additional funding
by the federal government will probably be required.
**One member** mentioned that this year the resulting
challenges for public finances are exacerbated in the
face of an outlook for economic growth and oil
income being lower than previously foreseen. He/she
indicated that although in 2020 this situation may be
addressed with the use resources from the Budget
Revenue Stabilization Fund (FEIP, for its acronym in
Spanish), the vulnerability of the public finances
would increase in the coming years given the longterm challenges Pemex faces and the probable
exhaustion of federal government reserve funds.
He/she emphasized the need for implementing
actions that allow Pemex to overcome its structural
problems as soon as possible. **Some** members
mentioned that the risks for both Mexico’s sovereign
and Pemex’s credit ratings have decreased. **One**
member highlighted the reduction of the state ownedcompany’s interest rate and its CDS. He/she noted
that the recent bond repurchase and refinancing
operations were successful, which shows that there
is a greater appetite for Pemex’s bonds, in line with
its improved financial situation.

As for public finances, one member highlighted the
primary surplus achieved and the stabilization of the
public debt as a share of GDP, after having increased

5


-----

between 2008 and 2016. He/she noted that the lax
fiscal behavior in those years led to macroeconomic
imbalances that affected the exchange rate and
inflation. He/she pointed out that, although debt
decreased to around 46% of GDP in 2017, this was
artificially achieved by the transfer of Banco de
México’s surplus in 2016 and 2017. He/she stated
that the behavior of public finances in 2019 sends a
message of credibility and commitment to fiscal
discipline. Another member mentioned that in 2019
revenues closed below those programmed and that
the fiscal balance target was achieved with the use
of FEIP resources and that without the use of those
resources the primary balance would have been
0.6%. He/she stressed that this situation could
continue in 2020 since, according to the consensus
of private sector forecasters, economic growth will be
half the programmed. He/she warned that, if this
scenario materializes, additional resources from the
FEIP would be withdrawn. He/she argued that using
these resources without implementing measures that
permanently increase income aggravates the

vulnerability of public finances. He/she added that, if
there were significant rises in the international
reference prices for gasoline, this may have a high
fiscal cost.

**_Monetary policy_**

**Regarding Banco de México’s monetary policy**
**decision,** **the** **Governing** **Board** **decided**

**unanimously to lower the target for the overnight**
**interbank interest rate by 25 basis points to 7%.**
**Among the elements considered in this decision,**
**the following stand out: the levels attained by**
**headline inflation, its outlook within the time**
**frame in which monetary policy operates, the**
**greater economic slack, and the recent behavior**
**of external and domestic yield curves.** As
additional factors in making the decision **one**
member added: i) the decline of inflation risks; ii) the
environment of low international interest rates; iii) the
favorable performance of domestic markets; and, iv)
the peso exchange rate’s strength given external
shocks. Another member added the lower credit risk
premia and the improvement in the country-risk
perception, as well as the stability of public finances
and the lower uncertainty regarding international
trade. He/she argued that, although some latent risks
remain, monetary policy has room to maneuver.

**Some members considered that given the economic**
environment, the current monetary policy continues
being very restrictive. **One** member specified that
Mexico’s real interest rate is the highest among a
large group of economies, including those that have


a credit rating lower than Mexico’s. He/she argued
that a very restrictive monetary policy for an
extended period can jeopardize macroeconomic and
financial stability, and affect consumption and
investment. He/she mentioned that the analysis by a
brokerage estimated a cost associated with the
restrictive monetary policy of 0.7% of GDP in 2019
and of 1% in 2020. The same member noted that by
affecting growth, it also has effects on the
performance of both firms and the stock market, as
well as on public finances, by increasing the financial
cost of debt and lowering tax collection. The same
member added that this makes domestic financial
markets less attractive and affects risk premia and
the exchange rate. For this reason, he/she
considered that insofar as the inflation rate close to
the target is consolidated, it will be necessary for
monetary policy to transition towards a stance closer
to neutral. **Another** member pointed out that the
target rate in early 2019 was very restrictive, 3.4% in
real terms, and with a spread of 575 basis points
against that of the United States. He/she highlighted
that, despite the interest rate cuts, an absolute
easing was not achieved given that the real rate
closed the year at 4.4%. As to the relative monetary
policy stance, he/she noted that the spread against
the United States decreased only by 25 basis points
towards the end of the year, remaining as one of the
highest spreads. He/she pointed out that it turns out
to be even higher when considering the lower
exchange risk, the greater risk appetite, and that no
changes are expected in the accommodative
monetary policies worldwide. He/she stated that, as
to the absolute policy stance, economic slack
demands a lower rate of return on capital, and that
for such reason there must be consistency with the
neutral rate. In sum, he/she considered that both
stances point to the need for a greater rate easing in
order to attain the primary objective at the lowest
possible cost.

**Most** **members** **estimated** **that** **economic**

**stagnation responds to multiple factors. The**
**majority also mentioned that using monetary**
**policy to reactivate the economy would have**
**modest benefits and could imply a high risk. One**
member indicated that monetary policy has been
criticized as causing to a large extent the stagnation.
He/she considered that, nevertheless, its impact has
been marginal. The same member pointed out that
at this point it is important to acknowledge the limits
and scope of monetary policy. He/she stated that, on
the one hand, an overly restrictive policy may affect
investment and consumption but it is not the main
factor behind their loss of dynamism. The same
member added that, on the other hand, the monetary

6


-----

policy implemented has yielded significant benefits in
terms of financial and exchange rate stability and
ensuring the purchasing power of wages. **Another**
member mentioned that recent research suggests
that given the high share of informality in the
economy and the low credit penetration, the impact
of the interest rate and credit channels to stimulate
economic activity is limited, while the expectations
channel is the predominant one to control inflation.
He/she added that although a more significant
monetary policy easing could improve the fiscal
balance, it would not correct the structural problems
of public finances. He/she also pointed out that the
lack of dynamism of investment is due to the lack of
certainty on public policies and concerns about
domestic factors, such as governance, rule of law,
and corruption, which remain as the major obstacles
for private investment. In this regard, **another**
member mentioned the importance of maintaining an
environment of greater certainty, arguing that the
central bank can contribute to that by ensuring
macroeconomic and financial stability.

**One member mentioned that, given the development**
of core inflation, the challenge is for wage increases
not to affect inflation and nullify the improvements in
purchasing power attained. He/she estimated that
inflationary pressures from the supply side are
difficult to control with monetary policy, even more
when they are the result of a medium-term policy,
such as the wage policy. He/she pointed out that a
wage policy is successful when it is able to
permanently increase the purchasing power and
generate better-paid jobs. He/she argued that
caution and prudence must be applied in order to
assess the best time to modify the rate of easing,
taking into account that the goal is to contribute to
improve the purchasing power of wages. Such
member considered that although there are elements
that suggest lowering the policy rate, given the
persistence of core inflation and the permanent
shock of wages, the balance of risks is uncertain in
the short and medium terms.

**Most members pointed out the challenges faced**
**by monetary policy.** **Some indicated the difficulty in**
reconciling an ample economic slack with inflationary
pressures and mentioned that there is the prospect
of postponing the consolidation of inflation around
the target. **One member pointed out that headline**
and core inflation expectations are converging to
3.5%, which implies that they are settling more firmly
at that level, while long-term core inflation

expectations have increased. If the aforementioned
prevails, it would be a factor of concern that could be
considered as a second-round effect on prices. Thus,


he/she argued that there are signs that core inflation
expectations are un-anchoring, in addition to which
an environment of high uncertainty prevails. He/she
considered that in this context the challenges for
monetary policy have been exacerbated, thus it must
continue to be conducted prudently. He/she
mentioned that despite the cautious approach that
has been followed, the risks of second-round effects
on prices have increased. He/she argued that the
central bank must focus on attaining its target within
the time frame of monetary policy influence. He/she
added that, at the same time, it must be ensured that
the convergence to the target takes place in an
orderly manner, avoiding potential costs for

economic activity.

**Another** member considered that although

economic slack has widened more than expected,
the challenges faced by the economy are not only
those associated with its cyclical position. He/she
mentioned that there are other challenges and risk
factors, both domestic and external, which affect the
economy, the price formation process, and inflation.
Such member noted that although under an inflation
targeting framework monetary policy must be such
that headline and core inflation forecasts remain
around their target within the forecast horizon, it must
also consider other elements. Among these, he/she
mentioned the external environment, the greater
amount of economic slack and the need to foster
adequate conditions in financial markets. In addition
to the above, he/she highlighted that monetary policy
decisions must also: i) allow for an orderly
adjustment of the economy; ii) consider the behavior
of domestic and external yield curves and the
corresponding risk premia; iii) maintain interest in
Mexico as an investment destination and generate
confidence; iv) consider the effects of the relevant
relative monetary conditions; and, v) ensure the yield
curve incorporates interest rate expectations

consistent with the central bank targets within the
time frame in which monetary policy operates.
He/she argued that the latter implies that the
adjustment of the monetary policy stance: i) must be
done gradually to maintain the needed flexibility to
face a wide range of scenarios and allow the required
adjustments to be done in an orderly way; ii) must
take into account all information available; iii) must
fully respond to all expected factors and features of
the Mexican economy and in a wide range of
scenarios; and, iv) must lead to an orderly and
sustained convergence of headline inflation to its
target within the time frame in which monetary policy
operates.

7


-----

**The majority of members highlighted the**
**importance** **of** **future** **adjustments** **being**

**consistent with the evolution of both the balance**
**of risks for inflation and the economic juncture.**
**One member stated that a prudent and gradual**
approach must be taken given the environment of
uncertainty. Another member pointed out that under
such circumstances the future actions of the
monetary policy must rely on the available
information at the time of the policy decision since
attempting to provide a more precise guideline in an
uncertain environment, can affect the central bank’s
credibility. One member added that the message that
the monetary policy stance is consistent with the
attainment of the inflation target within the time frame
in which monetary policy operates must be
maintained. Another member argued that the rate of
the adjustment must be considered period by period,
must rely on incoming information, and must
maintain a trajectory of inflation converging to the
target. He/she underlined that a further deterioration
of the balance of risks could limit taking advantage of
the margin of maneuver for the relative and absolute
policy stances in the future. Such member added that
since the rate of adjustment affects expectations, a
prudent policy adds to a sounder anchoring and
maintains the central bank’s credibility. He/she
pointed out that the central bank must remain alert as
to avoid being complacent with a relatively low
inflation but which is above the target. Nevertheless,
**one** member considered important that such
guideline acknowledges the convenience of

adjusting the monetary policy stance to a less
restrictive one in a relatively short period, with such
an adjustment being conditioned to the favorable
evolution of the inflation outlook. He/she argued that
based on available information, it is possible to


envision a scenario in which the interest rate’s
neutral zone is attained by the end of this year.
He/she estimated that a scenario like the above
would not jeopardize the outlook for inflation but it
would improve the economic perspectives.

**3. MONETARY POLICY DECISION**

With the presence of all its members, Banco de
México’s Governing Board decided unanimously to
lower the target for the overnight interbank interest
rate by 25 basis points to 7%. To this end, the current
levels of headline inflation, the inflation outlook within
the time frame in which monetary policy operates, the
greater amount of economic slack, and the recent
behavior of external and domestic yield curves, were
considered.

The Governing Board will take the necessary actions
based on incoming data so that the policy rate is
consistent with the orderly and sustained

convergence of headline inflation to Banco de
México’s target within the time frame in which
monetary policy operates. To strengthen the
macroeconomic framework and the country´s growth
capacity, in addition to a prudent monetary policy,
public finances must be consolidated in a sustainable
way.

**4. VOTING**

Alejandro Díaz de León-Carrillo, Irene EspinosaCantellano, Gerardo Esquivel-Hernández, Javier
Eduardo Guzmán-Calafell and Jonathan Ernest
Heath-Constable voted in favor of lowering the
overnight interbank interest rate by 25 basis points to
a level of 7%.

8


-----

**ANNEX**

The information in this Annex was prepared for this
meeting by the staff of Banco de México’s General
Directorate of Economic Research and General
Directorate of Central Bank Operations. It does not
necessarily reflect the considerations of the

members of the Governing Board as to the monetary
policy decision.

**A.1. External conditions**

**A.1.1. World economic activity**

Available information suggests that during the fourth
quarter of 2019 world economic activity continued to
decelerate (Chart 1), reflecting the effects of the
prevailing environment of uncertainty regarding trade
and geopolitical tensions and idiosyncratic factors in
some of the major economies, all of which affected
trade, manufacturing, and, particularly, investment.
The mitigation of certain risks in light of the United
States’ approval of the new US-Mexico-Canada
Agreement (USMCA), the exit of the United Kingdom
from the European Union, and the signing of the USChina Phase 1 trade deal, led to a positive
performance of financial markets, greater risk
appetite, and to a loosening of financial conditions.
Nevertheless, in early 2020, there were episodes of
volatility, such as those stemming from the escalation
of geopolitical tensions between the United States
and Iran and from the coronavirus (Covid-19)
outbreak. In turn, although the latest data shows a
stabilization of business confidence and of certain
leading indicators, economic activity has not shown
clear signs of recovery. In this context, while growth
expectations for the global economy continue
pointing to a slight recovery in 2020, the presence of
several uncertainty factors implies that the balance
of risks for growth continues biased to the downside
in the short and, particularly, in the medium term.


**Chart 1**

**Global Activity Indicators**

Annual percentage change of 3-month moving

average and deviation from 50, s. a.

7

Industrial production

6

World trade

5 PMI: New orders

4

3

2

1

0

-1

November

January

-2

2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020

s. a. / Seasonally adjusted figures.
Source: CPB Netherlands and Markit.

In the United States, GDP grew at an annualized
quarterly rate of 2.1% during the fourth quarter of
2019, rate similar to that registered in the third
quarter (Chart 2). Economic activity continued to be
driven by residential investment, public spending and
private consumption, although the latter has been
slowing down. Additionally, as a result of the fall in
imports, net exports contributed positively to growth.
In contrast, investment in equipment and fixed
structures continued to contract during the fourth
quarter. US industrial production contracted in
December, as a result of a fall in the gas and
electricity sectors caused by the lower demand for
space heating due to unusually warm weather
conditions during that month. This was partially offset
by the rebound in mining and the moderate growth of
manufacturing, sector which continues exhibiting
significant weakness. Key labor market indicators in
the United States remain relatively strong. In
particular, the growth of the non-farm payroll, the
initial requests for unemployment insurance, and the
layoff levels continue to suggest tight labor
conditions. However, other indicators such as the
rate of new jobs created and the index of weekly
hours worked have moderated. The unemployment
rate was 3.6% in January, around its lowest levels
since the end of 1969, while wage growth in that
country moderated.

9


-----

**United States: Real GDP and its Components**

Annualized quarterly percentage change and

contributions in percentage points, s. a.

6

4

2

0

-2

Public spending Net exports

-4 Inventories Non-residential investment

Residential investment Private consumption

Total

-6

I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV

2016 2017 2018 2019

Source: Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA).

In the euro area, GDP growth slowed from an
annualized quarterly rate of 1.1% during the third
quarter to 0.4% in the fourth quarter. In particular,
private consumption continued growing, driven by
the relative strength of the labor market and the high
levels of consumer confidence. Nevertheless,
exports remained weak, in an environment of
persisting uncertainty that has affected

manufacturing activity and investment spending
throughout the region. In Japan, GDP growth is
estimated to have contracted during the fourth
quarter due to transitory factors related to adverse
climate conditions and to the VAT increase. In this
context, and to offset the negative effects of said tax
increase, a fiscal stimulus package was announced
which is expected to boost economic activity in 2020
and 2021.

Available information for the fourth quarter of 2019
shows that most emerging economies continued to
grow moderately. In China, although GDP growth
stabilized and the latest indicators recovered towards
the end of 2019, the coronavirus outbreak is
anticipated to negatively affect economic activity in
that country and in other emerging economies in the
short term. As for Latin America, growth seemed to
continue weakening in the last part of 2019, although
the region’s countries continue exhibiting mixed
performances.


Since Mexico’s last monetary policy decision,
international commodity prices have trended

downward. Crude oil prices increased temporarily at
the end of 2019 and in the first days of 2020 due to
the extension of oil production cuts starting in 2020
by OPEC members and other producers and the
conflict between the United States and Iran. Later,
such prices fell as a result of a reduction in the
expected demand for crude oil, particularly by China,
due to the coronavirus outbreak. The easing of
Middle East tensions and the increase in oil and
gasoline inventories in the United States made said
fall sharper. Industrial metal prices and grain prices
also decreased due to fears about the health
emergency in China affecting its economy.

**A.1.2. Monetary policy and international financial**
**markets**

Headline inflation in most advanced economies
increased slightly, although it remains below their
respective central banks’ targets. Such increase was
mainly due to the rise in energy goods prices
observed at the end of 2019. Nevertheless, core
inflation and inflation expectations in these

economies remain at low levels (Chart 3). In some
emerging economies, such as Brazil, China, India,
the Philippines, Poland, Hungary, and Turkey,
headline inflation increased due to the rise in food
merchandise prices, while in Chile the increase
responded to idiosyncratic factors. Core inflation,
however, has remained relatively stable in most
emerging countries.

In this context of low inflation levels and risks for the
global economy in the short and, particularly, in the
medium term, the central banks of the major
advanced economies maintained accommodative
monetary policy stances. Expectations drawn from
market instruments anticipate that these institutions’
monetary policies will remain accommodative (Chart
4). In emerging economies, several central banks
have continued to ease their policy stances, with the
cases of Argentina, China, Brazil, Malaysia, South
Africa, Thailand, the Philippines, Russia, and Turkey
standing out.

10

|Chart 2 United States: Real GDP and its Components Annualized quarterly percentage change and contributions in percentage points, s. a.|Col2|Col3|Col4|
|---|---|---|---|
|Public spending Net exports Inventories Non-residential investment Residential investment Private consumption Total||||
|I II III IV 2016|I II III IV 2017|I II III IV 2018|I II III IV 2019|


-----

**Chart 3**

**Selected Advanced Economies: Core Inflation**

Annual percentage change


3

2

1


0

-1


Canada 3/ December
United Kingdom January

-1

2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020


1/ Refers to the Personal Consumption Expenditures Price Index (PCE).
2/ Excludes fresh food, energy, and the direct effect of the consumption tax
increase of 2014.
3/ Excludes food, energy, and the effect of adjustments on indirect taxes
(CPIX).
Source: Haver Analytics, BEA, Statistical Office of the European Union
(Eurostat), and Statistics Bureau (Japan).

**Chart 4**

**Reference Rates and Implied Trajectories in**

**OIS Curves[1/]**

Percent

3.0% **― US Federal Reserve***

**― Bank of England** Forecasts
**― Bank of Japan**

2.5% **― Bank of Canada**

**― European Central Bank deposit rate**
**― OIS implicit trajectory 10 Feb 2020**

2.0% **--- OIS implicit trajectory 16 Dec 2019**

1.5%

1.0%

0.5%

0.0%

-0.5%

-1.0% End of 2018 End of 2019 End of 2020

2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020

1/ OIS: Fixed floating interest rate swap where the fixed interest rate is the
effective overnight reference rate.

- In the case of the US observed reference rate, the average interest rate of
the federal funds target range is used (1.50% - 1.75%).
Source: Bloomberg.

Some of the major central bank policy decisions
during the period were:

i) In January, the US Federal Reserve left unchanged the
target range for the federal funds rate, at 1.5-1.75%. In
its January statement, that central bank pointed out that
the current monetary policy stance is the appropriate to
ensure sustained growth, sound labor conditions, and
inflation returning to its 2% symmetric target. The most
recent implied trajectory in the futures of such rate
reflects expectations of between one and two additional
25 basis point reductions in 2020.


ii) In January, the European Central Bank (ECB) left its

monetary policy stance unchanged. That central bank
reiterated that it expects key ECB interest rates to
remain at their present or lower levels until inflation
robustly converges to levels sufficiently close to, albeit
below, 2%.

iii) In its January meeting, the Bank of England left its

policy rate at 0.75% and did not modify the size of its
government bond purchases, although two members
voted again in favor of cutting their policy rate. The
Monetary Policy Committee pointed out that the
domestic uncertainty faced by households and
businesses has decreased. It highlighted that it will
closely assess if the improvement in the economic
outlook actually leads to a better performance of
economic activity indicators.

iv) In its January meeting, the Bank of Japan also left its

monetary policy stance unchanged. That central bank
reiterated that it will leave interest rates at their current
or lower levels until the 2% inflation target is attained.

v) In its January meeting, the Bank of Canada left its

policy interest rate unchanged at 1.75%. In its January
Monetary Policy Report it highlighted that although the
Canadian economy continues to grow at a rate close to
potential, growth in the short term is expected to be
below that forecasted in its October report. The
economic outlook was revised due to the effects of
global uncertainty and other temporary factors on
business investment and exports, as well as to
consumers’ more cautious behavior.

International financial markets exhibited higher
volatility at the beginning of the year (Chart 5). This
was initially associated with geopolitical tensions
between the United States and Iran and later with
concerns associated with the coronavirus outbreak in
China. In this scenario, the US dollar strengthened
against most currencies (Chart 6). For its part, stock
markets recorded gains at the end of 2019 in light of
the reduction of certain risks that the global economy
had been facing, with the historically high levels of
US stock exchanges standing out. More recently,
other stock indexes registered losses due largely to
the uncertainty associated with the coronavirus
outbreak. Interest rates of long-term government
bonds decreased in most advanced and emerging
economies. In this context, inflows to financial assets
of emerging economies continued to recover,
although a greater differentiation among economies
and by type of asset has been observed (Chart 7).

Looking ahead, episodes of greater volatility in
financial markets stemming from the high uncertainty
about the economic effects of the coronavirus
outbreak in China, its spread, and the efficiency of
authorities in containing said health emergency are

11


-----

not ruled out. In addition to the above, several risk
factors persist, such as the possibility of a new
escalation of trade tensions between the United
States and its main trade partners, the intensification
of geopolitical conflicts, mainly in the Middle East,
and risks stemming from climatic factors, among
others.

**Chart 5**

**Implicit Volatility of Selected Financial**

**Indicators**

31-dic-2015=100

180 US stock markets 1/

European stock markets 2/

160 Currencies 3/

US fixed income market 4/

140 Oil 5/

120

100

80

60

40

February


**Chart 6**

**Change in Selected Financial Indicators**

**from December 16, 2019 to February 10, 2020**

Percent, basis pointsPercentage, basis points


8%

6%


40

30


4%

2%


20

10


0%

-2%


0

-10


-4%

-6%


-20

-30


-8%


-40


1/VIX: Weighted 1-month implied volatility index for options of the S&P500
published by the Chicago Board Options Exchange. 2/V2X: Weighted 1month implied volatility index for options of the Euro Stoxx50 published by
Deutsche Borse and Goldman Sachs. 3/CVIX: 3-month implied volatility
index of the most traded exchange rates with the following weights
EURUSD: 35.9%; USDJPY: 21.79%; GBPUSD: 17.95%; USDCHF: 5.13%;
USDCAD: 5.13%; AUDUSD: 6.14%; EURJPY: 3.85%; EURGBP: 2.56%;
and EURCHF: 1.28%. 4/ MOVE: Implied volatility index for at the money
options with a 1-month maturity on 2-, 5-, 10- and 30-year Treasury bills.
Index calculated by Merrill Lynch. 5/ OVX: Weighted index of 1-month
implied volatility in the oil options market.
Source: Prepared by Banco de México with Bloomberg data.


1/ MSCI Emerging Markets Index (includes 24 countries).
2/ DXY: Weighted average of the nominal exchange rate of the six main
world-traded currencies (calculated by Intercontinental Exchange, ICE) with
the following weights: EUR (57.6%), JPY (13.6%), GBP (11.9%), CAD
(9.1%), SEK (4.2%), and CHF (3.6%).
3/ J.P. Morgan Index constructed from a weighted average of the nominal
exchange rate of emerging economies’ currencies with the following
weights: TRY (8.3%), RUB (8.3%), HUF (8.3%), ZAR (8.3%), BRL (11.1%),
MXN (11.1%), CLP (11.1%), CNH (11.1%), INR (11.1%), and SGD (11.1%).
Source: Bloomberg and ICE.

**Chart 7**

**Emerging Economies: Financial Assets**

**Performance from December 16, 2019 to**

**February 10, 2020**

Percent, basis points


Note: Interest rates correspond to interest rate swaps for 2-year/10-year Note: Interest rates correspond to interes rate swaps for 2-year/10-year maturities. In the
maturities. In the case of Argentina, rates in US dollars are used since they
are the most liquid ones and those that reflect more adequately the
performance of the fixed income market in that country.
Source: Bloomberg.

12


-----

**A.2. Current situation of the Mexican economy**

**A.2.1. Mexican markets**

Since Banco de Mexico’s previous monetary policy
decision, financial asset prices in Mexico exhibited a
slight positive bias in an environment where a
decrease in trade policy uncertainty was observed
and in which the central banks of the major advanced
economies are expected to maintain a high level of
monetary stimulus. In the last weeks, the spread of
the coronavirus outbreak has led to negative days in
Mexico’s financial markets and to a moderate
increase of volatility in said markets. In particular, the
peso/dollar exchange rate fluctuated between 18.56
and 19.08 pesos per US dollar, reaching 18.70 pesos
per US dollar at the end of the period (Chart 8). This
occurred in a context where both spot and
prospective trading conditions remained stable
during the period. For its part, forecasters from
several financial institutions adjusted downward their
peso exchange rate expectations for the end of 2020,
from 20.05 to 19.67 pesos per US dollar, while for the
end of 2021, they maintained their expectations at
20.00 pesos per US dollar (Chart 9).

Interest rates of government securities decreased
between 15 and 25 basis points throughout the entire
yield curve, with long-term rates registering the
greatest adjustments (Chart 10). This occurred in a
context where trading conditions remained stable.

As to expectations regarding the path of the
monetary policy target rate, information implied in the
Interbank Equilibrium Interest Rate (TIIE, for its
acronym in Spanish) swaps curve practically
discounts a 25-basis point cut for the monetary policy
decision of February, in line with expectations of
private sector forecasters surveyed by Citibanamex.
For the end of 2020, market variables anticipate a
target rate of around 6.00% (Chart 11), while the
median of said survey foresees a target rate at
6.50%.


Range in year Range since last monetary policy decision 16-Dec-19 Last level


Note: The black vertical line represents Banco de México’s latest monetary
policy decision.
Source: Bloomberg and Citibanamex survey.

13


**Chart 8**

**Mexican Markets’ Performance and Trading**

**Conditions**

Percent, pesos/US dollar and index


7.4

7.3

7.2

7.1

7.0

6.9

6.8

6.7

6.6

6.5

6.4


3.7

3.6

3.5

3.4

3.3

3.2

3.1


19.1

19.0

18.9

18.8

18.7

18.6

18.5


46,500

46,000

45,500

45,000

44,500

44,000

43,500

43,000

42,500

42,000


M Bond


Inflation indexed bonds


Range in year Range since last monetary policy decision 16-Dec-19 Last level


Source: Prepared by Banco de México with Bloomberg and Proveedora
Integral de Precios (PIP) data.

**Chart 9**

**Analysts’ Mexican Peso Exchange Rate**

**Expectations**

Pesos per US dollar


21.0

20.5


20.0

19.5


19.0

18.5


18.0

17.5

J   M   M J    S   N    J   M   M   J    S    N   J
2018                       2019                     2020


Mexican Peso Estimated end 2019 Citibanamex

Estimated end 2020 Citibanamex Estimated end 2021 Citibanamex


-----

**Chart 10**

**Nominal Yield on Government Securities**

Percent, basis points

7.40 20

7.20 10

30

6

7.00 5 0

6.80 -10

6.60 -20

6.40 -30

6.20 -40

Dec-16-19 Feb-10-20 Change (Dec-16-19 to Feb-10-20)

Trading range over the period

Source: PIP.

**Chart 11**

**Banxico Overnight Interbank Rate Implied in**

**TIIE IRS Curve**

Percent Percent

8.50

8.25

8.00

7.75

7.50

7.25

7.00

6.75 Banxico overnight rate (policy rate)

6.50 Last monetary policy decision

6.25

Rest of period

6.00

Last level

5.75

5.50

jun. 18J           O          F          J           N          M         A          D oct. 18 feb. 19 jul. 19 nov. 19 mar. 20 ago. 20 dic. 20

2018                    2019                              2020

Source: Prepared by Banco de México with Bloomberg data.

**A.2.2. Economic activity in Mexico**

According to INEGI’s GDP flash estimate, the
stagnation that Mexico’s economic activity has been
exhibiting for several quarters continued during the
fourth quarter of 2019. Thus, in 2019 as a whole the
economy contracted slightly (Chart 12).


s. a. Seasonally adjusted figures.
1/ The figure for the fourth quarter of 2019 refers to INEGI’s GDP flash
estimate.
Source: Mexico’s National Accounts System (SCNM, for its acronym in
Spanish), INEGI.

In the last quarter of 2019, manufacturing exports
decreased vis-à-vis the previous quarter (Chart 13).
Such evolution was mainly due to the contraction of
automotive exports, both to the United States and to
the rest of the world, which is consistent with the fall
in Mexico’s automotive production caused by
changes in the production lines of several auto
assembly plants and the effects of strikes in this
sector in the United States. Similarly, non-automotive
manufacturing exports to the United States exhibited
lackluster growth, while Mexico’s non-automotive
exports to countries other than the United States
continued trending downward.

During October-November 2019, private

consumption registered less dynamism vis-à-vis the
recovery at the end of the previous quarter. Such
behavior was due to the slowdown of consumption of
domestic and imported goods and to a weak
consumption of services. Timely indicators of
consumption, such as retailer’s earnings and sales of
manufacturing industries more related with

consumption in the domestic market, exhibited low
dynamism, while the sales of light vehicles slightly
recovered in the early part of 2020. For its part, gross
fixed investment continued to contract during
October-November 2019. Within this indicator, both
spending in construction and machinery and
equipment exhibited weakness.

14


**Chart 12**

**Gross Domestic Product**

Quarterly percentage change, s. a.


2

1

0

-1

-2


I

2013


II III IV I

2014


II III IV I

2015


II III IV I

2016


II III IV I

2017


II III IV I

2018


II III IV I

2019


II III IV


-----

**Chart 13**

**Total Manufacturing Exports**

Indices 2013 = 100, s. a.


**Chart 14**

**Global Index of Economic Activity**

Indices 2013 = 100, s. a.


170

160

150

140

130

120

110

100

90

80

J

2013


A J O J A J O J

2014 2015


140

130

120

110

100

90


A J O J

2016


A J O J

2017


A J O J

2018


A J O J

2019


A J O D


120

115

110

105

100

95


A J O J

2014


A J O J

2015


A J O J

2016


A J O J

2017


A J O J

2018


A J O J

2019


A J O


s. a. / Seasonally adjusted series and trend series based on data in nominal
USD. The former is represented by a solid line and the latter by a dotted
line.
Source: Prepared by Banco de México with data from the Tax
Administration Service (SAT, for its acronym in Spanish), the Ministry of the
Economy (SE, for its acronym in Spanish), Banco de México, the National
Institute of Statistics and Geography (INEGI, for its acronym in Spanish),
Mexico’s Merchandise Trade Balance, and the National System of
Statistical and Geographical Information (SNIEG, for its acronym in
Spanish).

As for production, the stagnation of economic activity
during the fourth quarter of 2019 reflected the
contraction of industrial activity and the lower growth
of services (Chart 14). The performance of the
secondary sector is associated with the weakness of
construction and with manufacturing following a
slight downward. In contrast, mining recovered
slightly, associated with the uptick of the oil platform
(Chart 15). For its part, services registered low
growth. This behavior was the result of the fall in
wholesale trade; arts, entertainment, and recreation;
and other services (except public administration);
and of increases in professional services;

management of companies and enterprises;

transportation; information industries; finance; and
real estate and rental and leasing.

As to the economy’s cyclical position, slack
conditions are estimated to have continued to widen
in the last quarter of 2019, reflecting the persistent
stagnation of economic activity (Chart 16). As to the
labor market, both national and urban unemployment
rates decreased at the end of 2019 (Chart 17). In
turn, the creation of IMSS-insured jobs continued to
slow down. According to information available for the
third quarter of 2019, as a result of the behavior of
productivity and average real earnings, unit labor
costs for the economy as a whole continued trending
upward. At the beginning of the fourth quarter, unit
labor costs in the manufacturing sector also
increased, remaining at high levels (Chart 18).


s. a. / Seasonally adjusted and trend series. The former is represented by a
solid line and the latter by a dotted line.
1/ Figures in parentheses correspond to its share in the total in 2013.
Source: Mexico’s National Accounts System (SCNM, for its acronym in
Spanish), INEGI.

15


J

2013


s. a. / Seasonally adjusted and trend series. The former is represented by a
solid line and the latter by a dotted line.
1/ Figures up to December 2019 correspond to estimates implied by the
flash GDP.
2/ Figures up to December 2019 of the Monthly Indicator of Industrial
Activity.
Source: Mexico’s National Accounts System (SCNM, for its acronym in
Spanish), INEGI.

**Chart 15**

**Industrial Activity[1/]**

Indices 2013 = 100, s. a.

130

120

110

100

90

Total

Mining (22.3%)

80

Manufacturing (49.7%)

70 Construction (23.3%)


60


December

J M M J S N J M M J S N J M M J S N J M M J S N J M M J S N J M M J S N J M M J S N D

2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019


-----

**Chart 16**

**Output Gap Estimates [1/]**

**Excluding Oil Industry [4/ ]**

Potential output percentages, s. a.


**Chart 18**

**Productivity and Unit Labor Costs in the**

**Manufacturing Sector[1/]**
Indices 2013 = 100, s. a.


8

Global Economic Activity Index 2/

6 Gross Domestic Product 2/

95% confidence interval 3/

4

2

0

-2

-4

-6

-8

-10

Q-IV

December

-12

J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S

2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019


115

Unit labor costs

Productivity

110

105

100

95

November

90

J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J ON

2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019


s. a. / Calculations based on seasonally adjusted figures.
1/ Output gap estimated with a tail-corrected Hodrick-Prescott filter; see
Banco de México (2009), “Inflation Report (April-June 2009)", p.74.
2/ Fourth quarter of 2019 figure based on the flash GDP estimate and for
December based on the IGAE estimate implicit in said flash figure.
3/ Output gap confidence interval calculated with a method of unobserved
components.
4/ Excludes both oil and gas extraction, support activities for mining, and
petroleum and coal products' manufacturing.
Source: Prepared by Banco de México with INEGI data.

**Chart 17**

**National Unemployment Rate and Urban**

**Unemployment Rate**

Percent, s. a.

8.5

Urban unemployment rate

8.0

7.5 National unemployment rate

7.0

6.5

6.0

5.5

5.0

4.5

4.0

3.5

3.0

December

2.5

J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O D

2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019

s. a. / Seasonally adjusted and trend series. The former is represented by a
solid line and the latter by a dotted line.
Source: National Survey of Occupations and Employment (ENOE, for its
acronym in Spanish), INEGI.


s. a. / Seasonally adjusted and trend series. The former is represented by a
solid line and the latter by a dotted line. Trend series estimated by Banco
de México.
1/ Productivity based on hours worked.
Source: Prepared by Banco de México with seasonally adjusted data from
the Monthly Survey of the Manufacturing Industry and from industrial activity
indicators from INEGI’s National Accounts System (Sistema de Cuentas
Nacionales de México).

In December 2019, domestic financing to the private
sector continued growing at a lower rate. Within it,
the deceleration of financing to private firms
observed since the second half of 2018 intensified.
This trend is explained by the lower growth of bank
credit and a lower domestic debt issuance. As to the
household segment, mortgages slowed down, while
consumer credit continued growing at low rates. As
for interest rates, those of firm financing decreased,
in line with the reduction of the overnight funding
interest rate. Interest rates of mortgages have
remained stable since the second quarter of 2017,
while in the segment of consumer credit, those of
credit cards and personal loans stopped trending
upward. With regards to portfolio quality, firm and
mortgage delinquency rates remained at low levels,
while those related to consumption did not register
significant changes and continue at high levels.

16


-----

**A.2.3. Development of inflation and inflation**
**outlook**

Annual headline inflation increased from 2.97 to
3.24% between November 2019 and January 2020
(Chart 19 and Table 1). This behavior was due to an
increase of 5 basis points in the incidence of core
inflation and of 21 basis points in that of non-core
inflation.

**Chart 19**

**Consumer Price Index**

Annual percentage change

13

CPI

12

11 Core

10 Non-core

9

8

7

6

5

4

3

2

1 January

0

J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J

2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020

Source: Banco de México and INEGI.

Annual core inflation increased from 3.65 to 3.73%
between November 2019 and January 2020. Within
this component, the annual rate of change of food
merchandise prices increased from 4.56 to 5.10%
during the same period, influenced by the increase in
cigarette’s and sugar-added drinks’ excise taxes
(IEPS, for its acronym in Spanish). In contrast, the
annual rate of change of non-food merchandise
prices remained at low and stable levels of 2.66 and
2.68% during said months (Chart 20). For its part, the
annual rate of change of services prices decreased
from 3.67 to 3.51% (Chart 21) mainly due to the lower
increases in telecommunication and tourist services
prices vis-à-vis the previous year.

Annual non-core inflation rose from 0.98 to 1.81%
between November 2019 and January 2020 (Chart
22 and Table 1). This was basically due to an
increase in the annual rate of change of energy
goods prices, influenced by an upward effect
stemming from the low comparison base on gasoline
prices, which had decreased at the beginning of last
year mostly due to the reduction of the VAT in the
northern border area. As to the subindex of
agricultural and livestock product prices, although
their annual rate of change decreased between
November and December, such behavior partially
reverted in January due to the rise in the annual rates
of change of fruit and vegetable prices.


As for inflation expectations drawn from Banco de
México’s Survey of Private Sector Forecasters,
between December 2019 and January 2020, those
for short-, medium- and long-term headline inflation
remained relatively stable, although at levels above
3%. Those corresponding to core inflation for the
same terms were revised upwards. Finally, long-term
inflation expectations implied in market instruments
were slightly revised downwards during the same
period, while the inflation risk premium decreased.

Regarding the risks to inflation, those to the upside
include: core inflation’s resistance to decline; wage
increases affecting the labor market and prices; a
possible exchange rate adjustment due to external or
domestic factors; increases in agricultural and
livestock prices greater than expected; and a
deterioration of public finances. As for downside
risks: a further appreciation of the peso exchange
rate; lower international prices of energy goods due
to the coronavirus outbreak; and a greater economic
slack. In this context, uncertainty still persists
regarding the balance of risks for the referred
trajectory of inflation.

**Chart 20**

**Merchandise Core Price Subindex**

Annual percentage change

8

Food, beverages and tobacco

Non-food merchandise

7

6

5

4

3

2

1

January

0

J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J

2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020

Source: Banco de México and INEGI.

17

|Chart 19 Consumer Price Index Annual percentage change|Col2|
|---|---|
|||
|||
|||
|||
|January||


-----

**Chart 21**

**Merchandise and Services Core Price Subindex**

Annual percentage change

7

Merchandise

6 Services

5

4

3

2

1

January

0

J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J

2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020


**Chart 22**

**Non-core Price Subindex**
Annual percentage change


20

15

10

5

0

-5


2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J

2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020

Source: Banco de México and INEGI.

Source: Banco de México and INEGI.

**Table 1**

**Consumer Price Index and Components**

Annual percentage change

**Item** **November 2019** **December 2019** **January 2020**

**CPI** **2.97** **2.83** **3.24**

**SubyacenteCore** **3.65** **3.59** **3.73**

**Merchandise** **3.63** **3.56** **3.92**

Food, beverages and tobacco 4.56 4.45 5.10

Non-food merchandise 2.66 2.62 2.68

**Services** **3.67** **3.64** **3.51**

Housing 2.88 2.91 2.93

Education (tuitions) 4.73 4.73 4.69

Other services 4.16 4.05 3.78

**No SubyacenteNon-core** **0.98** **0.59** **1.81**

**Agricultural and livestock products** **2.18** **-0.03** **1.44**

Fruits and vegetablesFruits abd vegetables -1.48 -5.40 -1.76

Livestock productsLivestock 5.38 4.98 4.45

**Energy and government-authorized prices Energéticos y Tarifas Aut. por Gobierno** **0.14** **1.04** **2.08**

Energy productsEnergy -1.80 -0.54 0.86

Government-authorized pricesTarifas Autorizadas por Gobierno 5.09 5.05 5.07

Source: INEGI.

18


-----

-----

-----

