-----

-----

**FOREWARNING**
This document is provided for the reader’s convenience only.
The translation from the official Spanish version was made
by Banco de México’s staff. Discrepancies may arise
between the original document in Spanish and its English
translation. For this reason, the original Spanish version is
the only official document.

**1. PLACE, DATE, AND PARTICIPANTS**

**1.1 Place:** Av. Cinco de Mayo Street no. 2, 5[th] floor,
Col. Centro, Mexico City.

**1.2. Date of Governing Board meeting:** December
18, 2019

**1.3. Participants:**
Alejandro Díaz de León-Carrillo, Governor.
Irene Espinosa-Cantellano, Deputy Governor.
Gerardo Esquivel-Hernández, Deputy Governor.
Javier Eduardo Guzmán-Calafell, Deputy Governor.
Jonathan Ernest Heath-Constable, Deputy

Governor.
Arturo Herrera-Gutiérrez, Secretary of Finance and
Public Credit.
Gabriel Yorio-González, Undersecretary of Finance
and Public Credit.
Elías Villanueva-Ochoa, Secretary of the Governing
Board.

Prior to this meeting, preliminary work by Banco de
México’s staff analyzing the economic and financial
environment, together with the developments in
inflation and the determinants and outlook for
inflation, was conducted and presented to the
Governing Board (see annex).

**2. ANALYSIS AND RATIONALE BEHIND THE**
**GOVERNING BOARD’S VOTING**

Most members of the Governing Board pointed out
that during the fourth quarter of the year the world
economy continued to decelerate. In this respect,
one member noted that this was the result of the
weakness of advanced economies, given that growth
in emerging economies remained stable during said
period. Some members added that in 2019 the
international environment has been characterized by
high uncertainty. One member mentioned that the
extended trade war between the United States and
China has been the biggest obstacle to world
economic growth. Some members commented that
the impact of trade tensions have propitiated a
decline in global trade, investment, manufacturing
production and business confidence. One member
mentioned that the strongest impact has been


observed in more open economies that export to the
U.S. and China.

Most members mentioned that the main advanced
economies have continued to slow down. One of
them specified that the US economy is an exception,
an economy which is going through its longest cycle
of expansion on record. Another member pointed out
that trade-related uncertainty has affected economic
activity in the Euro area, Japan and the U.S. He/she
mentioned that in the U.S. the weakness of
investment stands out, although in general the
impact has been of a lesser magnitude. Meanwhile,
some members pointed out that private consumption
and services have expanded in advanced

economies. One member highlighted that the
services’ sector is the main source of employment
and that it has contributed to maintain the
unemployment gaps at historically low levels. In this
context, most members considered that these
economies’ labor markets have continued to show
strength. As for emerging economies, one member
stated that available indicators point to a not so
favorable behavior, due to idiosyncratic factors
associated to outbreaks of sociopolitical instability,
especially in Latin America.

Regarding the growth outlook, most members
pointed out that it has been revised downwards. One
member considered that investment is expected to
remain weak, given that it tends to be more sensitive
to an environment of high uncertainty compared to
an environment of low interest rates. He/she added
that looser financial conditions, rather than

generating greater capital accumulation, would lead
to an increase in businesses and households’
leverage, which could increase financial

vulnerabilities, especially in the less regulated
segments. Another member pointed out that in recent
weeks, certain timely indicators have started to
suggest a possible change of trend. In this regard,
most members agreed that the growth rate of the
world economy is anticipated to begin rebounding
starting from early 2020. One member specified that
this forecast is based on expectations that, along with
the expected stimulus provided by the implemented
policy measures, global economic activity will be
supported by the gradual fading of the impact of
certain factors that have affected it. He/she added
that the economic recovery would be gradual, while
another member specified that it would be
heterogeneous across regions.

Most members noted that some risks to the global
economy have moderated recently, in light of the
preliminary trade agreement reached between China

1


-----

and the U.S., and the election results in the United
Kingdom. Similarly, one member mentioned that the
additional agreement among the governments of
Mexico, the United States and Canada has also
contributed to improve the business climate. Most
members stressed that risks to the global economy
persist, which are associated to: i) trade tensions; ii)
political and geopolitical factors; and, iii) a greaterthan-anticipated deceleration in key economies. One
member mentioned surprises in the monetary field as
an additional risk. Regarding the first of the referred
risks, some members considered that in view of the
upcoming US electoral process it is difficult to
guarantee that the negotiations between the U.S.
and China will not suffer any setbacks. With respect
to the second risk, some members noted that,
although elections in the U.K. lowered the
uncertainty, details are still missing about the United
Kingdom’s exit strategy from the European Union. In
this context, most members agreed that the balance
of risks for world economic activity remains biased to
the downside, although one of them mentioned that
given the described events, the balance of risks has
improved since the last monetary policy decision,
and also from a medium-term perspective.

Most members pointed out that both headline and
core inflation in the main advanced economies
remain at low levels, below the targets of their
respective central banks. Some members noted that,
despite the tightening in labor markets, the impact on
wages and inflation has been moderate in said
economies. With respect to emerging economies,
some members highlighted that in a considerable
number of these, headline inflation is below target.
One member added that in most cases, core inflation
continues trending downwards. Another member
mentioned that in some cases, slight price level
increases have been observed. In this regard, he/she
emphasized the increase in commodity prices.
Finally, he/she added that the balance of risks to
global inflation remains biased to the downside.

All members pointed out that the central banks of the
main advanced economies maintained

accommodative policy stances. One member added
that certain monetary authorities have urged their
respective governments to adopt complementary
policies that boost economic growth. Most members
noted that in its December meeting, the US Federal
Reserve left the target range for the federal funds
rate unchanged, and highlighted that such range is
appropriate to achieve its goals. They added that,
according to that central bank’s communication, prior
to increasing the policy rate, an increase in inflation
would have to be observed. They stated that the


median of the projections by the members of the
Federal Open Market Committee does not indicate
further adjustments for 2020, whereas market
expectations anticipate only one additional cut for the
next year. In this respect, one member highlighted
that economic analysts do not expect changes either
in the federal funds’ rate during 2020. As to emerging
economies, some members stated that a number of
central banks continued easing their monetary
policies. One member mentioned that Brazil recently
lowered its policy rate by 50 basis points, leading to
a total downward adjustment of 200-basis points
during the year. Finally, the majority of members
agreed that accommodative monetary policy stances
at the global level will continue during the next year.

Most members stated that the recent moderation in
some of the abovementioned risks to the global
economy, along with signs of stabilization in certain
leading indicators have led to a greater risk appetite
in international financial markets. They added that
the accommodative monetary policy stances have
also contributed to the favorable performance of said
markets. In this regard, one member argued that
these have incorporated an environment of low
interest rates throughout the yield curve. Another one
pointed out that, although there have been episodes
of volatility, these have been temporary and more
improvements than setbacks have been observed.
Some members mentioned that stock indices have
registered generalized gains, reaching historic highs.
Regarding fixed income instruments, some members
stated that government bond interest rates declined.
One stressed that around 30% of all fixed income
instruments in circulation in developed economies
exhibit negative returns, especially in the Euro area
and Japan. He/she pointed out that the US Treasury
bonds’ yield curve exhibited a slightly positive slope.
With respect to emerging economies, some
mentioned that financial assets exhibited volatility,
especially in Latin America as a result of idiosyncratic
factors. In this context, one mentioned that the
aforementioned region had a negative performance
in the foreign exchange and bond markets. He/she
specified that in the case of emerging economies the
results were mixed. He/she underlined that although
flows to fixed income assets were negative in the last
four weeks, equity assets registered moderate
inflows in said period. Some members pointed out
that the improvement in international financial
markets has benefitted emerging economies. One
member emphasized that the flows of funds to these
economies have continued to accumulate during the
year and that in most cases risk premia have
declined. In this regard, he/she considered that the
balance of risks for financial markets has improved

2


-----

since the last monetary policy decision, as well as
from a medium-term perspective. Another member
warned that, although the observed improvement
suggests a more favorable global environment, a
sudden tightening stemming from the materialization
of certain risks cannot be ruled out.

All members mentioned that although information
available for the fourth quarter of 2019 is limited, the
weakness that has been observed for several
quarters in Mexico’s economic activity is expected to
persist, and they agreed that the economy remains
stagnant. One member pointed out that an accurate
reading of economic activity is complicated not only
because of the limited information available, but also
due to the effects of the temporary factors that have
affected the automotive sector. Another member
added that the stagnation has been due to: i) an
external environment that has not been favorable,
given that US manufacturing production contracted
during the last year; ii) that at the beginning of each
new administration’s six-year term a deceleration is
observed associated with slow public spending; and,
iii) a tight monetary policy that has affected
consumption and investment. He/she considered
that the latter is particularly relevant in an
environment in which the real yield of government
bonds is even above the expected real rate of return
of many productive investment projects.

Regarding aggregate demand, one member

mentioned that the weakness of its components
persists. Some members underlined the deceleration
of consumption and the negative trend in investment.
One member emphasized that public investment
continues to reflect the lack of resources and that
private investment has been affected for a number of
years by the uncertainty regarding the trade relations
in North America and by other domestic factors.
He/she added that the weakness of investment in
machinery and equipment and in construction has
intensified. He/she also specified that non-residential
investment has maintained a declining trend since
early 2015. With regards to external demand, most
members pointed out that manufacturing exports lost
dynamism, and that they were affected by strikes in
the US automotive sector, although one member
considered that exports maintained a positive trend.

On the supply side, most members underlined the
negative performance of the industrial sector. Some
members detailed that in October it contracted once
again. One member added that this confirmed the
negative trend that this indicator has been exhibiting.
Within industrial production, most members

highlighted the loss of dynamism in manufacturing


production as well as the weakness in mining and
construction. Regarding manufacturing production,
one member specified that in October it registered a
significant fall, although it is expected to be transitory.
Regarding construction, most members stressed that
its decline intensified during the year. One member
detailed that mining seems to have started to
stabilize after having exhibited a negative trend for
several years. Finally, another member added that
the services sector continues to decelerate.

As to the labor market, most members highlighted
the decrease in the growth rate of formal
employment. One member specified that in

November 2019, 345 thousand formal jobs were
created, with an annual growth of 1.7%, figures
below those of the previous year, of 688 thousand
jobs and a 3.5% growth. One member mentioned
that during 2019 formal job creation is expected to
register its lowest level since 2009. He/she also
emphasized the higher employment in the informal
sector and an increase in underemployment. He/she
mentioned that the accumulated change since 2012
of the percentage of economically active population
that works less than 35 hours a week increased by a
factor of almost four during the period 2018-2019.
One member added that a slight increase in the
unemployment rate was also observed. Some
members considered that the evolution of the labor
market has reflected the weakness of the economy,
although some of them maintained that it has also
reflected the trajectory of wages. In particular, one
member mentioned that there is information which
suggests that the wage policy has started to limit
formal job creation, which may also weaken
economic activity. He/she specified that such
distortions will become more evident as a result of
the 20% increase in the minimum wage starting
2020, which is the largest increase in the last 44
years. Another member added that the experience of
the northern border free zone clearly shows that
wage increases that are inconsistent with the
development of productivity negatively affect

employment. He/she added that the upward trend in
unit labor costs has continued, as a consequence of
both larger real remunerations and a labor
productivity that has registered consecutive annual
contractions over the last 6 quarters.

Most members agreed that the stagnation of
economic activity has implied that the negative slack
conditions have widened with respect to those
observed in the previous quarter. One member noted
that such widening has been greater than previously
foreseen. Another member considered that its
magnitude is a reason for concern and estimated that

3


-----

the current negative output gap is by far the largest
since the 2009 global crisis. Another member noted
that the growth outlook for 2019 and 2020 imply
negative output gaps in both years similar to those
estimated in the latest Quarterly Report. One
member specified that given the economy’s cyclical
position, exogenous cost pressures, salary

pressures among them, could hamper the recovery
of employment and production as well as the
narrowing of the negative output gap.

Most members mentioned that the growth outlook is
in line with that published in the Quarterly Report July
– September 2019. With respect to the outlook for
2020, most members indicated that a moderate
recovery is expected. One member mentioned that
the recovery is possible for several reasons: i) a low
comparison base; ii) the public administration is more
prepared to operate; iii) the USMCA ratification is
imminent; and, iv) a low probability that the negative
shocks observed in 2019 occur again. Some
members maintained that a slight recovery of private
consumption is estimated, boosted by consumer
confidence, income from remittances, and the wage
bill. One member expressed that investment is
foreseen to remain weak, both in construction and in
imported machinery and equipment. He/she added
that a slight recovery in tertiary activities is
anticipated. However, he/she stated that industrial
production would maintain an unfavorable evolution,
particularly in construction and mining.

Most members noted that in an environment of
marked uncertainty the balance of risks for growth
remains biased to the downside. One considered that
said balance has been deteriorating throughout the
year, and another member pointed out that this has
occurred despite a certain improvement in the
environment. Some members maintained that the
growth remains subject to both external and
domestic risks. In addition to the above described
global risks, one member added expectations of a
slight improvement in the global economy as an
upside risk. He/she considered that among domestic
risks the possibility of monetary policy remaining tight
for a long period stands out.

Most members mentioned that there are risks
associated to the ratification of the USMCA in the
U.S. and Canada. Some members warned that the
final part of the legislative ratification is still pending
in said countries. However, most members

acknowledged that the uncertainty associated to
such process has diminished and agreed that the
USMCA ratification could improve the investment
outlook. Nonetheless, one member noted that non

trivial challenges to its implementation are

anticipated, and therefore it is not evident that said
agreement will reactivate private investment in the
short run. In this context, another member mentioned
that this agreement is a necessary but not a sufficient
condition for a strengthening of confidence that is
compatible with a solid expansion of investment.
Most members stressed that to reach this goal, other
domestic uncertainty factors need to be mitigated,
such as those related to governance, legal certainty,
insecurity and those related to the country’ economic
and political situation. One member asserted that the
implications of the behavior of investment in recent
years for potential growth are even more worrisome,
a situation that is accentuated considering the level,
orientation and high concentration of public

investment, as well as the possibility that the recent
stagnation of total factor productivity persists or even
that a negative trend in this variable is observed, in
the absence of a public policy package that may
contribute to reverse such trend. Meanwhile, another
member added that it is unlikely that the National
Infrastructure Investment Agreement of the Private
Sector could reverse the weakness of investment,
given that the resources intended for these projects
are lower than the annual average observed in the
last five years. He/she added that the restructuring of
spending approved in the 2020 Federal Budget
poses significant risks to the country’s potential
growth, given that resources are reallocated from
strategic sectors, such as the electrical sector, the
airport sector, and the highway infrastructure sector,
to projects with uncertain profitability. Another
member mentioned the possible reductions in public
revenue as an additional risk to growth.

Among upward risks to growth, one member stated
that the foundations of private consumption, such as
remittances, the real wage bill and consumer
confidence remain strong. He/she also noted that the
fiscal policy objective will be a lower surplus, which
will allow for a higher public spending. He/she
mentioned that the factors that typically tend to cause
a deceleration at the beginning of each new
government’s six-year term will no longer be present
and stated that the National Infrastructure and
Housing Programs will start functioning next year.
Similarly, some members pointed out that it is
possible that a less restrictive monetary policy
contributes to a recovery of the economy. One of
them mentioned that investment and consumption
would gradually recover.

Most members stated that in November headline
inflation was 2.97%, lying around the point target.
One member mentioned that headline inflation has

4


-----

decreased at a greater-than-anticipated rate. Most
members stressed that the decline in headline
inflation was determined by a significant reduction in
the non-core component. In this regard, all noted that
the annual rate of change of this component was
particularly low, reaching 0.98% in November. On the
other hand, most members mentioned that core
inflation exhibited slight reductions, laying at 3.65%,
a pattern that one member emphasized has been
observed since early 2018.

Delving into the evolution of non-core inflation, all
members considered that it has remained at
historically low levels. In this regard, most members
highlighted the reduction in the rates of change of
energy prices and agricultural and livestock products’
prices. As to core inflation, most members
emphasized that it has exhibited persistence. One
member pointed out that it has declined at a rate
lower than expected at the beginning of the year.
Another member considered that it has remained on
the same decreasing trend observed since June of
this year. Some members attributed the slow
reduction of core inflation to the high rates of change
of services’ prices. One member underlined that
throughout the year, the price-related pressures of
the services other than housing and food

merchandise have been associated, in his/her
opinion, to the indirect effects of the energy price
increases in 2018 and to the wage increases since
early 2019. Meanwhile, another member considered
that the different determinants of core inflation have
performed favorably during the year. Specifically,
he/she mentioned the exchange rate appreciation,
the low levels of inflation of energy and agricultural
and livestock products’ prices, along with a negative
output gap.

The majority of members pointed out that short-term
inflation expectations have moderated, while those
for the longer term remain above 3%. One member
noted that expectations for headline inflation for the
end of 2019 decreased from 3.00 to 2.94% and those
for 2020 rose slightly from 3.46 to 3.5%. Another
member noted that, based on the latest information
and prior to the decision on minimum wages,
expectations for headline and core inflation for 2020
and for the long term were 3.5 and 3.4%,
respectively. He/she added that such expectations
could partially incorporate the said adjustment to the
minimum wage, but that it will be necessary to wait
for the next surveys to determine if they show an
additional adjustment. One member mentioned that
short-term inflation expectations from surveys have
followed the latest information and that breakeven


inflation and inflationary risk implied in fixed income
instruments has remained relatively stable.

As for inflation forecasts, most members estimated
that headline inflation expectations for the end of
2019 could be below the forecasts of the Quarterly
Report July-September 2019. One member

mentioned that he/she foresees that it will close
below target, and be the second lowest annual
inflation of the current century. In this regard, the
majority stated that this behavior would respond to
the outstandingly favorable performance of non-core
inflation during 2019. Some members emphasized
that such performance is not expected to continue
much longer. One member pointed out that, with an
average of almost 6% since January 2001, when the
inflation targeting regime was formally adopted, it
would be difficult to expect that non-core inflation
continues registering such low figures for a long time.
In this regard, he/she considered that, in said
context, assessing the behavior of inflation based on
the headline price index entails serious limitations.
Another member argued that it is wrong to assume
that non-core inflation will once again show its
previous levels and volatility since the new policy on
energy prices reduces the volatility of this component
by design. He/she pointed out that, given this policy,
it is not right to assume that non-core inflation will
mechanically rebound and that this assumption led
to overestimations of headline inflation in 2019.
He/she added that such was the case of estimates
by economic forecasters and by Banco de México
itself, which, in May of this year adjusted upwards its
inflation estimates for the fourth quarter of 2019, from
3.4% to 3.7%, while, in early August, economic
forecasters had estimated inflation to be at 3.66% for
the end of 2019. He/she mentioned that these
estimates contrast significantly with the figure
estimated for the end of the year. Regarding the core
inflation outlook, some members stated that it is
expected to continue declining in December,
although one member pointed out that doubts persist
as to the pace at which it would decrease.

For 2020, the majority of members considered that
headline and core inflation will reflect both the
conditions of greater slack in the economy as well as
the cost pressures that could stem from the minimum
wage increase, which could raise them to moderately
higher levels than those anticipated in the last
Quarterly Report. One member stated that although
it is difficult to anticipate which would be the end
result of the interaction between the aforementioned
factors, since it is uncommon for the economy to face
labor cost pressures during the low phase of the
economic cycle, core inflation is expected to be

5


-----

subject to moderate pressures. Some members
pointed out that with the announced minimum wage
increase, one of the upward risks for inflation
materialized, which will make it difficult to attain the
3% target in 2020 as anticipated. One member
underlined that a transitory seasonal rebound in
inflation in the following months is expected. Another
member considered that several determinants that
have a delayed impact on core inflation have had a
favorable behavior during the year, and, thus, this
component is foreseen to continue decreasing in the
following months and headline inflation to continue at
levels close to the target in the next year.

As for upward risks to inflation, most members
mentioned the possibility of core inflation continuing
to show persistence and that the recent minimum
wage increase leads to wage revisions that exceed
productivity gains in different segments of the
employed population and that this generates costrelated pressures, affecting formal employment and
prices. In this regard, such members argued that the
effect on inflation of the minimum wage increase is
expected to be moderate. One member noted that
research on the lighthouse effect of the minimum
wage concludes that the impact should be marginal.
Another member stated that it is not clear that
minimum wage increases significantly affect inflation
and that evidence on the minimum wage increase in
the border area this year confirms it. He/she
explained that inflation in the northern region in 2019
is the lowest in the country - 2.24% in November –
and that it is even lower in the border area, despite
the fact that the minimum wage in nominal terms in
this region doubled in 2019. He/she added that
something similar can be said about the rest of the
country where, despite the increase of over 16% in
the minimum wage, observed inflation in 2019 will be
significantly below the target. He/she noted that a
wage increase may not be inflationary because: i) it
affects a relatively small segment of workers and the
wage bill, and ii) domestic labor markets probably
operate with distortions that have generated a gap
between wage and labor productivity, so that such
increases can be absorbed through adjustments in
profit margins. He/she pointed out that the wage
increase represents a negative supply shock, whose
possible impact on prices is, in any case, transitory,
and that the optimal response is not to tighten
monetary conditions that would worsen the negative
effect of the shock. Another member noted that wage
increases should be supported by productivity gains,
otherwise inflationary risks intensify with the
introduction of distortions in the price formation
processes and formal employment is negatively
affected. He/she added that, given the magnitude of


the wage increase, it is foreseeable that a significant
number of micro and small enterprises, which group
the largest number of workers earning the minimum
wage, will have to pass-through such adjustments to
the prices of their products, cut their number of
employees, or, in the worst case, abandon formality.
He/she noted that the recent announcement would
represent the second considerable and consecutive
increase to the minimum wage and that it is a factor
to which the central bank should remain attentive.

Most members added as an upward risk to inflation
that that the peso exchange rate comes under
pressure from external or domestic factors, although
the easing of certain external tensions and progress
in the ratification of the USMCA have reduced this
risk. One member argued that a possible rebound in
the exchange rate does not represent a great risk
because the peso has appreciated and multiple
studies have shown that the pass-through of foreign
exchange adjustments to prices is not significant in
economies with a flexible exchange rate, a prudent
fiscal policy and a central bank with high credibility.
He/she also mentioned that given the risk of
exchange rate pressures, monetary policy must not
strengthen such variable as a factor to contain
inflation, because doing so weakens its function as a
variable to prevent imbalances in the balance of
payments. The majority added the threat of tariffs by
the United States and the adoption of compensatory
measures, although this risk has diminished more
noticeably after a new trade agreement was reached.
In this regard, one member emphasized, that even if
the ratification of the USMCA is achieved next year,
it should not be forgotten that this agreement does
not oblige the US Executive to refrain from
establishing tariffs or other unilateral trade

restrictions, which could represent new price shocks.
In addition, most members mentioned the risks of
public finances deteriorating or of increases in
agricultural, livestock product or energy prices being
greater than expected, which could make non-core
inflation revert to higher levels. One member
highlighted that, although energy prices are
administered by the government and do not
automatically reflect the evolution of their

international references, increases in the latter
generate pressures on public finances, which
indirectly impact the dynamics of domestic prices
through different channels. Finally, one member
added the possibility that a temporary seasonal
rebound in inflation in the coming months shows a
greater persistence and that economic slack
continues to have no clear impact on inflation.

6


-----

As for downside risks, most members mentioned: i)
a greater appreciation of the peso exchange rate,
which could be associated with a context of greater
risk appetite in international financial markets or with
the final steps towards ratifying the trade agreement
with the United States and Canada; ii) a widening of
slack conditions or their impact on core inflation
being greater than foreseen; and iii) that the prices of
certain goods included in the non-core subindex
register lower rates of change. One member added a
lower pass-through of the minimum wage increase to
prices, given the expected slack conditions, and that
the favorable behavior of producer prices leads to a
decline of the core component. He/she pointed out
that the producer price inflation is close to zero and
that several studies indicate a correspondence with
consumer prices after a certain lag. In this context,
the majority pointed out that uncertainty still persists
as to the risks that could make inflation deviate from
the trajectory described previously. One member
noted that this balance of risks applies to an inflation
trajectory adjusted upwards as a result of the
materialization of one of its risks. Another stated that,
in his/her opinion, the balance is uncertain for the
long term and symmetrical in the short term. One
member mentioned that the referred balance has
become slightly upward-biased. Another member
considered that inflation risks have decreased
significantly during the year. He/she mentioned that
not only the external environment is much more
favorable, but that the domestic factors that
generated more uncertainty have been resolved
favorably.

Most members agreed that, although domestic
financial markets underwent episodes of volatility
associated with social developments in some Latin
American countries, financial assets in Mexico and
the peso exchange rate recently exhibited a positive
behavior. Some members pointed out that the
agreement to approve the USMCA together with the
monetary policy stance have contributed to such
results. The majority mentioned that long-term
interest rates decreased. One member added that
real interest rates have also decreased. He/she
argued that, given the complex environment, the
sound macroeconomic and monetary policy stances
have been fundamental in making the nominal and
real yield curves, especially in their longer maturities,
adjust downwards in an orderly manner. He/she
noted that both short-term interest rate expectations
and term premia have decreased in recent months.
The majority of members noted that the Mexican
peso appreciated, although some members stressed


that episodes of volatility were observed. One
member highlighted that the Mexican peso

performed better than other Latin American

currencies, some of which have been more exposed
to political and social risks, either directly or by
contagion. Another member emphasized that the
stock market registered gains, accumulating a
positive annual return close to 6.5%. As for risk
premia, some members underlined the reduction in
the CDS premium. One member argued that, despite
such reduction, the level of the premium implies that
the market continues discounting a downgrade of the
sovereign rating.

Some members mentioned that, despite the
favorable evolution of the external environment, risks
persist that may affect the performance of domestic
financial assets. As for external risks, they
highlighted the possibility of shocks, including for
instance, the contagion from emerging economies,
mainly from Latin America, or those associated with
the electoral process in the United States. As for
domestic risks, they mentioned the uncertainty about
Pemex's credit rating. One member pointed out that
significant challenges persist that are still pending
solution. He/she underlined the potential implication,
both for public finances and the sovereign credit
rating, of the loss of Pemex’s investment grade, while
another mentioned that expectations of a downgrade
are still latent. One member argued that the balance
of risks for financial markets has improved
throughout the year, due to a more favorable external
environment and to the resolution of domestic
uncertainty factors. He/she noted that, in that period,
interest rates for terms greater than three years
decreased around 200 basis points, the peso
appreciated around 4%, and Mexico's CDS

decreased 75 basis points. He/she stressed that
fiscal discipline was maintained throughout the year,
a preliminary trade agreement was reached with the
US Congress, and Pemex's rating has been
maintained. As to the latter, he/she pointed out that
Pemex’s CDS premium has decreased significantly
due to the support of the Federal Government, the
refinancing and debt repurchase operations, and the
increase in crude oil production.

The majority of members mentioned that the current
environment continues to pose risks that may affect
the country’s macroeconomic conditions, its ability to
grow, and the economy’s price formation process. In
this regard, they highlighted that it is particularly
important that, in addition to a prudent and firm
monetary policy, measures to foster an environment
of confidence and certainty for investment and higher

7


-----

productivity are adopted, and that public finances are
consolidated in a sustainable way. In this context,
they stated that strengthening the credit rating
outlook for the sovereign and Pemex’s debt, as well
as achieving the fiscal targets for 2019 and the goals
set in the 2020 Economic Package are necessary.
They also pointed out that strengthening the rule of
law, tackling corruption, and fighting insecurity are
equally imperative. One member added that
increasing productivity through the adoption of new
technologies and human capital investment is also
important. Another member underlined that all these
measures would prevent a further deterioration of
potential growth. One member highlighted that,
based on the opinion of business owners and
economic forecasters, among the obstacles to
economic activity in Mexico, the factors related to
governance problems (public insecurity, political
instability, impunity and corruption) and uncertainty
in domestic economic conditions stand out. In this
regard, another member stated that the main action
that could be taken to stimulate economic activity is
the implementation of public policy measures that
generate economic certainty and encourage

investment.

Delving into Pemex's financial situation, one member
pointed out that one rating agency, whose position
will be crucial in defining the future of Pemex's
investment grade, has reiterated the negative outlook
on the company's rating, based on the one
corresponding to the sovereign debt, the

deterioration of Pemex's credit profile, and its
perception that Pemex's investment expenditures will
be insufficient to replenish its crude oil reserves in
2019 and 2020. Another member mentioned that
attention remains focused on validating the

company's capacity to increase its production, and
that its continuing dependence on the Federal
Government’s budget support is unsustainable.
Regarding public finances, some members

highlighted that the goals for 2020 are based on
optimistic assumptions and that considering the use
of resources from the Budget Revenue Stabilization
Fund (FEIP, for its acronym in Spanish) this year, the
funds to deal with contingencies will be reduced
considerably. One member added that the primary
surplus has been achieved through underspending
and through the use of resources from the FEIP.
He/she stated that using extraordinary resources to
face income shortfalls in the absence of unforeseen
shocks does not address the structural problems.
He/she added that fiscal pressures are expected to
continue increasing due to the upward trend in
pension spending by the Federal Government.
Another member stressed that, at the beginning of


the year, there were fears about the Federal
Government not complying with fiscal discipline;
however, to date, results show that fiscal discipline
was maintained. One member warned that

challenges for public finances over the medium and
long terms should be considered and that, in this
context, the announcement that the tax authorities
are considering a tax reform is of great relevance.

Regarding the monetary policy decision, considering
the lower levels registered by headline inflation, its
outlook within the timeframe in which monetary policy
operates, the more ample slack in the economy, as
well as the recent behavior of external and domestic
yield curves, Banco de México’s Governing Board
decided by majority to lower the target for the
overnight interbank interest rate by 25 basis points to
7.25%.

Similarly, one member added two other reasons for
lowering the policy rate: i) that the monetary signal
and its effect on the cost of financing must be
consistent with a real rate of return, which is following
a downward trend due to the economy’s cyclical
conditions and that maintaining a disparity between
these rates for a long period would generate
distortions in investment decisions; and, ii) that a
monetary policy easing would contribute, albeit
modestly, to an economic recovery for the following
year.

The same member elaborated on the importance of
the relative and absolute monetary policy stances
given that they summarize the multiple factors that
must be considered in the monetary policy decision.
He/she mentioned that the former is essential in the
case of small and open economies, as it reflects the
degree of tightness in terms of the global monetary
conditions and of the differences between domestic
and external inflation. He/she added that, from a risk
appetite perspective, such stance also measures if
the level of relative tightness allows to compensate
investors for risk premia. He/she expressed that
accommodative monetary policies worldwide, in
particular that of the Federal Reserve, and the
increase in risk appetite, provide a margin of
maneuver for Mexico’s relative monetary policy.

As to the absolute monetary policy stance, said
member explained that it considers the inflation
target and the neutral rate. When the level of
monetary tightness is compared in these terms, the
conditions of the economy’s real rate vis-à-vis its
equilibrium level are implicitly assessed.

Furthermore, leaving the policy rate in the restrictive

8


-----

segment, above the neutral rate, as the current
absolute policy stance suggests, communicates to
society the firm intention of consistently attaining the
inflation target. In sum, the relative and absolute
policy stances allow to calibrate the direction and
magnitude of the adjustments in the policy rate.
Moreover, their assessment suggests that the
monetary policy stance is tighter than necessary.

Therefore, if the expected convergence of inflation to
its target is confirmed, the same member mentioned
that a greater monetary policy easing might be
considered. Said member argued that the possibility
of inflation being above the foreseen trajectory would
affect Banco de México’s credibility, which reaffirms
the need for gradually adjusting the policy rate within
the restrictive range.

In this regard, he/she stated that the speed of these
adjustments should consider its effect on the
expectations of economic agents. He/she mentioned
that firms and analysts make conjectures about
future monetary policy actions, which affect their
inflation expectations. In determining the speed of
adjustment, Banco de México must minimize the
costs to its credibility in case that inflation deviates
from the anticipated trajectory. He pointed out that, in
the context of a weak economy with a materialization
of negative risks, a greater than necessary monetary
policy easing would imply a higher cost for the central
bank’s credibility and the formation of inflation
expectations, as compared to a lower than necessary
easing.

He/she emphasized that, in this case, a conservative
behavior strengthens the perception of commitment
to the inflation target, and to the central bank’s
independence, in addition to highlighting that Banco
de México’s decisions are based on an objective
view and supported by technical elements. He added
that an advantage associated with a cautious
monetary policy is that it moderates financial market
expectations about the actions of the central bank,
and allows an orderly evolution of interest rates with
lower costs for the economy.

Finally, the same member suggested that the fact
that monetary policy is in a rate-cutting cycle that is
subject to the evolution of inflation, its expectations
and balance of risks, be included in the guidance of
the monetary policy statement. He/she considered
that this would acknowledge that the policy rate has
been lowered on four consecutive occasions and that
the expected trajectory of inflation has been better
than anticipated under multiple scenarios. Including
the above into the statement would convey a clearer


and more credible message, which would be in line
with maintaining a restrictive policy stance in
absolute and relative terms for as long as necessary,
but not as restrictive as the current one.

One member considered that a 25-basis point
adjustment to the policy rate is insufficient to
acknowledge the progress attained in the

macroeconomic realm and in mitigating risks in the
last months, and that this would mean remaining
behind the curve already anticipated by the market.
In particular, he/she made reference to inflation being
below target, the exchange rate being at levels below
19 pesos per US dollar, and the fiscal policy being
conducted prudently. The same member added that
all of the aforementioned has taken place in a context
of null growth. He/she stated that previous
communications have mentioned that monetary
policy decisions will be taken based on available data
and considered that the current conditions allow for
a greater monetary policy adjustment. He/she added
that this is possibly the last opportunity to make an
adjustment of a greater magnitude. The same
member mentioned that monetary policy must
contribute to improve the overall economy’s
performance, and that this does not imply putting at
risk the central bank’s main mandate. He/she
mentioned that not doing it this way would be unwise
and unjustified. The same member pointed out that
the tight monetary policy has affected consumption
and investment, in an environment in which the real
yield of government bonds is above the expected real
rate of return of many productive investment projects.
He/she indicated that a too-high interest rate
incentivizes savings by increasing the yield of bonds
and also raises the cost of credit. That both channels
hamper consumption and investment and, therefore,
growth. Also, that a high interest rate affects public
finances directly by increasing the public debt’s
financial cost and indirectly through its negative
effect on growth and tax collection. He/she
mentioned that the deterioration of public finances
and the lower growth generated by the high interest
rates tend to increase delinquency rates and make
public debt less attractive, which leads to higher risk
premia. Said member indicated that, for this reason,
a too-high interest rate, which in principle seeks to
shield us from some risks, might paradoxically
become a destabilizing factor.

The majority of members pointed out that given the
outlook of high uncertainty that still prevails,
maintaining a prudent monetary policy is necessary.
Such members mentioned that monetary policy must
be adjusted gradually and mainly respond to the
evolution of inflation relative to its foreseen trajectory,

9


-----

and incorporate all information available on the
economy’s current situation and characteristics, in
such a way as to allow headline inflation to converge
to its target in an orderly and sustained manner. They
added that significant domestic and external risks
prevail. Such members were also concerned about
medium- and long-term inflation expectations

remaining above the 3% target.

One member considered that since the last policy
decision, monetary policy faces a more complex
situation, given that the current environment is
characterized by factors that have differentiated
effects on inflation. On the one hand, slack conditions
have widened and the balance of risks for growth is
biased to the downside, while headline inflation is at
target; and, on the other hand, the risk of a greater
than expected increase to the minimum wage
materialized. Another member mentioned that, on
this occasion, two additional factors had to be
considered. First, a lesser uncertainty stemming from
external factors such as the USMCA. Said member
pointed out that the latter shows how strengthening
confidence can increase the margin of maneuver for
monetary policy. He/she added that this highlights
the importance of dissipating the domestic sources
of concern, due to both their direct impact on the
economy and the fact that it would allow a more
flexible implementation of the different economic
policy instruments. In this regard, he/she pointed out
that monetary policy’s capacity to respond will be
very limited if domestic uncertainty does not
decrease significantly. Second, he/she highlighted
the outlook of an upward adjustment in the trajectory
of inflation, a risk that has materialized via wages and
that apparently is the core component’s main source
of persistence.

Another member mentioned that the process of
monetary policy easing is determined period after
period depending on the trajectory of headline
inflation and its components towards the target. In
particular, the assessment must take into

consideration the following factors: the possible
rebound of inflation due to the core component’s
persistence; the potential reversion of the non-core
component; the probable rebound of the economy in
2020; and, the evolution of domestic and external
risks. One member pointed out that the risks faced
by the economy are not only those derived from its
cyclical position. There are other challenges and risk
factors, external and domestic, which affect the
economy, the price formation process, and inflation.
He/she mentioned that the setting of the monetary
policy stance must not only foster that the projections
for headline inflation remain around the target within


the forecast horizon, but also take into consideration:
i) an external environment characterized by low
growth, with obstacles to investment, and low
inflationary pressures and interest rates, and, at the
margin, by a greater risk appetite; ii) a considerable
widening of slack conditions in the economy; iii) the
recent decline of headline inflation as a result of noncore inflation being atypically low; iv) core inflation’s
resistance to decline and whose behavior will be
determined by the combination of a greater amount
of slack in the economy and the direct and indirect
effects generated by the minimum wage increase;
and, v) the need to foster appropriate conditions in
the fixed income market and in short-term interest
rates. As to the latter consideration he/she
mentioned that the behavior of interest rates must
ensure an orderly adjustment of the economy; be in
line with the behavior of the domestic and external
yield curve, and with risk premia; maintain the
attractiveness of domestic fixed income markets,
generate confidence and consider global monetary
conditions; and, propitiate that the yield curve
incorporates short-term interest rate expectations
that are consistent with the central bank’s objectives
in the timeframe in which monetary policy operates.
He/she emphasized that the latter suggests the
convenience of adjusting the monetary policy stance
gradually under the current environment. He/she
added that in this process it is necessary to identify,
in the best possible way, the economy’s conditions,
the risks it faces, as well as the possible
vulnerabilities that could materialize.

Another member mentioned that a monetary policy
easing of more than 25 basis points would not be
convenient, as it would probably validate the
inflationary impact of the minimum wage

adjustments, which would justify having long-term
inflation expectations above the target. He/she
added that an action of this sort with a view to
stimulate economic growth, would be difficult to
reconcile with the theoretical and empirical evidence
of economic growth determinants, and does not
consider the opinion of business people or analysts
on the factors that are hampering the growth of the
Mexican economy. It would also leave aside
evidence on interest rates having a modest impact
on economic growth, even in the short term. For all
of the above reasons, an action like the one
described would certainly be perceived as being
incompatible with the central bank’s mandate.
He/she added that monetary policy must strive for the
convergence of inflation to its target without imposing
excessive costs to the economy while, at the same
time, preventing inflation expectations from

becoming unanchored. He/she mentioned that the

10


-----

argument that Banco de México must adjust its
monetary policy stance in view of a wide nominal
interest rate spread with other economies, does not
consider the need for including other risk factors into
the analysis, such as the exchange rate volatility.
Once the latter is considered, the spread decreases
significantly.

Another member highlighted that the monetary policy
statement must continue to communicate that in an
environment characterized by high risks and great
uncertainty, future monetary policy will depend
mainly on the evolution of inflation and on its
deviations from the foreseen trajectory.

**3. MONETARY POLICY DECISION**

To guide its monetary policy actions, Banco de
México’s Governing Board follows closely the
development of inflation vis-à-vis its forecasts, taking
into account the monetary policy stance and the time
frame in which monetary policy operates. In this
process, it uses available information on all inflation
determinants as well as on medium- and long-term
inflation expectations, including the balance of risks
for such factors. Monetary policy must also act
prudently if for any reason the uncertainty faced by
the economy increases significantly. In this context,
considering the lower levels registered by headline
inflation, its outlook within the time frame in which
monetary policy operates, the more ample slack in
the economy, as well as the recent behavior of
external and domestic yield curves, Banco de
México’s Governing Board decided by majority to
lower the target for the overnight interbank interest
rate by 25 basis points to 7.25%. One member voted
for lowering the target to 7.00%. In order to
consolidate a low and stable inflation, in an
environment in which price formation and slack
conditions in the economy are subject to risks, the
Governing Board will continue to follow closely all
factors and elements of uncertainty that have an
impact on inflation and its outlook, and will take the
required actions based on incoming information so
that the policy rate is consistent with the orderly and
sustained convergence of headline inflation to Banco
de México’s target within the time frame in which
monetary policy operates.

Banco de México’s Governing Board will maintain a
prudent monetary policy stance and, under the
current environment of uncertainty, will follow closely


the potential pass-through of exchange rate
fluctuations to prices, Mexico’s relative monetary
policy stance in an external environment that it is still
subject to risks, and the behavior of slack conditions
and cost-related pressures in the economy. In the
presence and possible persistence of factors that, by
their nature, involve risks to both inflation and its
expectations, monetary policy will be adjusted in a
timely and firm manner to achieve an orderly and
sustained convergence of inflation to its 3% target
and to strengthen the anchoring of medium- and
long-term inflation expectations so that they attain
such target.

**4. VOTING**

Alejandro Díaz de León-Carrillo, Irene EspinosaCantellano, Javier Eduardo Guzmán-Calafell, and
Jonathan Ernest Heath-Constable voted in favor of
lowering the overnight interbank interest rate by 25
basis points to a level of 7.25%.

Gerardo Esquivel-Hernández voted in favor of
lowering the overnight interbank interest rate by 50
basis points to a level of 7.00%.

**5. DISSENTING OPINIONS/VOTES**

Gerardo Esquivel-Hernández

I believe that the economic juncture in which the
decision was taken was probably one of the last
favorable opportunities in this cycle to make a more
decisive monetary policy adjustment. In my opinion,
lowering the policy rate by only 25 basis points is
insufficient to acknowledge the progress attained in
reducing inflation and in mitigating inflationary risks
over the last months. An adjustment of this
magnitude simply means remaining behind the curve
already anticipated by the market. On numerous
occasions it has been said that monetary policy
decisions will be taken based on facts and observed
figures. I believe that the combination of an exchange
rate close to 19 pesos per US dollar, an annual
inflation below target, the significant reduction of
external and domestic risks, and null economic
growth could fully justify opting for a more decisive
policy action. The alleged inflationary risk attributed
to the minimum wage is in fact very low. This year’s
evidence, both in the northern border as well as in
the rest of the country, suggests it. Overestimating
this risk may end up influencing inflation expectations
and becoming a self-fulfilling prophecy.

11


-----

**ANNEX**

The information in this Annex was prepared for this
meeting by the staff of Banco de México’s General
Directorate of Economic Research and General
Directorate of Central Bank Operations. It does not
necessarily reflect the considerations of the

members of the Governing Board as to the monetary
policy decision.

**A.1. External conditions**

**A.1.1. World economic activity**

During the fourth quarter of 2019, in light of the
uncertainty at a global level that continued to affect
business confidence, the world economy seems to
have continued to decelerate, while its growth
outlook has been revised downwards. Although the
risks that the global economy faces have subsided
recently due to the agreements on trade-related
issues reached between the United States and some
of its main partners, especially China, as well as by
the election results in the United Kingdom, and signs
of stabilization in certain leading indicators (Chart 1),
the balance of risks for world economic activity
remains biased to the downside. In particular, the
possibility of additional bouts of uncertainty that could
negatively affect the outlook for global economic
growth, and which may be related to a new
escalation of trade tensions or with social and
political uncertainty in several regions of the world,
persists. The above has taken place in an
environment where headline and core inflation
remain at low levels and below their respective
central banks’ targets. In this context, those
institutions have maintained accommodative

monetary policy stances.


7

6

5

4

3

2

1

0

-1

-2


**Chart 1**

**Global Activity Indicators**

Annual percentage change of 3-month moving

average and deviation from 50, s. a.

Industrial production

World trade

PMI: New orders

September

November

2015 2016 2017 2018 2019


s. a. / Seasonally adjusted figures.
Source: CPB Netherlands and Markit.

In the United States, available information suggests
that GDP growth during the fourth quarter may be
slightly below the average observed in the previous
three quarters (Chart 2). In particular, private
consumption appears to be slowing down, after
having remained strong throughout the year,
whereas non-residential investment is expected to
continue exhibiting weakness. In contrast, residential
investment is expected to continue growing at a
modest rate, while recent data suggest a positive
contribution to growth from net exports due to the
large drop in imports. Finally, public spending is
expected to continue supporting short-term growth,
although this stimulus would start to fade throughout
2020.

**Chart 2**

**United States: Real GDP and its Components**


6

4

2

0

-2

-4

-6


6

4

2

0

|Chart 2 United States: Real GDP and its Components Annualized quarterly percentage change and contributions in percentage points, s. a.|Col2|Col3|Col4|
|---|---|---|---|
|Forecast Public spending Net exports Inventories Non-residential investment Residential investment Private consumption Total||||
|I II III IV 2016|I II III IV 2017|I II III IV 2018|I II III IV 2019|


s. a. / Seasonally adjusted figures.
Note: Figures for the fourth quarter correspond to GDP Now estimates of
December 17, 2019.Source: Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA) and
Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta.

12


-----

US industrial production recovered in November,
growing at a monthly rate of 1.1%, after having
contracted 0.9 and 0.4% in October and September,
respectively. This expansion was partly due to the
rebound of manufacturing production, largely

attributed in turn to the recovery of automotive
production after the labor conflict in this sector was
settled (Chart 3). Excluding motor vehicles and auto
parts, the US Federal Reserve estimates that
manufacturing production grew 0.3%. Certain
leading indicators, such as the Purchasing

Managers’ Index (PMI), point to a certain stabilization
of this sector at the end of the fourth quarter.

In this environment, the US labor market continued
showing signs of strength. In particular, the non-farm
payroll grew at a faster rate in November, increasing
by 156,000 and 266,000 new jobs in October and
November, respectively. Although this was partly due
to the normalization of labor conditions in the
automotive sector, the growth of employment was
generalized. In turn, the unemployment rate
decreased from 3.6 to 3.5%, once more reaching its
lowest levels since the end of 1969. In this context,
wages continued to grow at a moderate rate.

**Chart 3**

**USA: Manufacturing Production**

Monthly change and annualized quarterly change of

3-month moving average in percent, s. a.

1.5 10

November

Monthly

1.2 8

Quarterly annualized

0.9 6

0.6 4

0.3 2

0.0 0

-0.3 -2

-0.6 -4

-0.9 -6

2015 2016 2017 2018 2019

s. a. / Seasonally adjusted figures.
Source: US Federal Reserve.

In the euro area, available indicators suggest that
during the fourth quarter of the year economic growth
would continue to be weak, mainly reflecting the lack
of vigor of international trade, in an environment of
persistent uncertainty that has been affecting
manufacturing activity and investment spending in
the region. In particular, retail sale indicators
available for October appear to show a moderation
of consumption during that period. In addition,
although the Composite Purchasing Managers’


Index showed signs of stabilization in November, its
level suggests that manufacturing growth may
remain weak. Despite the above described

environment, the unemployment rate decreased
from 7.6% in September to 7.5% in October.

In Japan, GDP growth during the third quarter was
revised upwards from 0.2 to 1.8%, reflecting the
strong growth of private consumption in anticipation
to the VAT increase. In October, the entry into force
of this rate increase contributed to the highest
contraction in retail sales of the last 10 years. Despite
the apparent weakening of economic activity at the
beginning of the fourth quarter, the unemployment
rate remained at 2.4% in October. In this context, the
Japanese authorities announced a fiscal stimulus
package of around 2% of GDP that is expected to
boost economic activity in 2020 and 2021.

In emerging economies, available information
indicates that most of them continued registering
moderate growth rates during the fourth quarter of
the year. In China, economic activity indicators, such
as retail sales and industrial production, recovered
slightly in November. Nevertheless, economic
activity is expected to continue its trend towards a
gradual deceleration in the medium term due to the
economy’s high leverage and to the trade conflicts
with the United States. As for Latin America, social
and political tensions have started to be reflected in
a decline in growth expectations for the region and in
a high volatility in its financial markets.

International commodity prices registered a mixed
behavior during the last weeks. International crude oil
prices registered a high volatility between midNovember and early December due to the
uncertainty regarding the trade tensions between
China and the United and news on US oil production
levels. Nevertheless, in the last days, oil prices
trended upwards, lying close to their highest levels of
the year. This was due to a fall in crude oil extraction
by some Organization of Petroleum Exporting
Countries (OPEC), particularly Iran and Angola, the
extension of the oil production cut agreement
between OPEC and its allies, and the fall in US crude
oil inventories. Grain prices followed a slight upward
trend given growing expectations that China will
increase its purchases of US grains, following the
provisions of the preliminary agreement reached
between both countries, and delays in US summer
harvests. Finally, industrial metal prices followed a
downward trend due to the sharp fall in zinc, nickel,
and copper prices stemming from the significant
deceleration of the world manufacturing sector.

13


-----

**A.1.2. Monetary policy and international financial**
**markets**

Headline and core inflation of the main advanced
economies have remained at low levels and below
their respective central banks’ targets, despite the
continuing tightness of their labor markets (Chart 4).
Similarly, inflation expectations drawn from surveys
and from market instruments have remained at low
levels. In the United States, headline inflation, as
measured by the personal consumption expenditure
deflator, remained below the US Federal Reserve’s
2% target, while core inflation decreased in October
partly due to the effect of the methodological change
for measuring clothing and apparel prices. In the euro
area, headline and core inflation increased slightly in
November. In Japan, both remained at very low
levels in October. In most emerging economies,
inflation remained in line or below their central banks’
targets, although in certain Asian economies,
particularly China and India, headline inflation
continued to increase due to the effects of the higher
prices of pork.

**Chart 4**

**Selected Advanced Economies: Core Inflation**

Annual percentage change

3

2

1


0

-1


2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019


1/ Refers to the Personal Consumption Expenditures Price Index (PCE).
2/ Excludes fresh food, energy, and the direct effect of the consumption tax
increase of 2014.
3/ Excludes food, energy, and the effect of adjustments on indirect taxes
(CPIX).
Source: Haver Analytics, BEA, Statistical Office of the European Union
(Eurostat), and Statistics Bureau (Japan).

In this context of low growth forecasts, of inflation
persistently below the main central banks’ targets,
and of high risks for the global economy, the major
central banks have maintained accommodative
monetary policies (Chart 5).


**Chart 5**

**Reference Rates and Implied Trajectories in**

**OIS Curves[1/]**

Percent

3.0% **― US Federal Reserve***

**― Bank of England** Forecasts
**― Bank of Japan**

2.5% **― Bank of Canada**

**― European Central Bank deposit rate**
**― OIS implicit trajectory 16 Dec 2019**

2.0% **--- OIS implicit trajectory 11 Nov 2019**

**--- OIS implicit trajectory 31 Dec 2018**

1.5%

1.0%

0.5%

0.0%

-0.5%

-1.0% End of 2018 End of 2019 End of 2020

2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020

1/ OIS: Fixed floating interest rate swap where the fixed interest rate is the
effective overnight reference rate.

- In the case of the US observed reference rate, the average interest rate of
the federal funds target range is used (1.50% - 1.75%).
Source: Bloomberg.

In its December meeting, as anticipated, the US
Federal Reserve left the target range for the federal
funds rate unchanged at 1.5-1.75%. In its statement,
this central bank reiterated that the current monetary
policy stance is appropriate to ensure a sustained
growth of economic activity, sound labor conditions,
and inflation close to its 2% symmetric target, and
eliminated the reference to uncertainty regarding
said scenario. The medians of the Fed’s projections
on the federal funds rate suggest that this rate would
remain unchanged in 2020 and would increase by 25
basis points in 2021, contrasting with the implied path
of the federal funds rate futures, which continues to
reflect the expectation of an additional cut in 2020.
This central bank reiterated that, in determining its
future actions, it will take into consideration the
implications of available information, including the
development of global economic activity and low
inflationary pressures. In this regard, the Chairman
of the US Federal Reserve pointed out that, in order
to support a raise in the federal funds rate, inflation
would need to increase significantly and persistently.

In its December meeting, as expected, the European
Central Bank (ECB) left unchanged its monetary
policy stance. As to its forward guidance, this central
bank reiterated that Monetary Policy Committee
members anticipate that rates remain at their current
levels or below them until inflation robustly converges
to a level sufficiently close to but below 2%. In
addition, in her first press conference, the ECB
President highlighted that although inflation is
moderate and growth is weak, there are signs of a

14


-----

certain stabilization of economic activity. She also
pointed out that this central bank will start revising its
monetary policy strategy in January and that such
revision will probably last until the end of 2020.

The Bank of Japan did not modify its monetary policy
stance in its December meeting. In said meeting it
reiterated that it will leave interest rates at their
current or lower levels until it is certain that the 2%
inflation target is not at risk. The Bank of Japan
Chairman highlighted that, although the external and
domestic environment has improved slightly, risks to
inflation and economic activity remain biased to the
downside and thus monetary policy maintains an
accommodative stance. He also pointed out that
although a cut in reference rates remains an
alternative, the costs and benefits of this option must
be assessed.

The Bank of Canada left its policy interest rate
unchanged at 1.75% in its December meeting. In its
statement, this central bank mentioned that

economic growth decelerated during the third
quarter, although it highlighted the sound growth rate
of investment spending. This central bank identified
trade conflicts and their associated uncertainty as the
main sources of risk for its economic outlook and
pointed out that future decisions on the path of the
reference interest rate will be determined by its
assessment of the adverse effect that such conflicts
may have on the components of external demand
that have largely explained the strength of Canada’s
economy, such as consumption and the housing
sector.

In its December meeting, the Bank of England left its
policy rate at 0.75% and did not modify the size of its
government bond purchases. Two members once
again voted in favor of cutting the policy rate by 25
basis points. The Monetary Policy Committee
highlighted the improvement in the economic
outlook. In particular, it pointed out that consumer
and business confidence may recover in the short
term given the lower uncertainty regarding the United
Kingdom’s exit process from the European Union
and the recent preliminary trade agreement between
the United States and China. In this context, this
central bank reiterated that its monetary policy
stance will depend on the course followed by the
economy, which will be influenced by the United
Kingdom’s exit process from the European Union
and by the outlook for the world economy.

In emerging economies, some central banks have
continued to ease their monetary policy stances. In
particular, the People’s Bank of China cut the 7-day


reverse repo rate from 2.55 to 2.50% for the first time
since October 2015, while it lowered the one-year
Loan Prime Rate (LPR) from 4.20 to 4.15% and the
5-year LPR from 4.85 to 4.80%. Expectations that
this central bank will continue to gradually ease its
monetary policy stance in order to boost economic
activity strengthened. Other central banks, such as
those of Brazil, Turkey and Russia, also lowered their
reference interest rates. Some others implemented
other type of measures to face the deterioration of
their economies and the volatility of financial
markets, associated, in several cases, with social
conflicts. In this regard, Chile announced

interventions in its foreign exchange market, while
leaving its monetary policy rate unchanged.

As to financial markets, these exhibited a high
sensitivity to the decline of certain risk factors, which
has led to greater risk appetite among investors.
Thus, during the last month, the financial markets of
advanced economies exhibited moderate

adjustments differentiated by asset class. Stock
indexes registered slight gains; interest rates of
government bonds showed limited mixed

adjustments; and the US dollar depreciated slightly
(Chart 6).

Financial assets of emerging economies registered a
higher volatility, especially those of Latin America
due to the presence of idiosyncratic factors. Inflows
towards emerging economies’ financial assets
recovered, although capital inflows were

concentrated in equity assets. In contrast, fixed
income markets registered moderate outflows in the
last weeks. The currencies of these economies
fluctuated slightly, except for specific cases, such as
the Chilean peso, which continued to exhibit a high
volatility (Chart 7).

15


-----

**Chart 6**

**Change in Selected Financial Indicators**

**from November 11, 2019 to December 16, 2019**

Percent, basis points

12% 60


10%

8%

6%

4%

2%

0%

-2%

-4%


50

40

30

20

10

0


-10

-20


1/ MSCI Emerging Markets Index (includes 24 countries).
2/ DXY: Weighted average of the nominal exchange rate of the six main
world-traded currencies (calculated by Intercontinental Exchange, ICE) with
the following weights: EUR (57.6%), JPY (13.6%), GBP (11.9%), CAD
(9.1%), SEK (4.2%), and CHF (3.6%).
3/ J.P. Morgan Index constructed from a weighted average of the nominal
exchange rate of emerging economies’ currencies with the following
weights: TRY (8.3%), RUB (8.3%), HUF (8.3%), ZAR (8.3%), BRL (11.1%),
MXN (11.1%), CLP (11.1%), CNH (11.1%), INR (11.1%), and SGD (11.1%).
Source: Bloomberg and ICE.

**Chart 7**

**Emerging Economies: Financial Assets**

**Performance from November 11, 2019**

**to December 16, 2019**


social and political uncertainty in several Latin
American countries; and, an escalation of

geopolitical tensions in the Middle East, among
others.

**A.2. Current situation of the Mexican economy**

**A.2.1. Mexican markets**

Since Banco de Mexico’s previous monetary policy
decision, the prices of financial assets in Mexico
exhibited a positive behavior, although some
episodes of sharp volatility, mostly related with social
events in some Latin American countries, were
observed during the period (Chart 8).

In particular, the peso/dollar exchange rate fluctuated
in a broad range of 18.90-19.66 pesos per US dollar,
closing the period at 18.94 pesos per US dollar,
appreciating by 0.76%. In turn, forward-looking
trading conditions for the peso exchange rate implied
in FX options continued to evolve favorably. Indeed,
the implied volatility of one-month options reached
the minimum levels of the last six years. For its part,
the median of peso exchange rate expectations by
forecasters from several financial institutions for the
end of 2019 were adjusted downwards from 19.75 to
19.60 pesos per US dollar, while those for the end of
2020 were slightly adjusted from 20.07 to 20.05
pesos per US dollar (Chart 9).

**Chart 8**

**Mexican Markets’ Performance and Trading**

**Conditions**

Percent, pesos/US dollar, index and basis points


46,000

45,000

44,000

43,000

42,000

41,000

40,000

39,000

38,000


5

0


25

20


15

10


Note: Interest rates correspond to interest rate swaps for 2-year/10-year Note: Interest rates correspond to interes rate swaps for 2-year/10-year maturities. In the
maturities. In the case of Argentina, rates in US dollars are used since they
are the most liquid ones and those that reflect more adequately the
performance of the fixed income market in that country.
Source: Bloomberg.

Several risk factors persist, such as a greater-thanexpected weakening of global economic activity; a
new escalation of trade tensions between the United
States and its main trade partners; uncertainty
regarding the condition for the United Kingdom’s exit
from the European Union, although this decreased
after the recent election results in that country; the
possible impeachment of the US President; higher


Range in year Range since last monetary policy decision 11-Nov-19 Last level


Note: For the Mexican peso volatility, the levels implied in 1-month
exchange rate options are considered. For the interest rate, a Garch model
(1,1) of daily fluctuations in all the curve since 2007 is considered. For
exchange rate volatility, the Vimex published by MexDer is considered.
Source: Prepared by Banco de México with Bloomberg and Proveedora
Integral de Precios (PIP) data.

16


9.5

9.0

8.5

8.0

7.5

7.0

6.5


20.4

20.2

20.0

19.8

19.6

19.4

19.2

19.0

18.8

18.6

18.4


M Bono


Volatility


Range in year Range since last monetary policy decision 11-Nov-19 Last level


-----

**Chart 9**

**Analysts’ Mexican Peso Exchange Rate**

**Expectations**

Pesos per US dollar

21.0


**Chart 11**

**Mexican Government Debt Market Trading**

**Conditions and Jun-27 Bond Rate**

Index (10-day moving average), percent


9.5

9.0

8.5

8.0

7.5

7.0

6.5

6.0

5.5

5.0


20.5

20.0


19.5

19.0


18.5


18.0

17.5

J    M   A J    A   O    D   F    A   J    A   O   D
2018                            2019


J F M M J A S O D J M A M J A S N D F M A J J A O N J F A M J A S O D

2016 2017 2018 2019

Note: Index calculated with the changes in bonds’ interest rates, volatility of
events, bid-ask spread, the average of the differences in quotes of intra-day
operations, and the daily interbank and customer traded volume.
Considering the aforementioned, percentiles since 2016 and the average of
percentiles for every day are calculated. The vertical line represents the
date of Banco de México’s latest monetary policy decision.
Source: Banco de México with PIP data.

As to expectations regarding the path of the
monetary policy target rate, information implied in the
TIIE (Interbank Equilibrium Interest Rate) swap curve
considers a 25-basis point cut, placing the funding
rate at levels of 7.25% by the end of the year (Chart
12), in line with the median forecasts of private sector
forecasters surveyed by Citibanamex. For the end of
2020, market variables incorporate rates of around
6.00%, while the median of said survey among
forecasters remained at 6.50%.


80

70

60

50

40

30

20

10

0


Mexican Peso End of 2019 End 2020

Note: The black vertical line represents Banco de México’s latest monetary
policy decision.
Source: Bloomberg and Citibanamex survey.

Interest rates of government securities registered
mixed and moderate fluctuations, with increases of
up to 7 basis points in the 1 to 3-year nodes and
decreases in the rest of the curve (Chart 10). It is
worth noting that, although these adjustments
occurred in a context where trading conditions
remained stable, the trading volume decreased due
to seasonal reasons (Chart 11).


**Chart 10**

**Nominal Yield on Government Securities**

Percent, basis points

8.00

7.80

7.60

7.40

7.20

7.00

6.80

6.60

6.40

11-nov-19 16-Dec-19 Change (11-nov-19 to16-Dec-19)

Source: PIP.


jun. 18J           O          F          J           N          M         A          D oct. 18 feb. 19 jul. 19 nov. 19 mar. 20 ago. 20 dic. 20

2018                    2019                              2020

Source: Prepared by Banco de México with Bloomberg data.


**Chart 12**

**Banxico Overnight Interbank Rate Implied in**

**TIIE IRS Curve**

PercentPercent

8.50


17


-----

**A.2.2. Economic activity in Mexico**

According to latest revised GDP data, during the third
quarter of 2019 economic activity remained stagnant
(Chart 13). Such behavior reflected the unfavorable
performance exhibited by investment and the
slowdown of exports, while private consumption
recovered slightly. Although available information for
the fourth quarter of 2019 is limited, the weakness of
economic activity is expected to persist during said
quarter.

**Chart 13**

**Gross Domestic Product**

Quarterly percentage change, s. a.

2

1

0

-1


**Chart 14**

**Total Manufacturing Exports**

Indices 2013 = 100, s. a.


170

160

150

140

130

120

110

100

90

80

J

2013


A J O J A J O J

2014 2015


A J O J

2016


A J O J

2017


A J O J

2018


A J O J

2019


A J O


-2


I

2013


II III IV I

2014


II III IV I

2015


II III IV I

2016


II III IV I

2017


II III IV I

2018


II III IV I

2019


Q-III

II III


s. a. Seasonally adjusted figures.
Source: Mexico’s National Accounts System (SCNM, for its acronym in
Spanish), INEGI.

As for external demand, at the beginning of the fourth
quarter of 2019 manufacturing exports continued to
slow down (Chart 14). Such evolution was due to the
downturn of automotive exports, consistent with the
fall in Mexico’s automotive production originated by
changes in the automotive production lines of several
auto assembly plants and the effects of strikes in this
sector in the United States. In particular, such fall is
explained by the lower exports to the United States,
given that those to the rest of the world recovered
slightly. This decrease was offset by the positive path
followed by non-automotive manufacturing exports,
which were bolstered by exports to the United States,
given that those to the rest of the world continued
trending downwards.


s. a. / Seasonally adjusted series and trend series based on data in nominal
USD. The former is represented by a solid line and the latter by a dotted
line.
Source: Prepared by Banco de México with data from the Tax
Administration Service (SAT, for its acronym in Spanish), the Ministry of the
Economy (SE, for its acronym in Spanish), Banco de México, the National
Institute of Statistics and Geography (INEGI, for its acronym in Spanish),
Mexico’s Merchandise Trade Balance, and the National System of
Statistical and Geographical Information (SNIEG, for its acronym in
Spanish).

As for domestic demand, according to its monthly
indicator, at the end of the third quarter of 2019
private consumption registered a slight recovery visà-vis the weakness observed at the end of 2018 and
the beginning of 2019. Such rebound is mainly
explained by the recovery of consumption of
imported goods, given that consumption of domestic
goods and services remained weak. More timely
indicators of consumption, albeit of less coverage,
such as retailer’s earnings and sales of

manufacturing industries that are more correlated
with domestic consumption, remain on a positive
trend. In contrast, sales of light vehicles have
continued trending downwards. In September 2019
the decreasing trend followed by gross fixed
investment since early 2018 continued to intensify.
The unfavorable performance of investment in
construction persisted, while investment in

machinery and equipment remained weak, albeit
recovering slightly at the margin.

As for production, the stagnation of economic activity
during the third quarter of 2019 reflected the
unfavorable performance of secondary activities and
the lackluster growth of tertiary activities, although
the latter slightly recovered towards the end of said
period (Chart 15), largely driven by the positive
contribution of transportation and warehousing;
finance and insurance; and, of real estate, rental and
leasing. As for industrial activity, it continued to
perform poorly at the beginning of the fourth quarter
of 2019. In particular, the downward trajectory

18


-----

followed by construction intensified further, while
manufactures decreased significantly, mainly due to
the contraction of transport equipment. In contrast,
mining, quarrying, and oil and gas extraction
remained relatively stable (Chart 16).

**Chart 15**

**Economic Activity Indicators**

Indices 2013 = 100, s. a.

120 140

Total IGAE 1/

Industrial production 2/

Services IGAE 1/

115 130

Agriculture and livestock products IGAE 1/

110 120

105 110

100 100

September

October

95 90

J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O

2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019

s. a. / Seasonally adjusted and trend series. The former is represented by a
solid line and the latter by a dotted line.
1/ Figures up to September 2019.
2/ Monthly Industrial Activity Indicator figures up to October 2019.
Source: Mexico’s National Accounts System (SCNM, for its acronym in
Spanish), INEGI.

**Chart 16**

**Industrial Activity[1/]**

Índices 2013 = 100, s. a.

130

120

110

100

90

Total

Mining (22.3%)

80

Manufacturing (49.7%)

70 Construction (23.3%)

Utilities (4.7%)

October

60

J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O

2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019

s. a. / Seasonally adjusted and trend series. The former is represented by a
thirdsolid line and the latter by a dotted line.
1/ Figures in parentheses correspond to its share in the total in 2013.
Source: Mexico’s National Accounts System (SCNM, for its acronym in
Spanish), INEGI.

As to the economy’s cyclical position, slack
conditions are estimated to have widened during the
third quarter of 2019, due to the stagnation of
economic activity. In particular, output gap estimates,
both based on total GDP and on GDP excluding the
oil sector, displayed more negative levels than in the
previous quarter (Chart 17). Available information for
the fourth quarter suggests that during that period a
widening of negative slack conditions might be
observed with respect to the previous quarter. As to


labor market conditions, both national and urban
unemployment rates remained at levels above those
registered in 2018 (Chart 18), while IMSS-insured
jobs continued to grow at a sluggish pace. As a result
of the behavior of productivity and real average
earnings, unit labor costs in the overall economy
continued trending upwards during the third quarter
of 2019 (Chart 19), while manufacturing unit labor
costs remained at relatively high levels.

**Chart 17**

**Output Gap Estimates [1/]**

**Excluding Oil Industry [4/ ]**

Potential output percentages, s. a.

8

Global Economic Activity Indicator 2/

6 Gross Domestic Product 2/

95% Confidence Interval 3/

4

2

0

-2

-4

-6

-8

-10

Q-III

September

-12

J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S

2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019

s. a. / Calculations based on seasonally adjusted figures.
1/ Output gap estimated with a tail-corrected Hodrick-Prescott filter; see
Banco de México (2009), “Inflation Report (April-June 2009)", p.74.
2/ GDP figures up to the third quarter of 2019 and of IGAE up to September
2019.
3/ Output gap confidence interval calculated with a method of unobserved
components.
4/ Excludes both oil and gas extraction, support activities for mining, and
petroleum and coal products' manufacturing.
Source: Prepared by Banco de México with INEGI data.

**Chart 18**

**National Unemployment Rate and Urban**

**Unemployment Rate**

Percent, s. a.

8.5

Urban unemployment rate

8.0

7.5 National unemployment rate

7.0

6.5

6.0

5.5

5.0

4.5

4.0

3.5

3.0

October

2.5

J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O

2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019

s. a. / Seasonally adjusted and trend series. The former is represented by a
solid line and the latter by a dotted line.
Source: National Survey of Occupations and Employment (ENOE, for its
acronym in Spanish), INEGI.

19


-----

**Chart 19**

**Global Index of Labor Productivity (IGPLE, for**

**its acronym in Spanish) and Unit Labor Costs [1/]**

Indices 2013 = 100, s. a.

120

Productivity

115 Unit labor costs

110

105

100

95


13

12

11

10

9

8

7

6

5

4

3

2

1


**Chart 20**

**Consumer Price Index**

Annual percentage change


90


0
Q- III


I II IIIIV I II IIIIV I II IIIIV I II IIIIV I II IIIIV I II IIIIV I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV I II III

2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019

s. a. / Seasonally adjusted and trend series. The former is represented by a
solid line and the latter by a dotted line. Trend series estimated by Banco
de México.
1/ Productivity based on hours worked.
Source: IGPLE published by INEGI. Unit labor costs prepared by Banco de
México with INEGI data.

In October 2019, domestic financing to the private
sector continued to slow down. Within it, the
deceleration that financing to private firms has been
registering since the second half of 2018 further
intensified, in turn due to the lower growth of bank
credit and to the contraction of debt issuance,. As to
the household segment, mortgages maintained the
dynamism they have been exhibiting throughout the
year, whereas consumer credit continued registering
a low growth rate. As for interest rates, those of firm
financing decreased, in line with the reduction of the
overnight funding interest rate. Interest rates of
mortgages, on the other hand, have remained stable
since the second quarter of 2017, while in the
segment of consumer credit those of credit cards and
personal loans continued following an upward trend.
With regards to portfolio quality, firm and mortgage
delinquency rates remained at low levels, while those
related to consumption did not register significant
changes, although they continue being at high levels.

**A.2.3. Development of inflation and inflation**
**outlook**

Between October and November 2019, annual
headline inflation decreased slightly, from 3.02 to
2.97% (Chart 20 and Table 1).


J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O

2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019


Source: Banco de México and INEGI.

In particular, annual core inflation decreased from
3.68 to 3.65% between October and November
2019. Within this component, the annual rate of
change of food merchandise prices fell from 4.67 to
4.56% in said period. As for non-food merchandise
prices, its annual rate of change continued to
decrease, reaching 2.66% in November (Chart 21).
In contrast, the annual rate of change of services
prices rose from 3.58 to 3.67% between October and
November (Chart 22), mainly due to increases in
certain tourist and food and beverage services
prices.

**Chart 21**

**Merchandise Core Price Subindex**

Annual percentage change

8

Food, beverages and tobacco

Non-food merchandise

7

6

5

4

3

2

1

November

0

J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O

2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019

Source: Banco de México and INEGI.


20


-----

**Chart 22**

**Merchandise and Services Core Price Subindex**

Annual percentage change

7


6

5

4

3

2

1

0


Merchandise

Services

|nnual percentage change|Col2|
|---|---|
|||
|||
|||
|||
|||
|||
|November||


J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O

2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019

Source: Banco de México and INEGI.

Annual non-core inflation decreased from 1.01 to
0.98% between October and November 2019 (Chart
23 and Table 1). This was due to a reduction in the
annual rate of change of fruit and vegetable prices,
which was offset by increases in the annual rates of
change of livestock product, energy and governmentauthorized prices.

**Chart 23**

**Non-core Price Subindex**
Annual percentage change

20

Non-core
Agricultural and livestock products
Energy and government-authorized prices

15

10

5

0

November

-5

J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O

2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019

Source: Banco de México and INEGI.

The medians for short-term headline inflation
expectations drawn from Banco de México’s Survey
of Private Sector Forecasters registered decreases
between the October and December surveys. In
particular, the median of expectations for the end of
2019 decreased from 3.00 to 2.94%. This mainly
reflected the reduction from 1.07 to 0.85% in implied
non-core inflation expectations, given that the
median for core inflation expectations was adjusted


slightly from 3.60 to 3.58%. For its part, the median
of expectations for headline inflation for the end of
2020 decreased from 3.50 to 3.46%, which is
explained by the downward revision of the non-core
component from 3.81 to 3.69%, given that the core
component increased from 3.38 to 3.40%. As to the
medians for headline and core inflation expectations
for the medium term (next four years), they remained
unchanged at 3.50% and 3.46%, respectively, while
headline and core inflation expectations for the
longer term (five to eight years) remained at 3.50 and
3.40%, respectively. Thus, expectations for both
headline and core inflation for the medium and long
terms remain above the 3% headline inflation target.
Finally, long-term inflation expectations (average of 6
to 10 years) implied in long-term market instruments
decreased slightly between October and November
and remain close to 3%, while the inflation risk
premium (calculated on the basis of 1-10 average
inflation expectations) increased slightly from 0.18 to
0.21% during the same period.

Regarding risks to inflation, those to the upside are:
core inflation’s persistence; that the recent minimum
wage increase leads to wage revisions that exceed
productivity gains in different segments of the
employed population and that this generates costrelated pressures, thus affecting formal employment
and prices; that the peso exchange rate comes under
pressure from external or domestic factors, although
the easing of certain external tensions and progress
in ratifying the USMCA have reduced such risk;
possible tariff and compensatory measures, although
this risk has diminished; that public finances
deteriorate; and, in this same regard, that there are
greater-than-expected increases in agricultural and
livestock product or energy prices. As for downside
risks: a greater appreciation of the peso exchange
rate, which could be associated with a context of
greater risk appetite in international financial markets
or with the final steps towards ratifying the trade
agreement with the United States and Canada; a
widening of slack conditions or their impact on core
inflation being greater than foreseen; and, that the
prices of certain goods included in the non-core
subindex register lower rates of change. In this
context, uncertainty still persists regarding the risks
that could make inflation deviate from its expected
trajectory.

21


-----

**Table 1**

**Consumer Price Index and Components**

Annual percentage change

**Item** **September 2019** **October 2019** **November 2019**

**CPI** **3.00** **3.02** **2.97**

**SubyacenteCore** **3.75** **3.68** **3.65**

**Merchandise** **3.77** **3.78** **3.63**

Food, beverages and tobacco 4.61 4.67 4.56

Non-food merchandise 2.88 2.85 2.66

**Services** **3.73** **3.58** **3.67**

Housing 2.89 2.93 2.88

Education (tuitions) 4.73 4.73 4.73

Other services 4.28 3.91 4.16

**No SubyacenteNon-core** **0.71** **1.01** **0.98**

**Agricultural and livestock products** **2.98** **3.82** **2.18**

Fruits and vegetablesFruits abd vegetables 0.71 2.36 -1.48

Livestock productsLivestock 4.86 5.02 5.38

**Energy and government-authorized prices Energéticos y Tarifas Aut. por Gobierno** **-0.90** **-0.91** **0.14**

Energy productsEnergy -3.09 -3.20 -1.80

Government-authorized pricesTarifas Autorizadas por Gobierno 4.35 4.78 5.09

Source: INEGI.


22


-----

-----

-----

