-----

-----

**FOREWARNING**
This document is provided for the reader’s convenience
only. The translation from the official Spanish version was
made by Banco de México’s staff. Discrepancies may arise
between the original document in Spanish and its English
translation. For this reason, the original Spanish version is
the only official document.


**1. PLACE, DATE AND PARTICIPANTS**

**1.1 Place:** Meeting held by virtual means.

**1.2. Date of Governing Board meeting:** April 20,
2020.

**1.3. Participants:**
Alejandro Díaz de León-Carrillo, Governor.
Irene Espinosa-Cantellano, Deputy Governor.
Gerardo Esquivel-Hernández, Deputy Governor.
Javier Eduardo Guzmán-Calafell, Deputy Governor.
Jonathan Ernest Heath-Constable, Deputy
Governor.
Arturo Herrera-Gutiérrez, Secretary of Finance and
Public Credit.
Gabriel Yorio-González, Undersecretary of Finance
and Public Credit.
Elías Villanueva-Ochoa, Secretary of the Governing
Board.

Prior to this meeting, preliminary work by Banco de
México’s staff analyzing the economic and financial
environment as well as the developments in inflation
and the determinants and outlook for inflation, was
conducted and presented to the Governing Board
(see Annex).

**2. ANALYSIS AND RATIONALE BEHIND THE**
**GOVERNING BOARD’S VOTING**

**_International environment_**

**All members pointed out that the COVID-19**
**pandemic and the measures adopted to prevent**
**its spread have affected world economic activity**
**considerably. Most members indicated that in the**
**last weeks the virus has spread rapidly, and one**
member noted that some countries appear to have
managed to contain the pandemic. Another member
stated that open economies that are integrated into
global value chains and with a high exposure to
services provided person-to-person are more

affected by the production shutdowns stemming from
the isolation measures. On the demand side, he/she
considered that households’ and firms’ spending and
income are being very affected. He/she added that
numerous firms are facing a highly uncertain
environment regarding the demand for their goods


and services. He/she mentioned that production
constraints and impacts on demand will lead to a
significant fall in employment, aggravating the
economic contraction.

**All members pointed out that the complex**
**worldwide economic situation has led to**
**significant revisions of economic expectations,**
**which** **incorporate** **a** **large** **contraction** **of**

**productive activity in the first half of 2020. Most**
**members stated that declines in economic**
**activity of the magnitude that is anticipated, have**
**not been seen since the Great Depression. One**
member pointed out that it is estimated that the
impact will be larger in advanced economies, which
would intensify the world demand shock. He/she
added that among emerging economies, Latin
American economies would be affected the most as
a result of lower commodity prices, a large informal
sector, and fragile fiscal positions.

**Some** members emphasized that, although a
significant recovery is expected in 2021, this is
subject to considerable risks, including: i) the
uncertainty regarding the timing, conditions and the
pace of the economy’s reopening; ii) the possibility of
a reemergence of epidemiological outbreaks in the
absence of a vaccine or effective treatment; iii) a
greater caution to resume activities, and iv) that the
damage to the production apparatus and the supply
chains turns out to be difficult to revert, especially if
the financial systems are considerably affected. **All**
**members noted that the outlook for the world**
**economy** **remains strongly biased to the**

**downside.**

**Most members mentioned that the impact to**
**economic activity has propitiated a sharp fall in**
**commodity prices, especially of crude oil. Most**
**members added that, given the lower demand**
**and a practically nil storage capacity, even**
**negative figures were registered in the futures’**
**contracts to be settled next month. One member**
specified that this occurred despite the agreements
achieved recently among the main oil producers.
**Another member mentioned that inflation pressures**
are contained in most countries, and underlined that
inflation expectations implied by market instruments
for the main economies remain below those
registered at the beginning of the year.

**Given** **the** **described** **environment,** **most**

**members stated that several central banks of**
**advanced and emerging economies lowered their**
**interest rates significantly.** **Most members**

**mentioned that currently several advanced**

1


-----

**economies register close to zero or even**
**negative interest rates. One** member added that
said measures seek to influence not only the risk-free
rate, but also the risk premia faced by firms, lowering
the cost of credit and thus generating confidence.
He/she highlighted that central banks in emerging
economies are expected to continue easing their
monetary policy stances, reaching close to zero or
negative real interest rates.

**Most members pointed out that several central**
**banks have also implemented extraordinary**
**measures to foster the well-functioning of their**
**financial systems. Most members emphasized**
**the measures to stabilize foreign exchange**
**markets, the asset purchase programs, and the**
**actions to strengthen both the liquidity facilities**
**available for financial intermediaries and the**
**channels of credit provision. One** member
highlighted that the US Federal Reserve included
corporate debt with a wide range of credit ratings in
its asset purchase program.

**Most members stated that several countries have**
**implemented fiscal measures to mitigate the**
**adverse** **effects** **on** **employment** **and** **on**

**households’ and firms’ income. One** member
mentioned that the adoption of said measures also
seeks to prevent a risk aversion spiral in financial
markets. **Some** members highlighted that the
support to households and firms has reached
significant amounts as a share of GDP in the main
advanced economies. **One** member indicated that
said measures in advanced economies will be mainly
financed with public debt.

**Most members emphasized that the adverse**
**environment has generated an increase in risk**
**aversion, worsening global financial conditions**
**and leading to a recomposition of investors’**
**portfolios towards lower-risk assets. Most**
**members pointed out that stock markets in**
**various** **countries** **have** **been** **significantly**

**affected by the realignment of portfolios towards**
**safe haven assets. However, most members**
**acknowledged that during the last month there**
**was a slight improvement in international**
**financial markets following the announcement of**
**monetary, fiscal and financial support measures,**
although some mentioned that a fragile and volatile
environment persists. One member pointed out that
there are considerable potential pressures on global
financial markets in addition to those stemming from
the current situation, such as the reemergence and
escalation of trade, political and geopolitical tensions.


**Most members stressed that in this context**
**emerging economies have registered significant**
**capital outflows. Most members mentioned that**
**this has led to a depreciation of their currencies**
**and to volatility in their foreign exchange**
**markets, as well as to pressures on stock indices**
**and interest rates. Some members mentioned that**
capital outflows this year have accumulated the
highest amount on record. One member added that
this was exacerbated by the fall in commodity prices
and in other sources of external revenue, such as
those related to tourism and remittances. **Another**
member mentioned that inflation pressures derived
from the exchange rate adjustment are contained in
most of these countries. He/she stated that most
central banks in emerging economies have lowered
their interest rates significantly so far this year.
He/she also noted that expectations for the policy
rate average in these economies for the end of 2020
are below 3.5%, which implies that emerging
economies are adopting accommodative monetary
policy stances with close to zero or even negative
real interest rates.

**_Economic activity in Mexico_**

**Most members agreed that the pandemic is an**
**unprecedented shock. One member stated that the**
macroeconomic outlook has changed radically since
the last monetary policy decision. **Another member**
pointed out that this is due to the supply and demand
shocks caused by social distancing and the
economic lockdown. One member mentioned that
Mexico currently has over 8 thousand confirmed
COVID-19 cases and around 700 deaths, and that
the peak of infections is expected to be reached in
the next weeks. **Another** member stated that the
absence of a treatment, the rapid spread of the
outbreak, and the fatality of the pandemic have
serious human and economic implications.

**As for domestic economic activity, most**
**members stated that supply has been affected by**
**interruptions in the production of goods and**
**services, as well as by the closure of businesses.**
**Meanwhile, demand has been affected by lower**
**consumption, as a result of a decline in**
**individuals’ incomes and of fewer spending**
**opportunities, as well as by lower investment and**
**lower external demand, partly due to the**
**deceleration of the US economy. Some members**
noted the effect of the fall in crude oil prices. **Most**
**members mentioned that the impact of the shock**
**can already be observed in a number of**
**variables, such as: i) consumer and business**
**confidence indicators; ii) credit and debit card**

2


-----

**spending;** **iii)** **manufacturing** **orders;** **iv)**

**purchasing managers’ indices; v) vehicle sales;**
**vi) air and land transportation, and vii) hotel**
**occupancy and tourist flow. One** member added
that economic activity had already been exhibiting a
persistent weakness, as shown by spending and
production indicators for the first quarter of the year.

**With respect to the labor market, most members**
**highlighted the deterioration observed in the**
**employment figures reported by the IMSS. Some**
members highlighted that, in March, formal

employment registered the greatest monthly decline
on record. One member pointed out that, during that
month’s contraction, the losses in the services and
construction sectors and in the manufacturing
industry stand out. **Another** member added that,
between March 13 and April 6, 347 thousand formal
jobs were lost, more than the total amount of jobs
created in 2019. He/she considered that at such rate
by the end of April approximately 700 thousand jobs
would be lost, as compared to the 2009 crisis, when
around 600 thousand jobs were lost over a 12-month
period. In this context, one member mentioned that
the main danger we face is a loss of employments in
the short term that will not be able to be recovered in
the medium term, sentencing a share of the
population to a situation of structural poverty.

**All members pointed out that, in view of the**
**impact of the pandemic, Mexican economic**
**activity is anticipated to contract significantly**
**during** **the** **first** **half** **of** **the** **year,** **while**

**acknowledging that the magnitude and duration**
**of the pandemic’s effects are still unknown, and**
**that available information is still limited. One**
**member** stated that various indicators allow to
foresee a severe weakening of the services sector.
He/she added that automotive production contracted
over 24% in annual terms in March, which signals an
important deterioration of manufacturing activity.
He/she specified that this scenario could deteriorate
as a consequence of the extension of the social
distancing measures. In this context, he/she
mentioned that some specialists anticipate a
contraction of up to 34% in annualized terms in the
second quarter. **One** member emphasized that
concerns over the severity of the economic
contraction grow week after week and are reflected
in the continuous downward revisions to forecasts,
including those of multilateral organizations.

**Another member pointed out, in order to provide a**
sense of the size of the adjustment in the economic
projections, that at the moment of the March
monetary policy decision the median forecast of the
survey conducted by a commercial bank anticipated


GDP growth for 2020 and for 2021 of 0.7 and 1.6%,
respectively, while currently these figures are at -5
and 1.8%, respectively, and that additional

downward adjustments are being observed at the
margin. **One** member highlighted that the forecast
range for 2020 and for 2021 is atypically wide, lying
between -9 and -3.9% and between 0.4 and 5.5%.
**Some members stated** that a recession is expected
with a significant impact on the labor market and on
production. One member noted that, unlike the 2019
stagnation, when the greatest impact came from
international trade and from manufacturing activity,
on this occasion the most significant contraction is
anticipated to take place in the non-manufacturing
sector, especially in services and commerce, which
will have more severe repercussions on employment
and occupation. **Another** member considered that
due to a lower external demand, a lower income of
the population, the loss of confidence, and the risk
for investment associated with the deterioration of
economic conditions, the impact on demand will be
deeper and longer than that on supply, which he/she
mentioned would be transitory. **One member noted**
that in 2020 the Mexican economy may register its
greatest contraction since the Great Depression.

**All members agreed that the balance of risks to**
**growth is significantly biased to the downside.**
**Most members stated that this balance is**
**characterized by high uncertainty, given that the**
**duration and depth of the pandemic are**
**uncertain.** In this respect, **one member mentioned**
that this recession will considerably affect the labor
market, production and practically all sectors of the
economy. Another member mentioned the following
among the main risks: i) that the impact on
production is prolonged; ii) lower incomes and a
greater impact on employment, and iii) a sharp
contagion phase that would significantly affect all
sectors of economic activity and the income of both
private and public sectors, leading to a deterioration
of credit risk, which could lead to financial and
solvency problems. **One** member added that the
effects of the pandemic could worsen if the economic
policies aimed at mitigating them are insufficient.
**Some members mentioned that there is uncertainty**
about the strength of the recovery, once it begins.
**One member mentioned that if the expectation that**
the US economy will recover relatively fast in 2021
materializes, it should contribute to strengthen
Mexico’s economic activity, although that would
depend on the degree to which the initial economic
weakness affects productive capacity and the
financial system. He/she emphasized that the latter
highlights the importance of implementing measures
in different spheres aimed at supporting them.

3


-----

He/she warned that available evidence is insufficient
to assess with adequate confidence margins the
future trajectory of domestic production activity.

**Most members agreed that slack conditions are**
**widening considerably and that the effects of the**
**pandemic will significantly widen the negative**
**output gap. One member estimated that this gap will**
be much wider during the present and the following
year as compared to what was contemplated a few
weeks ago. **Another member considered that this**
will imply lower inflationary pressures.

**_Inflation in Mexico_**

**All members highlighted the recent decline in**
**headline inflation, stressing that it was largely**
**due to a reduction in its non-core component.**
**One** member noted that deflation was observed in
March with respect to February, a phenomenon that
had not been observed in such a period in Mexico’s
recent history.

**Most members considered that the decline in**
**non-core inflation was mainly due to the fall in**
**energy prices. Some** members mentioned that
agricultural and livestock product prices increased.
However, **one** member considered that these
increases will be transitory because this type of
shocks fade after a few months, and because said
products currently experience a greater retail
demand as a result of the social isolation measures.

**As for core inflation, most members stated that it**
**decreased slightly in March. One member pointed**
out that the monthly change in this component was
lower than the average change in recent years,
although **another one highlighted that the rates of**
growth of prices in certain items remain above 4.5%.

With regards to inflation expectations, one member
noted that these have still not changed considerably
as a result of the pandemic. He/she stated that
expectations drawn from surveys remain anchored at
levels close to 3.5%, both for different definitions and
different terms. **Some** members indicated that
medium-term expectations continue above target.
Meanwhile, one member mentioned that breakeven
inflation has decreased.

**Most members mentioned that headline inflation**
**is likely to decline in the short term. Said**
**members mentioned that this decrease will**
**basically stem from the lower gasoline prices.**
**Some members noted that it will also result from a**
lower core inflation. One member pointed out that the
latter could partly result from the effect of the


pandemic on items such as tourism services.
**Another** member stated that annual inflation is
foreseen to decrease once more and lie below the
target at the end of April. **One** member noted that
during the next months it will remain close to or even
below the target.

**Some** members mentioned that, although different
factors can affect headline inflation at different
moments, it is expected to converge to Banco de
México’s target within the time frame in which
monetary policy operates.

**As for the risks to inflation, most members**
**argued that these are associated to the effects of**
**the pandemic on the economy and that inflation**
**would be subject to both upward and downward**
**pressures. First, they highlighted the downward**
**pressures caused by the widening of the**
**negative output gap and, in the short term, by**
**lower energy prices. One** member stated that the
fall in these prices tends to have lasting direct and
indirect effects on inflation. **Another** member
asserted that social distancing is already disrupting
the provision of certain services, and that their price
variations could decrease. Second, most members
**mentioned the upward pressures stemming from**
**the peso exchange rate depreciation, which will**
**depend on its magnitude and persistence. Some**
members mentioned that in the short term the supply
shocks derived from the impact on the supply chains
and, in general, from production disruptions, would
exercise upward pressures on inflation. One member
estimated that these likely upward pressures have
been more than offset by the above referred
downward pressures. **Another** member expressed
that the upward adjustment in the peso exchange
rate will have a relatively limited impact on inflation,
considering what multiple studies suggest. He/she
considered that, in such a complex situation as the
current one, upward risks to inflation should not be
overestimated, in particular, those associated to the
exchange rate.

**Most members indicated that uncertainty as to**
**the balance of risks for inflation has increased**
**significantly. Some of them pointed out that an**
**uncertain environment for inflation prevails**
**especially in the long term. One** member noted
that the uncertainty is associated to: i) possible
changes in consumption patterns and their effects on
price formation; ii) the magnitude and duration of
shocks; iii) the persistence of adverse conditions in
the financial markets; iv) the effects of disruptions in
global value chains and a possible shortage of
certain goods, and v) possible second round effects

4


-----

in case the exchange rate depreciation is perceived
to be permanent. **Another** member stated that,
although he/she agrees that the net effect of the
recent shocks on inflation is uncertain, given the
scale of the expected fall in output, the probability
that the demand shock will prevail has increased,
although in an environment characterized by
significant risks. **One** member considered that the
balance of risks for inflation in Mexico is clearly
biased to the downside. Another member specified
that this balance is biased to the downside in the
short term. He/she underlined that uncertainty
prevails in the medium and long terms as a result of
the following: i) the price index loses relevance given
that there is a sector of the economy that is unable to
consume freely; ii) it is unknown what the price
dynamics will be once the lockdown measures are
raised; iii) a significant percentage of the decline in
inflation is due to the non-core component, which
could revert, and iv) medium-term inflation

expectations remain above the target. He/she
mentioned as an additional factor the loss of
efficiency in measuring inflation and other economic
indicators, due to data collection problems generated
by the social distancing measures. He/she pointed
out that although remote methods to conduct surveys
are being proposed, this methodological change
implies a lower quality of information and of
assessment of the current juncture.

**_Macrofinancial environment_**

**Most members highlighted the deterioration of**
**domestic financial markets generated by the**
**shocks associated with the pandemic, while they**
**acknowledged that a slight improvement has**
**been recently observed, although risks to their**
**performance continue. Some members pointed out**
that markets continue to exhibit a significant degree
of volatility. **All** **members** **underlined** **the**

**depreciation of the peso exchange rate.** **Some**
members stated that, among emerging economy
currencies, the Mexican peso is one of those with the
greatest cumulative depreciation in the year. **One**
member pointed out that, since Banco de México’s
past monetary policy decision, the peso exchange
rate reached a new historical high of 25.77 Mexican
pesos per dollar. He/she also mentioned that trading
spreads in the foreign exchange market widened to
unprecedented levels. He/she stated that in the
above described environment there has been a
transition from a long to a short position in short-term
foreign exchange instruments denominated in
Mexican pesos. **Another** member considered that,
although the depreciation of the Mexican peso
exchange rate is partly explained by factors that have


affected emerging economies in general, the
presence of idiosyncratic factors is clear, as
evidenced by the recent downgrade in the sovereign
and in Pemex’s credit ratings. **One** member stated
that the depreciation of the peso exchange rate has
taken place despite the high interest rate spread with
respect to the US Federal Reserve.

**As to fixed income markets, the majority of**
**members mentioned that, after having increased**
**significantly,** **interest** **rates** **of** **government**

**securities have decreased, although they still**
**remain volatile. One** member pointed out that the
slope of the yield curve increased, as term premia
continue to reflect concerns about factors related to
domestic policies. **Some** members highlighted that
significant outflows of foreign capital were observed.
**One member specified that, during March, an outflow**
of 6 billion US dollars was observed, a figure never
observed before for a single month. Most members
**noted that risk premia increased considerably.**
**One member highlighted that those for 5-year credit**
default swaps (CDS) registered the largest increase
in the year among the main emerging economies.
**Another** member stated that these instruments
halted their upward trend after Banco de México’s
latest monetary policy decision.

**Most** **members** **warned** **that** **the** **adverse**

**environment the domestic economy is facing**
**resulting from the pandemic and the lower oil**
**prices is worsened by idiosyncratic factors.** **In**
**this context, most members highlighted the**
**recent downgrade of the sovereign and Pemex’s**
**credit rating by three agencies. The majority of**
**members pointed out that one of them lowered**
**the sovereign debt rating to one level above**
**losing the investment grade and that two of them**
**placed Pemex’s debt rating below investment**
**grade. In this regard, one member noted that such**
adjustments responded to concerns regarding: i) the
fall in oil prices; ii) the fragility of public finances; iii)
Pemex’s financial sustainability, and iv) the

weakening of institutions due to domestic policy.
He/she added that although the market had already
discounted these adjustments, additional sales of
such assets by investors can be expected, leading to
a greater tightening of Pemex and the country’s
financing conditions, which could hinder economic
recovery once the health emergency is over.
**Another member mentioned that the fall in oil prices**
has resulted in a reduction of Pemex’s revenues and
profitability, as well as in a higher risk premia on its
bonds.

5


-----

**The majority of members highlighted the**
**importance of fiscal measures under the current**
**situation, although they pointed out that fiscal**
**sustainability must not be jeopardized.** In this
regard, **one member mentioned that there is a**
reduced margin due to the fragility of both public
finances and Pemex, as reflected by the credit rating
downgrades observed in the last few days. Another
member pointed out that fiscal measures that
address the effects of the sanitary emergency and
support micro, small-, and medium-size firms and the
lowest income households are imperative. He/she
added that, for this purpose, a reassessment of the
priorities is necessary as well as the implementation
of schemes that allow for a greater participation of
the private sector in public investment projects with
high social and economic returns. **One member**
considered that currently there is a limited margin to
negotiate additional debt issuances. He/she

mentioned that there is room for flexibility in
monetary policy and thus reduce the government’s
financial cost. He/she mentioned that, only in 2019,
the interest, commissions and expenses on the
public sector’s debt amounted to 900 billion pesos,
that is, nearly 4% of GDP. He/she concluded that
reductions in the monetary policy rate might also
contribute to the health of public finances by
liberating space to increase public debt and therefore
stimulate the economy.

**In light of an adverse situation as the currently**
**faced, most members highlighted the importance**
**of** **maintaining** **sound** **macroeconomic**

**fundamentals and adopting actions that promote**
**a better adjustment of financial markets and of**
**the economy overall. Similarly they noted that in**
**this environment, it is essential to generate**
**public policies that guarantee certainty for**
**private investment. In this regard, said members**
**expressed their concerns about the deterioration**
**of the rule of law and the persistent insecurity,**
**which leads to an unfavorable environment for**
**investment. Some members noted that the external**
shocks worsened the problems that were already
underway, which were mainly the result of the lack of
confidence stemming from public policy decisions, of
the deterioration of the rule of law, the institutional
framework and public security. **One member**
mentioned that March was the most violent of the last
18 months, by number of executions and homicides.
There is no productive apparatus that can withstand
insecurity conditions of such magnitude; it is an
imperative agenda that must be addressed in order
to reactivate the economy. In this regard, he/she
mentioned that no fiscal or monetary policy measure
will be able to render the expected benefits if there is


no confidence to invest. **Another** member

considered that all of the above factors, along with
the perception of insufficient fiscal efforts to face the
external shocks, have contributed to undermine the
environment for private investment and have
increased doubts regarding the country’s growth
potential over the next years and its implications for
public finances. He/she highlighted that this situation
is further worsened by concerns over the uncertain
outlook for Pemex and the possible depletion of
resources from the Budget Revenue Stabilization
Fund (FEIP) in the near future, raising investors’
doubts about the viability of maintaining the
investment grade status for sovereign debt. He/she
stated that a deep reorientation of the economic
strategy is fundamental to overcome the current
crisis and strengthen the country’s growth outlook in
the long term.

**_Monetary Policy_**

**In light of the COVID-19 pandemic’s expected**
**impact on inflation, economic activity and**
**financial conditions, all members agreed on**
**lowering the overnight interbank interest rate by**
**50 basis points to 6%. Similarly, they agreed on**
**implementing additional measures to foster an**
**orderly behavior of financial markets, strengthen**
**the channels of credit provision in the economy,**
**and provide liquidity for the sound development**
**of the financial system. Most members pointed**
**out the importance of providing a timely**
**response** **given** **the** **rapidly** **changing**

**circumstances.**

**One** member stated that the trade-offs associated
with the inflation outlook should be assessed in an
environment that, although being uncertain as to the
magnitude and persistence of the shocks it is subject
to, it will clearly register a significant economic
contraction. **Another member pointed out that,**
considering the balance of factors affecting inflation
and, in particular, the higher probability that the
demand-related shock on inflation will prevail over
others that operate in the opposite direction, a lower
policy rate is consistent with the convergence of
inflation to the 3% target within the time frame in
which monetary policy operates. He/she also
considered that the proposed reduction will allow for
an adequate balance between the margins that have
become available for monetary policy and the risks
that continue to be observed. **One member added**
the importance of communicating clearly that given
the observed inflation the main purpose of lowering
the policy rate is to support the functioning of
financial markets in face of the uncertainty and

6


-----

volatility generated by the pandemic, and that its
main objective is other than to foster consumption
and investment.

**Another member pointed out that, in an environment**
where slack conditions are widening, the expected
rate of return on capital is lower, and, to avoid
distortions in the credit market, it is convenient that
the rate at which investment projects are financed is
adjusted downwards, which calls for easing

monetary policy. He/she noted that the above would
improve financial conditions, which is a necessary
although not sufficient condition to reactivate credit.
He/she also stated that even though the relative
monetary policy stance is only slightly restrictive,
despite the high interest rate spread with the United
States, the absolute policy stance is above the shortterm neutral rate, when it should already be below it.
**Some members considered that the upward**
adjustment in country risk indicators shows that the
relative monetary policy stance does not have an
ample margin, as often believed. **One member**
added that the increase in capital outflows also
suggests that said margin is not ample. **Another**
member added that monetary conditions in several
economies have eased considerably, and thus the
relative monetary policy stance remains wide vis-àvis other economies, including those emerging
economies that have a higher credit risk than
Mexico’s. Nevertheless, he/she mentioned that, in
light of the magnitude of the shock on economic
activity and the increase in risk aversion, interest rate
spreads have not been determinant in the portfolio
adjustments observed. He/she highlighted that even
the currencies and instruments with more liquid and
deeper markets may have registered higher capital
outflows. However, the same member emphasized
that, as risk appetite normalizes, interest rate
spreads may be more relevant.

**One member pointed out that at this moment**
domestic financial markets are being mostly affected
by investors’ concerns regarding the weak

performance of real economic activity, and to a lesser
extent by interest rate spreads. He/she stated that so
far this year the Mexican peso has been one of the
currencies with the worst performance despite the
high interest rate spread between Mexico and the US
Federal Reserve. He/she added that the foreign
exchange depreciation in economies with low
interest rate spreads has been smaller than in
economies with high interest rate spreads. He/she
argued that this could be reflecting investors’
expectations about the accommodative monetary
policy in the former economies allowing them to have
a faster recovery and a lower contraction of real


economic activity. He/she pointed out that an
argument in favor of maintaining a high interest rate
spread is to note that the volatility-adjusted spread
has decreased. Nevertheless, he/she added that
considering that exchange rate volatility might be
partly the result of the high interest rates and their
impact on economic activity, the recent behavior of
the foreign exchange spread calls precisely for the
opposite action, i.e., to promote an even greater
reduction of interest rate spreads. In the same
regard, he/she mentioned that the higher risk premia
observed does not limit the margin for lowering the
monetary policy rate and rather constitutes an
additional reason for continuing to do so, as a
substantial reduction would allow to offset the effect
of the higher risk premia by maintaining or even
lowering the cost of credit to firms. He/she added that
in light of the capital outflows registered over the last
weeks, concerns about monetary policy easing likely
propitiating a significant depreciation of the peso
exchange rate must be ruled out. He/she stated that
other Latin American economies have significantly
lowered their interest rate spreads, without this
having implied greater depreciations than the
Mexican peso’s. He/she also noted that the decision
to lower the monetary policy rate by 50 basis points
in March had positive effects on financial markets.
Said member mentioned that interest rates of
government securities decreased for all terms.
He/she stated that when a monetary policy easing is
perceived as a risk for inflation, long-term interest
rates tend to increase reflecting the upward
adjustment in inflation expectations. For this reason,
he/she argued that the recent behavior of interest
rates reflects that the market is not anticipating
inflationary pressures associated with a less
restrictive monetary policy stance. He/she pointed
out that there is a wide room to continue lowering the
policy rate, favoring financial markets and without
generating inflationary pressures.

**Most members agreed that monetary policy by**
**itself will not be able to solve the difficulties**
**generated by the shocks that are affecting the**
**economy. One** member argued that the credit
channel is ineffective to reactivate the economy.
He/she highlighted that Banco de México is most
willing to contribute to face this pandemic, within the
limits allowed by its institutional framework, without
undermining its primary objective or independence,
and maintaining its credibility. **Another member**
added that, although the measures of monetary
policy easing are essential in the current context,
overcoming the crisis requires adequate public
health and fiscal actions. He/she added that
monetary policy can only contribute to long-term

7


-----

economic growth by generating the conditions for
macroeconomic stability. He/she noted that its
impact on economic activity is modest even
throughout the cycle, due to the characteristics of the
Mexican financial system. He/she also emphasized
that, when facing shocks like the current one,
monetary policy has limitations to mitigate the
fluctuations of economic activity. He/she stated that
a set of policies aimed at fostering both an adequate
environment for private investment and productivity
growth are needed to boost economic growth.

**One** member considered wrong to believe that low
interest rates cannot contribute to the economic
recovery. He/she added that the cost and access to
credit for micro, small- and medium-size firms, which
are those that generate most of the jobs and which
will be the most affected by the pandemic, would be
highly favored by a significant reduction in interest
rates. He/she argued that fiscal policy could also
contribute to this; however, if the government's
borrowing costs remain high, the room for
implementing a fiscal stimulus would be limited.
He/she considered that high interest rates affect the
health of public finances by increasing their financial
cost. However, he/she mentioned that there is room
for flexibility in monetary policy and thus to reduce
the government's financial cost.

**The majority of members pointed out that the**
**outlook for monetary policy remains complex.**
**The majority highlighted the combination of a**
**sharp contraction of economic activity, both**
**upward and downward pressures on inflation,**
**and volatility in financial markets. One member**
highlighted the importance of identifying the different
dilemmas that monetary policy faces, of monitoring
the scenarios that materialize, and defining the most
convenient monetary policy adjustments. **Some**
members underlined the importance of having more
timely data to monitor which scenarios will
materialize.

**Most members pointed out the importance of**
**Banco de México acting with prudence. One**
member indicated that some risks associated with
public finances and Pemex’s financial situation have
materialized and thus that it is necessary to act with
caution. Another member mentioned that given the
expected trends, there are conditions to consider a
further monetary policy easing, even in the short
term. However, due to the risks for inflation and the
high volatility in the financial markets, it will be
necessary to proceed with caution. **One member**
indicated that several risk factors prevail that could
have negative consequences on the credibility of the


central bank’s commitment to the inflation target.
He/she stated that given the economic emergency
and the current level of inflation, the emphasis must
be set upon providing the necessary liquidity and
prevent any affectations to financial stability.
**Another member mentioned that, under the present**
situation, the most prudent monetary policy is to
substantially lower the policy rate, so that the real
interest rate is below its neutral level as soon as
possible, without discarding the possibility of moving
towards a real rate close to zero or even negative.
He/she added that not doing the above or postponing
it for too long would be an unwise decision, as it
would affect the Mexican economy at a time of
economic crisis, would deteriorate financial markets,
and would jeopardize price stability.

**All members acknowledged that the global and**
**domestic** **macroeconomic** **environment** **has**

**changed considerably over the last weeks, and**
**that in order to respond promptly it was**
**necessary to make a monetary policy decision**
**out of the programmed schedule and accompany**
**it with additional measures to foster an orderly**
**behavior of financial markets, strengthen the**
**channels of credit provision, and provide**
**liquidity for the sound development of the**
**financial system.** **One** member argued that given
the emergency, multiple economic agents, firms and
households, must rely on financing sources to be
able to offset the reduction in their income as a result
of the social distance measures. The fall in income
together with greater risk aversion, can result in a
segmented financial market in which only lower-risk
and large-sized issuers have access to financing.
He/she highlighted that, under the current

environment, the proper functioning of credit
channels indeed becomes more necessary. He/she
added that in a context of mandatory shutdowns in
the production lines of goods and services, the
reduction of interest rates may have a lesser effect
on aggregate demand in the short term. In this
context, he/she added that in order to strengthen the
financial system and provide greater liquidity to the
payment systems, it is necessary to: i) improve the
functioning of financial markets, strengthening their
price discovery process in a wide range of assets; ii)
provide sufficient liquidity and prevent its

segmentation, in order to foster the sound
development of the financial system, and iii)
strengthen the channels of credit provision, in order
for financing to reach a wide number of creditors. In
particular, through measures that i) grant more
liquidity to the daily funding market at the opening of
markets and to expand the collateral eligible for
financing facilities; ii) expand the terms and types of

8


-----

instruments with which banks can carry out repo
agreements with Banco de México, in order to
provide more liquidity and strengthen the secondary
market of said securities, as well as to carry out
operations aimed at promoting a better functioning of
the government securities’ yield curve, and iii)
provide resources to banks so that they can grant
credit to micro, small- and medium-size firms, as well
as to households affected by the pandemic.

**Another member underlined that by enabling the**
financial system to fulfil its role in mobilizing loanable
funds, these measures will help the economy to
absorb the real shock of the pandemic in an orderly
manner. **One member highlighted that such**
measures are necessary given the volatility

registered by domestic financial markets. In this
regard, he/she mentioned that these actions would
help to improve trading conditions in the fixed income
market, which have deteriorated significantly despite
the generalized decreases in the yields on
government securities. The same member pointed
out that in light of a crisis like the current one, the
central bank must act on several fronts to contribute
to preserve financial stability conditions and
incentivize the expansion of banking credit which,
besides alleviating the impact of the pandemic,
support the strengthening of confidence.

**Another** member stated that prior to the measures
announced in this monetary policy decision, other
actions had already been taken such as reducing the
monetary regulation deposit and making some credit
facilities more flexible, in addition to increasing
financing in foreign currency by taking advantage of
the credit swap line with the US Federal Reserve.
He/she mentioned that some of the actions of the
new package aim at expanding the collateral eligible
for accessing liquidity facilities and for widening the
coverage to development banks. He/she also pointed
out that the package includes measures to
strengthen the credit channels and the programs
carried out jointly with the Ministry of Finance to
ensure the proper functioning of the bond market, in
order to improve the banking sector’s positioning
given the large amount of capital outflows. He/she
stated that in accordance with the Foreign Exchange
Commission, the package incorporates foreign
exchange hedges with non-domiciled counterparties.
Said member stated that the Banking Liquidity
Regulation Committee has implemented, among


other measures, countercyclical macroprudential
policies by temporarily loosening minimum liquidity
requirements. He/she argued that, with these
actions, financial institutions will be able to ensure a
better balance given the disruptions in their financial
positions, especially if the higher number of nonperforming loans affects their liquidity. He/she added
that the complex situation demands implementing
decisive actions, many of which are unprecedented.
He/she stated that, despite these measures, the fall
in economic activity is so deep and complicated that
it may reveal or exacerbate existing structural flaws.
Thus, this extraordinary situation requires acting
more boldly and far beyond the traditional schemes.

**3. MONETARY POLICY DECISION**

Considering the risks resulting from the COVID-19
pandemic for inflation, economic activity and financial
markets, major challenges arise for monetary policy
and for the economy in general. In light of the
foreseen implications, and with the presence of all its
members, Banco de México’s Governing Board
decided unanimously to lower the target for the
overnight interbank interest rate by 50 basis points to
a level of 6%. The Governing Board also decided to
implement additional measures to foster an orderly
behavior of financial markets, strengthen the credit
channels and provide liquidity for the sound
development of the financial system.

The Governing Board will take the necessary actions
on the basis of incoming information so that the
policy rate is consistent with the orderly and
sustained convergence of headline inflation to Banco
de México’s target within the time frame in which
monetary policy operates. Perseverance in

strengthening the macroeconomic fundamentals and
adopting the necessary actions, regarding both
monetary and fiscal policies, will contribute to a better
adjustment of domestic financial markets and of the
economy as a whole.

**4. VOTING**

Alejandro Díaz de León-Carrillo, Irene EspinosaCantellano, Gerardo Esquivel-Hernández, Javier
Eduardo Guzmán-Calafell and Jonathan Ernest
Heath-Constable voted in favor of lowering the
overnight interbank interest rate by 50 basis points to
6%.

9


-----

**ANNEX**

The information in this Annex was prepared for this
meeting by the staff of Banco de México’s General
Directorate of Economic Research and General
Directorate of Central Bank Operations. It does not
necessarily reflect the considerations of the

members of the Governing Board as to the monetary
policy decision

**A.1. External conditions**

**A.1.1. World economic activity**

The COVID-19 pandemic and the measures adopted
to prevent its spread have continued to affect world
economic activity. This has led to significant revisions
to the world economy’s growth outlook, which include
a large contraction of productive activity in the first
half of 2020 and a recovery in 2021 (Chart 1). Such
outlook faces a high degree of uncertainty and its
balance of risks is strongly biased to the downside.
Lower global economic activity also led to a sharp fall
in commodity prices, especially of crude oil. As to the
prices of the latter, despite the agreement recently
reached among several producers to decrease its
supply, they have not recovered due to expectations
of lower demand and lack of storage capacity. In this
context, the lower energy prices and aggregate
demand have led to a decline in inflation in most
economies, and in several of them it remains below
the targets of their respective central banks.

The economic emergency has led several central
banks of both advanced and emerging economies to
continue to considerably lower their interest rates
and to implement new extraordinary measures to
foster the well-functioning of their financial systems.
Similarly, several countries have continued to
implement fiscal stimulus measures to mitigate the
adverse effects of the pandemic on employment and
on households and firms’ income.

In this environment, global financial conditions have
deteriorated, leading to a recomposition of investors’
portfolio towards lower risk assets, as well as to a
reduction in holdings of emerging economies’ assets.
This adjustment has led to a depreciation of these
economies’ currencies and to a high volatility in their
foreign exchange markets.


8

6.60

5.80

6

4.40 4.60 4.50

4 3.30 3.40

2 1.60 1.60

0

-2 -1.00

-4 -3.00

World
Advanced

-6

-6.10 Emerging

-8

January April January April

2020 2021

Source: IMF, World Economic Outlook (January and April 2020).

In the United States, GDP growth is expected to
contract during the first quarter of the year due to the
negative impact on supply chains and to a fall in
consumer and private investment spending. Indeed,
a severe contraction in retail sales was registered in
March, while indicators on existing home sales and
equipment production point to a contraction in
residential and business investment. In addition,
consumer confidence and construction indices, as
well as others available indicators for April, suggest
that economic activity will deteriorate further during
the second quarter of the year.

US industrial production contracted in March at a
monthly rate of 5.4% in light of the shutdown of
manufacturing plants due to the health emergency.
This behavior reflected falls in its three main
subsectors, standing out the 6.3% fall in

manufacturing production, the largest fall since
February 1946. Some indicators available for April,
such as the manufacturing sector Purchasing
Managers’ Index (PMI) of the Federal Reserve Banks
of New York and Philadelphia, plummeted, thus
suggesting that the sector’s weakness could intensify
in the future.

US labor market indicators deteriorated significantly
in light of the measures to contain the COVID-19
spread. In particular, in March 2020 employment in
the non-farm sector contracted by 701,000 jobs, its
greatest fall since March 2009. The unemployment
rate increased from 3.5% in February to 4.4% in
March (Chart 2). Initial unemployment claims
increased by around 22 million in the four weeks
ending on April 11, foretelling that a strong fall in
employment and a significant increase in the
unemployment rate will be observed in April.

10

|Chart 1 Real GDP Growth Forecasts Percent|Col2|
|---|---|
|6.60 5.80 4.40 4.60 4.50 3.30 3.40 1.60 1.60 -1.00 -3.00 World Advanced -6.10 Emerging||
|January April 2020|January April 2021|


-----

**Chart 2**

**USA: Unemployment Rate**

Percent, s.a.

12

Unemployment rate (left scale)

11 Unemployment rate (U-6) 1/

10

9

8

7

6

5

4 March

3

2001 2003 2005 2007 2009 2011 2013 2015 2017 2019


20

18

16

14

12

10

8

6

4

2


s. a. / Seasonally adjusted figures.
1/ Includes part-time and discouraged workers.
Source: Federal Reserve Economic Data (FRED).

In the euro area, available indicators point to a
contraction of economic activity in the first quarter of
this year. Although available figures for February for
employment, retail sales and industrial production
still do not fully reflect the effects of the measures
adopted to contain the pandemic spread, leading
indicators, such as the Purchasing Manager’s
Indices (PMIs), plummeted in March, reflecting said
effects on several economies of the region. Similarly,
consumer confidence and economic sentiment
indices contracted that month, with the latter pointing
to a greater impact on the services sector. In this
context, economic activity in this region is anticipated
to contract significantly during the first half of the
year.

In Japan, available information suggests another
GDP contraction in the first quarter of the year.
Leading indicators, such as PMIs registered in March
a fall in the manufacturing sector, most sharply in the
services sector. Net exports are expected to register
a negative contribution due to the impact on global
supply chains and to the lower global demand.
Similarly, private consumption is expected to
decrease as a result of the measures to contain the
pandemic.

In emerging economies, the latest information
suggests a significant deterioration of economic
activity during the first quarter of the year, particularly
in Asian economies that are highly integrated to
China and in commodity exporting countries.
Chinese economic activity fell by 6.8% at an annual
rate during the first quarter of the year, its first decline
in four decades (Chart 3). It is worth noting that the
most recent data on this country, such as that for
industrial production, retail sales and fixed asset


investment, recovered in March as the spread of
COVID-19 has been mitigated and production and
commercial and service activities have gradually
restarted, which may lead to a rebound of that
economy during the second quarter of the year. In
Latin America, the economic weakness is anticipated
to have intensified during the first quarter of 2020 as
a result of the measures to contain the virus
outbreak, the weakening of global demand, the
capital outflows, and the fall in commodity prices.
Such weakness is expected to further intensify during
the second quarter.

**Chart 3**

**China: Gross Domestic Product**

Annual percentage change, s.a.

8

6

4

2

0

-2

-4

-6

Q-I

-8

2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020

s. a. / Seasonally adjusted figures.
Source: Haver Analytics.

International commodity prices registered mixed
behaviors since Mexico’s latest monetary policy
decision. In particular, crude oil prices decreased
significantly due to expectations of a lower demand
for crude oil due to the pandemic’s worldwide impact.
Although the main oil producing countries reached in
mid-April a new agreement on production cuts for the
next years, crude oil prices continued to fall. In
particular, the fast reduction of available oil storage
capacity, along with the expiration of crude oil
contracts for May delivery, led WTI oil future prices
to fall to negative figures for the first time in history.
Although the prices of industrial metals and of some
grains slightly recovered as a result of China relaxing
its lockdown measures, they remain at levels below
those seen at the beginning of the pandemic.

**A.1.2. Monetary policy and international financial**
**markets**

Headline inflation in most advanced economies
decreased in March mainly as a result of the fall in
energy product prices and lower aggregate demand
due to the pandemic, and remained below the targets
of their respective central banks. Core inflation has

11


-----

also declined recently, also reflecting the effects of
the fall in economic activity. Inflation expectations
drawn from financial instruments remained at low
levels. In most emerging economies inflation also
declined for the same reasons.

In this environment, several central banks of
advanced and emerging economies continued to
lower their policy rates significantly and to implement
extraordinary measures to promote the wellfunctioning of their financial systems. Expectations
drawn from market instruments continued to
anticipate that central banks will maintain highly
accommodative monetary policy stances (Chart 4).
Since Mexico’s latest monetary policy decision,
several central banks of emerging economies have
announced cuts to their policy rates, in some cases
during unscheduled meetings, such as the

Philippines, China, South Africa, Poland, Czech
Republic, Peru, Chile, Colombia, and Israel, among
others. Some central banks announced new liquidity
measures and interventions in financial markets to
foster their proper functioning.

**Chart 4**

**Reference Rates and Implied Trajectories in**

**OIS Curves***

Percent


3.0% **― US Federal Reserve***

**― Bank of England**
**― Bank of Japan**

2.5% **― Bank of Canada**

**― European Central Bank deposit rate**
**― OIS implicit trajectory 20 Apr 2020**

2.0% **--- OIS implicit trajectory 23 Mar 2020**

--- OIS implicit trajectory 31 Dec 2019

1.5%

1.0%

0.5%

0.0%

-0.5%

End of End of End of
2019 2020 2021

-1.0%

2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022

|% %|― US Federal Reserve* ― Bank of England ― Bank of Japan ― Bank of Canada|Forecast|Col4|Col5|
|---|---|---|---|---|
|% %|― European Central Bank deposit rate ― OIS implicit trajectory 20 Apr 2020 --- OIS implicit trajectory 23 Mar 2020 --- OIS implicit trajectory 31 Dec 2019|ts|||
|%|||||
|%|||||
|%|||||
||||||


*/ OIS: Fixed floating interest rate swap where the fixed interest rate is the
effective overnight reference rate.

- In the case of the US observed reference rate, the average interest rate of
the federal funds target range is used (0.0% - 0.25%).
Source: Prepared by Banco de México with Bloomberg data.

Some of the monetary policy decisions by the main
central banks that stood out during the period
include:

i) After an unscheduled decision taken in mid
March, the Fed’s federal funds rate remained at a
range of 0%-0.25%. The Fed announced
complementary measures to those previously
implemented to provide liquidity, support the
credit needs of businesses, and foster the wellfunctioning of financial markets. These measures


include, among others, the purchase of assets for
the amount that is required, including mortgagebacked securities, and an increase in repo
transactions. The Fed also announced new credit
facilities for primary and secondary market
participants in corporate debt and term assetbacked securities. It also implemented the
Paycheck Protection Program Liquidity Facility
(PPPLF) and municipal liquidity facility, among
others. Finally, to provide liquidity in US dollars, it
increased the frequency of its FX swap
transactions with other central banks and
established a repo facility for central banks and
international monetary authorities that allows
them to exchange Treasury bonds for US dollars.

ii) The European Central Bank (ECB) has not

modified its monetary policy stance since its
March meeting, where it left its policy rates at
levels close to zero. In addition to the previously
established measures, such as the long-term
refinancing operations (LTROs) and purchases of
additional assets, the ECB recently announced
new actions to provide liquidity to banks, including
adjusting the rules on warranties to access
liquidity provision transactions and increasing risk
tolerance in credit provision through its

refinancing operations.

iii) In its last March meeting, the Bank of England left

its policy rate at 0.1%, after having lowered it by
65 basis points in its previous two unscheduled
meetings and having announced new term and
corporate financing schemes. It also announced
that it will continue to increase by 200 billion
pounds sterling the size of its previously
announced bond portfolio asset purchase

program, for a total of 645 billion pounds sterling.

iv) The Bank of Japan has not adjusted its monetary

policy stance since its unscheduled meeting in
March, in which it left its short-term policy interest
rate unchanged at -0.1% and its long-term
interest rate (indexed to its 10-year bond) at 0%,
and announced several measures to increase the
provision of funds to financial markets. It recently
announced additional measures to maintain repo
market stability.

v) After having lowered its policy rate twice in March,

the Bank of Canada announced a third 50-basis
point cut at the end of the month, lowering that
rate to 0.25%. In its April meeting, it left it
unchanged, while announcing changes in its term
repo transaction facility and new purchases of
commercial paper, regional bonds, corporate

12


-----

bonds and government bonds in the secondary
market, among other measures.

In addition to the above described monetary policy
measures, several countries have continued to
implement fiscal stimulus measures to mitigate the
adverse effects on employment and on households
and firms’ income. Overall, such measures include
direct transfers, wage subsidies, deferments for tax
or loan payments, and improvements in

unemployment insurance, among others.

The evolution of the COVID-19 pandemic and
concerns about its impact on world economic activity
led to a significant deterioration of global financial
conditions in late February. In particular, the main
stock indices of advanced economies fell

significantly, corporate credit spreads widened
considerably, and interest rates of government
securities of advanced economies decreased.
However, since Banco de México’s latest monetary
policy decision, the previously mentioned measures
and the incipient stabilization of the pandemic spread
in some countries gave rise to a less pessimistic
sentiment that partly reversed the adjustments
observed so far during the year. Thus, since Banco
de Mexico’s past monetary policy meeting, the main
stock indices of advanced economies registered
gains; the yield spreads of corporate bonds
decreased; the US dollar depreciated against most
currencies; and interest rates of advanced

economies showed mixed adjustments (Chart 5).
Nevertheless, volatility in international financial
markets persists (Chart 6). In this context, there has
been a recomposition of investors’ portfolios towards
lower risk assets and a reduction in the holdings of
emerging economies’ assets, which has led to a
depreciation of the currencies of these economies
and to a high volatility in their foreign exchange
markets (Chart 7).

Looking ahead, the behavior of financial markets will
be largely influenced by the evolution of the
pandemic, the magnitude of its effects on economic
activity and on specific sectors, such as the crude oil
market, as well as by policy responses aimed at
promoting the well-functioning of financial markets.


1/ MSCI Emerging Markets Index (includes 24 countries).
2/ DXY: Weighted average of the nominal exchange rate of the six main
world-traded currencies (calculated by Intercontinental Exchange, ICE) with
the following weights: EUR (57.6%), JPY (13.6%), GBP (11.9%), CAD
(9.1%), SEK (4.2%), and CHF (3.6%).
3/ J.P. Morgan Index constructed from a weighted average of the nominal
exchange rate of emerging economies’ currencies with the following
weights: TRY (8.3%), RUB (8.3%), HUF (8.3%), ZAR (8.3%), BRL (11.1%),
MXN (11.1%), CLP (11.1%), CNH (11.1%), INR (11.1%), and SGD (11.1%).
Source: Bloomberg and ICE.

It is worth highlighting that a high degree of
uncertainty prevails about the intensity and duration
of the global shock that the pandemic represents. In
this regard, several risks related to the health crisis
persist, such as: i) that both the pandemic and the
consequent lockdown measures are extended or
intensified; ii) that the tightening of financial
conditions continues or increases and that this
permeates to real economic activity and to financial
stability; and, iii) that a slower than expected
recovery of world demand occurs, with a gradual
recovery in households and firms’ spending, in light
of the possibility of a new intensification of the
pandemic or a disruption in global supply chains,
thus affecting investment and employment levels in a
more lasting way. In addition, other risks persist,
such as: i) the possibility of a new escalation of trade
tensions; ii) a worsening of geopolitical, social and
political conflicts in several regions of the world; and
iii) the risk of greater and more frequent economic
costs due to natural disasters attributed to
environmental factors.

13


30%

20%


**Chart 5**

**Change in Selected Financial Indicators**

**from March 23 to April 20, 2020**

Percent, basis points Percentage, basis points

120


10%

0%


80

40


-10%


0

-40


-----

**Chart 6**

**Selected Implied Volatility Indexes**

Percent, basis points

140 <- VIX (S&P)1/ 280

<- V2X (Eurostoxx) 2/

120 <- CVIX (Currencies) 3/ 240

<- OVX (Oil) 4/

100 200

80 160

60 120

40 80

20 40

0 0

J J J J J J J

1/ VIX: Weighted index of 1-month implied volatilities of S&P500 options
published by the Chicago Board Options Exchange. 2/V2X: Weighted index
of 1-month implied volatilities of Euro Stoxx50 options published by
Deutsche Borse and Goldman Sachs. 3/CVIX: 3-month implied volatility
index of most traded FX rates with the following weights: EURUSD: 35.9%,
USDJPY: 21.79%, GBPUSD: 17.95%, USDCHF: 5.13%, USDCAD: 5.13%,
AUDUSD: 6.14%, EURJPY: 3.85%, EURGBP: 2.56%, and EURCHF:
1.28%. 4/ OVX: Weighted index of 1-month implied volatilities of crude oil
options (CBOE Crude Oil Volatility Index). 5/ MOVE: Index of US Treasury
yield volatility implied by current prices of 1-month at-the-money options on
2-year, 5-year, 10-year and 30-year Treasuries, calculated by Merrill Lynch.
Source: Banco de México with Bloomberg data.


**Chart 7**

**Emerging Economies: Financial Assets**

**Performance from March 19 to April 20, 2020**

Percent, basis points

**Equity** **Interest** **Interest**
**Region** **Country** **Currencies** **CDS**

**markets** **rates 2Y** **rates 10Y**

**Mexico** **-0.05%** **-1.90%** **-160** **-117** **15**

**Latin** **Brazil** **-4.33%** **15.57%** **-233** **-146** **-41**

**America** **Chile** **0.91%** **21.64%** **-43** **-69** **-39**

**Colombia** **2.73%** **31.10%** **-101** **-127** **-81**

**Russia** **4.59%** **11.00%** **-229** **-213** **-100**

**Poland** **2.55%** **11.15%** **-43** **-39** **-4**

**Emerging**

**Turkey** **-6.07%** **16.14%** **-183** **-114** **-121**

**Europe**

**Czech Republic** **2.85%** **19.39%** **-24** **-5** **-5**

**Hungary** **2.81%** **11.64%** **50** **4** **-2**

**Malaysia** **0.94%** **15.86%** **-23** **-15** **-77**

**India** **-2.03%** **11.88%** **-76** **-103** **18**

**Asia** **Philippines** **0.63%** **24.01%** **-25** **-28** **-71**

**Thailand** **0.33%** **21.28%** **-19** **-42** **13**

**Indonesia** **3.14%** **11.46%** **1** **-22** **-67**

**Africa** **South Africa** **-7.96%** **28.68%** **-105** **-133** **-21**

Note: Interest rates correspond to interest rate swaps for 2-year/10-year
maturities. In the case of Argentina, rates in US dollars are used since they
are the most liquid ones and those that reflect more adequately the
performance of the fixed income market in that country.
Source: Bloomberg.


**A.2. Current situation of the Mexican economy**

**A.2.1. Mexican markets**

Since Banco de Mexico’s previous monetary policy
decision, although domestic financial markets have
shown a slight improvement, significant risks to their
performance persist. In addition, three rating
agencies downgraded the sovereign and Pemex’s
credit ratings and two of them ranked the latter below
investment grade. Thus, the prices of financial assets
in Mexico showed a mixed behavior that was
differentiated by asset class (Chart 8). This took
place in an environment where a sentiment of caution
towards emerging economies by investors prevailed.

The peso exchange rate fluctuated in a broad range
of 22.89-25.77 pesos per US dollar, with the latter
representing a new historical intraday high.

Nevertheless, in the last weeks the peso exchange
rate stabilized at around 24.00 pesos per US dollar,
in a context where both FX spot and forward outright
trading conditions remained deteriorated (Chart 9). It
is worth pointing out that Banco México, using the
mutual and temporary swap lines agreed with the US
Federal Reserve, carried out two credit auctions for
5 billion US dollars each, with the purpose of
providing liquidity in this currency to the country’s
credit institutions and ensure a better functioning of
the USD funding market.

**Chart 8**

**Mexican Markets’ Performance**

Percent, pesos/US dollar and index


Range in year Range since last monetary policy decision Mar-19-20 Last level

Source: Prepared by Banco de México.


9.5

9.0

8.5

8.0

7.5

7.0

6.5

6.0

5.5

5.0

4.5


4.3

4.1

3.9

3.7

3.5

3.3

3.1

2.9


26.0

25.0

24.0

23.0

22.0

21.0

20.0

19.0

18.0


48,000

46,000

44,000

42,000

40,000

38,000

36,000

34,000

32,000


M Bond


Inflation indexed bonds


Range in year Range since last monetary policy decision Mar-19-20 Last level


14


-----

**Chart 11**

**Banxico Overnight Interbank Rate Implied in**

**TIIE IRS Curve**

Percent

8.50

8.25

8.00

7.75

7.50

7.25

7.00

6.75

6.50

6.25 Banxico overnight rate

6.00

5.75 Rest of the period

5.50

Last

5.25

5.00 Last monetary policy

4.75 decision

4.50

A   N  F M   J   O   D   M   J   A   N  F   A  J   O  D

2018   2019              2020           2021

Source: Prepared by Banco de México with Bloomberg data.

**A.2.2. Economic activity in Mexico**

At the beginning of 2020, and prior to the COVID-19
spread, the stagnation that Mexico’s economic
activity has registered for several quarters continued.
In this context, since the virus outbreak at the end of
the first quarter economic activity has been
negatively affected. Said negative impact is foreseen
to have intensified in April and to extend for a period
that is difficult to determine, and to lead to a
significant contraction of economic activity in the first
half of the year and to an overall decline of aggregate
demand components.

In January – February 2020, manufacturing exports
showed an improvement associated with a slight
recovery of automotive exports, while the lackluster
growth in the rest of manufacturing exports persisted.
By destination, exports to both the United States and
the rest of world slightly recovered (Chart 12).
Nevertheless, looking ahead, the greater weakness
of the world economy, as well as the impact of the
measures to contain the COVID-19 spread on
domestic production and supplies’ availability, will
significantly affect the Mexican export sector.

15


25.50
25.00
24.50
24.00
23.50
23.00
22.50
22.00
21.50
21.00
20.50
20.00
19.50
19.00
18.50
18.00
17.50
17.00


**Chart 9**

**Mexican Peso Exchange Rate**

**with Moving Averages**

Pesos/US dollar

Mexican peso

100-day moving average **20.416**

200-day moving average **19.9253**

J F M A M J J A S O N D J F M A  M J J A S O N D J F M A M J  J A S O N D J  F M A


Source: Prepared by Banco de México.

After having increased considerably in this period,
interest rates of government securities decreased up
to 176 basis points throughout the entire yield curve,
with short- and medium-term rates registering the
greatest adjustments, although they remain volatile
(Chart 10). Such adjustments took place in a context
where trading conditions continued to slightly
deteriorate.

**Chart 10**

**Nominal Yield Curve on Government Securities**

Percent, basis points

8.90 0

8.40 -25

30

6 -50

7.90 5

-75

7.40

-100

6.90

-125

6.40

-150

5.90 -175

5.40 -200

Mar-19-20 Apr-20-20 Change (Mar-19-20 to Apr-20-20)

Trading range over the period

Source: PIP.

As to expectations regarding the path of the
monetary policy target rate, information implied in the
Interbank Equilibrium Interest Rate (TIIE) swap curve
discounts a 75-basis point cut for the scheduled
monetary policy decision of May, while private sector
forecasters surveyed by Citibanamex are expecting
a 50-basis point cut. For the end of 2020, market
variables are anticipating a target rate of around
4.70% (Chart 11), while the median of surveyed
forecasters remained at 5.50%.


-----

**Chart 12**

**Total Manufacturing Exports**

Indices 2013 = 100, s. a.


150

140

130

120

110

100

90

80

70

J

2013


A J O J

2014


A J O J

2015


A J O J

2016


A J O J

2017


A J O J

2018


A J O J

2019


A J O J F

2020


s. a. / Seasonally adjusted series and trend series based on data in nominal
US dollars. The former is represented by a solid line and the latter by a
dotted line.
Source: Prepared by Banco de México with data from the Tax
Administration Service (SAT, for its acronym in Spanish), the Ministry of the
Economy (SE, for its acronym in Spanish), Banco de México, the National
Institute of Statistics and Geography (INEGI, for its acronym in Spanish),
Mexico’s Merchandise Trade Balance, and the National System of
Statistical and Geographical Information (SNIEG, for its acronym in
Spanish).

In January 2020, private consumption continued to
exhibit sluggishness, mainly associated with the
stagnation of consumption of domestic goods and
services. Timely indicators of consumption suggest
that said aggregate remained weak prior to the
COVID-19 spread. In particular, in February retailer’s
earnings and sales of manufacturing industries that
are more related with consumption in the domestic
market continued to show an unfavorable

performance. In addition, the adoption of measures
necessary to contain the pandemic have already
resulted in significant effects on other indicators,
such as the strong contraction in the sales of light
vehicles in March. Although gross fixed investment
somewhat recovered in January –due to the slight
rebound in construction, given that spending in
machinery and equipment continued trending
downwards–, like consumption, it is expected to be
significantly affected since the end of the first quarter
due to the greater uncertainty and the economic
impact associated with the pandemic.

As for production, the downward path followed by
industrial production and the lackluster performance
of services persisted at the beginning of 2020 (Chart
13). Within the industrial sector, although a recovery
was observed in transportation equipment

manufacturing during the first quarter of the year,
overall manufacturing continued trending

downwards, while construction remained at low
levels (Chart 14). In contrast, mining continued to
recover, mainly driven by greater oil extraction.
Tertiary activities continued to stagnate in January


2020, mostly reflecting the decline in retail trade,
transportation, and mass media information services,
although the rest of services also exhibited
weakness. The negative performance of productive
activity is expected to have intensified by the end of
the first quarter and to deepen even further in the
second quarter, due to the shutdown of several
sectors to comply with the official measures to deal
with the health emergency.

**Chart 13**

**Economic Activity Indicators**

Indexes 2013 = 100, s. a.

120 140

Total IGAE 1/

Industrial production 2/

115 Services IGAE 1/ 130

Agricultural and livestock products IGAE 1/

110 120

105 110

100 100

January

February

95 90

J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J F

2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020

s. a. / Seasonally adjusted and trend series. The former is represented by a
solid line and the latter by a dotted line.
1/ Figures up to January 2020.
2/ Monthly industrial activity indicator figures up to February 2020.
Source: Mexico’s National Accounts System (SCNM, for its acronym in
Spanish), INEGI.

**Chart 14**

**Industrial Activity [1/]**

Indexes 2013 = 100, s. a.

130

120

110

100

90

Total

Mining (22.3%)

80

Manufacturing (49.7%)

70 Construction (23.3%)

Utilities (4.7%)

February

60

J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J F

2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020

s. a. / Seasonally adjusted and trend series. The former is represented by a
solid line and the latter by a dotted line.
1/ Figures in parentheses correspond to their share in the total in 2013.
Source: Mexico’s National Accounts System (SCNM, for its acronym in
Spanish), INEGI.

As to the economy’s cyclical position, it is clear that
slack conditions are widening considerably,

reflecting the persisting weakness of economic
activity registered at the beginning of 2020 and the
effects of the measures aimed at containing the
spread of COVID-19 (Chart 15). As to the labor

16


-----

market, in January – February 2020 both the national
and urban unemployment rates followed an upward
trend and stood at levels above the average for 2019
(Chart 16). The unfavorable performance in the
creation of IMSS-insured jobs that had been
observed intensified significantly due to the

pandemic’s effects, leading to the loss of 350,000
jobs between March and the first week of April,
according to an announcement from the Ministry of
Labor and Social Welfare (STPS, for its acronym in
Spanish). Finally, as a result of the behavior of
productivity and real average earnings, unit labor
costs in the manufacturing sector remained at
particularly high levels in February (Chart 17).

**Chart 15**

**Output Gap Estimates [1/]**

**Excluding Oil Industry [4/ ]**

Potential output percentages, s. a.

8

Global Economic Activity Indicator (IGAE) 2/

6 Gross Domestic Product 2/

95% Confidence Interval 3/

4

2

0

-2

-4

-6

-8

-10

Q-IV

January

-12

J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J

2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020

s. a. / Calculations based on seasonally adjusted figures.
1/ Output gap estimated with a tail-corrected Hodrick-Prescott filter; see
Banco de México (2009), “Inflation Report (April-June 2009)", p.74.
2/ Fourth quarter of 2019 GDP figure and January 2020 IGAE figure.
3/ Output gap confidence interval calculated with a method of unobserved
components.
4/ Excludes both oil and gas extraction, support activities for mining, and
petroleum and coal products' manufacturing.
Source: Prepared by Banco de México with INEGI data.


s. a. / Seasonally adjusted and trend series. The former is represented by a
solid line and the latter by a dotted line.
Source: National Survey of Occupations and Employment (ENOE, for its
acronym in Spanish), INEGI.

**Chart 17**

**Productivity and Unit Labor Costs in the**

**Manufacturing Sector[1/]**
Indices 2013 = 100, s. a.

115

Unit labor costs

Productivity

110

105

100

95

February

90

J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J F

2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020

s. a. / Seasonally adjusted and trend series. The former is represented by a
solid line and the latter by a dotted line. Trend series estimated by Banco
de México.
1/ Productivity based on hours worked.
Source: Prepared by Banco de México with seasonally adjusted data from
the Monthly Survey of the Manufacturing Industry and from industrial activity
indicators from INEGI’s National Accounts System (Sistema de Cuentas
Nacionales de México).

In February 2020, domestic financing to the private
sector continued showing a reduction in its growth
rate. Within it, financing to private firms contracted.
This trend is explained by lower bank credit and
domestic debt issuance. As to the household
segment, both mortgages and consumer credit
continued to decelerate. As for interest rates, those
of firm financing decreased, in line with the reduction
of the overnight funding interest rate. In turn, interest
rates of mortgages remained at levels close to those
of December 2019, when such rates decreased visà-vis those that had been observed since the second
quarter of 2017. In the segment of consumer credit,
and with figures to December 2019, interest rates of

17


**Chart 16**

**National Unemployment Rate and Urban**

**Unemployment Rate**

Percent, s. a.


8.5

National unemployment rate

8.0

7.5 Urban unemployment rate

7.0

6.5

6.0

5.5

5.0

4.5

4.0

3.5

3.0

February

2.5

J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J F

2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020


-----

credit cards remained unchanged as compared to
previous months, while those of personal loans
increased. With regards to portfolio quality, firm and
mortgage delinquency rates remained at low levels,
while those related to consumption did not change
significantly and remain at high levels.

As a result of the contingency stemming from the
COVID-19 pandemic, there is the risk that the
loanable funds market deteriorates over the next
months, both because some creditors may have
difficulties in meeting their obligations and because
some credit institutions may restrict financing as a
precautionary measure. To face this scenario, during
March and April, the authorities announced several
measures aimed at temporarily alleviating the
financial burden of creditors with banks and with the
National Housing Fund (Infonavit, for its acronym in
Spanish).

**A.2.3. Development of inflation and inflation**
**outlook**

The COVID-19 pandemic and the measures adopted
to contain its spread are starting to affect the
evolution of inflation. The most evident effect is the
fall in energy product prices, which has led to a
decline in non-core inflation, although incipient
pressures, both downward and upward, on the prices
of certain goods and services related to core inflation
were observed and would appear to be associated
with changes in their relative demand as a result of
the contingency. Thus, between February and March
2020, annual headline inflation decreased from 3.70
to 3.25% (Chart 18 and Table 1).

**Chart 18**

**Consumer Price Index**

Annual percentage change

13

CPI

12

Core

11

10 Non-core

9

8

7

6

5

4

3

2

1

March

0

J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J

2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020

Source: Banco de México and INEGI.

Annual core inflation stood at 3.66% and 3.60% in
February and March 2020, respectively. In particular,
the annual rate of change of merchandise prices


remained practically the same, at 2.82 and 2.83% in
those two months. Within it, as a result of the health
crisis, a slight rebound in the annual rates of change
of food merchandise prices was observed, while that
of non-food merchandise prices continued to
decrease (Chart 19). The annual rates of change of
the subindex of services prices decreased from 3.48
to 3.35% (Chart 20), with the decreases in services
other than education and housing standing out. In
this regard, the decline in the annual rate of change
of tourist services being noteworthy, reflecting the
lower demand for this type of services due to the
health emergency.

**Chart 19**

**Merchandise Core Price Subindex**

Annual percentage change

8

Food, beverages and tobacco

Non-food merchandise

7

6

5

4

3

2

1

March

0

J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J

2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020

Source: Banco de México and INEGI.

**Chart 20**

**Merchandise and Services Core Price Subindex**

Annual percentage change

7

Merchandise

6 Services

5

4

3

2

1

March

0

J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J

2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020

Source: Banco de México and INEGI.

Between February and March 2020, non-core
inflation declined from 3.81 to 2.19% (Chart 21 and
Table 1). Mixed behaviors were observed in its
components. Oh the one hand, important reductions
were observed in the annual rates of change of
energy product prices, which fell from -0.54 to -6.36%
in these months. This result was largely influenced
by the lower variations in gasoline prices, which in
turn reflected the sudden decreases of their

18


-----

international references. In contrast, the annual rates
of change of agricultural and livestock product prices
increased from 7.82 to 9.96%, with the recent
acceleration exhibited by the annual rates of change
of its two components (fruits and vegetables and
livestock products) standing out.

As to inflation expectations drawn from Banco de
México’s Survey of Private Sector Forecasters, the
median for headline inflation for the end of 2020
increased from 3.53% a 3.64% between February
and March. For its part, those for the medium and
long term remained at 3.50%. As to the medians for
core inflation expectations for the short, medium and
long term, they all remained at around 3.50%. Finally,
breakeven inflation increased in the same period,
due to an increase in inflation risk premium and
marginal increases in long-term inflation

expectations implied in market instruments.

However, both breakeven inflation and inflation risk
decreased during the first weeks of April.


Source: Banco de México and INEGI.

In the current environment and as result of the
COVID-19 pandemic, inflation would be subject to
pressures on two fronts. To the downside, those
stemming from the widening of the negative output
gap and, in the short term, from the decline in energy
prices, particularly of gasoline; to the upside, those
resulting from the depreciation of the peso exchange
rate, which will depend on its magnitude and
persistence. Although these factors may impact
headline inflation at different moments, inflation is
expected to converge to Banco de México’s target
within the time frame in which monetary policy
operates. Nevertheless, uncertainty as to the
balance of risks for inflation has increased
significantly.

19


**Chart 21**

**Non-core Price Subindex**
Annual percentage change


20

Non-core
Agricultural and livestock products
Energy and government-authorized prices

15

10

5

0

-5 March

J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J

2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020


-----

**Table 1**

**Consumer Price Index and Components**

Annual percentage change

**Item** **January 2020** **February 2020** **March 2020**

**CPI** **3.24** **3.70** **3.25**

**SubyacenteCore** **3.73** **3.66** **3.60**

**Merchandise** **3.92** **3.82** **3.83**

Food, beverages and tobacco 5.10 4.99 5.05

Non-food merchandise 2.68 2.58 2.54

**Services** **3.51** **3.48** **3.35**

Housing 2.93 2.94 2.93

Education (tuitions) 4.69 4.55 4.58

Other services 3.78 3.72 3.47

**No SubyacenteNon-core** **1.81** **3.81** **2.19**

**Agricultural and livestock products** **1.44** **7.82** **9.96**

Fruits and vegetablesFruits abd vegetables -1.76 11.23 13.47

Livestock productsLivestock 4.45 4.91 7.00

**Energy and government-authorized prices Energéticos y Tarifas Aut. por Gobierno** **2.08** **1.01** **-3.13**

Energy productsEnergy 0.86 -0.54 -6.36

Government-authorized pricesTarifas Autorizadas por Gobierno 5.07 4.86 4.98

Source:INEGI


20


-----

-----

-----

