-----

-----

**FOREWARNING**
This document is provided for the reader’s convenience
only. The translation from the official Spanish version was
made by Banco de México’s staff. Discrepancies may arise
between the original document in Spanish and its English
translation. For this reason, the original Spanish version is
the only official document.


**1. PLACE, DATE AND PARTICIPANTS**

**1.1 Place: Meeting held through virtual means.**

**1.2. Date of Governing Board meeting: March 19,**
2020.

**1.3. Participants:**
Alejandro Díaz de León-Carrillo, Governor.
Irene Espinosa-Cantellano, Deputy Governor.
Gerardo Esquivel-Hernández, Deputy Governor.
Javier Eduardo Guzmán-Calafell, Deputy Governor.
Jonathan Ernest Heath-Constable, Deputy
Governor.
Arturo Herrera-Gutiérrez, Secretary of Finance and
Public Credit.
Gabriel Yorio-González, Undersecretary of Finance
and Public Credit.
Elías Villanueva-Ochoa, Secretary of the Governing
Board

Prior to this meeting, preliminary work by Banco de
México’s staff analyzing the economic and financial
environment, together with the developments in
inflation and the determinants and outlook for
inflation, was conducted and presented to the
Governing Board (see annex).

**2. ANALYSIS AND RATIONALE BEHIND THE**
**GOVERNING BOARD’S VOTING**

**_International environment_**

**All members pointed out that the world economy**
**and its growth outlook deteriorated rapidly and**
**significantly as a result of the COVID-19**
**outbreak. Most members agreed that the**
**isolation measures adopted have contributed to**
**the halt in economic activity, to supply chain**
**disruptions, and to a decline of global demand.**
**Some** members mentioned that the pandemic has
strongly affected the public health systems and social
dynamics.

**Some** argued that the possibility of a global
recession in 2020 has increased, while one pointed
out that, in general, a recovery is expected for next


year. One member considered that, given the
magnitude of the shock and the impact that has
already been reflected in some economic indicators,
a significant contraction is foreseeable during the first
quarter of 2020, which could continue into the next
quarter. Another member considered that the length
and depth of the recession would depend on the
duration of the suspension of activities. One member
mentioned that the variation in the magnitude of the
revisions to growth forecasts reflects the uncertainty
regarding the intensity, duration and consequences
of the impact.

**Among the risks to world economic activity, most**
**members highlighted a greater-than-expected**
**spread of COVID-19. One member** underlined that,
given the severity of the pandemic, it constitutes an
unprecedented global risk factor. In particular, he/she
emphasized the complexity of handling it, its rapid
spread and the fatalities it can lead to.

**Some** members mentioned the escalation of trade
tensions along with political and geopolitical tensions
as additional risks. One mentioned the US electoral
process. **Some** members pointed out that the
balance of risks for the world economy is significantly
biased to the downside.

**All members mentioned that the prices of**
**commodities, especially of crude oil, have**
**plummeted. Most members underlined that this**
**is due to the observed and anticipated reduction**
**in demand and to disputes among the main oil**
**producers. One** member stated that headline and
core inflation in advanced economies are expected
to decline, due to the economic weakness and to the
lower prices of primary goods. He/she mentioned
that inflation in emerging economies could benefit
from these factors, although it could also be affected
to the upside by the depreciation of their exchange
rates.

**Given the described environment, all members**
**mentioned that different central banks in**
**advanced and emerging economies lowered their**
**interest rates, in some cases ahead of schedule.**
**Most members mentioned that the US Federal**
**Reserve held two unscheduled meetings, in**
**which it cut the federal funds rate by a total of 150**
**basis points, down to a range of 0-0.25%. Such**
**members pointed out that, globally, other**
**extraordinary monetary measures have also**
**been implemented to mitigate the effects of the**
**expected fall in domestic and external demand,**
**and to guarantee the well-functioning of financial**
**markets. In particular, they highlighted the**

1


-----

**measures to provide liquidity and incentivize**
**credit, as well as the purchase programs of the**
**following assets: i) government bonds; ii)**
**mortgage-backed** **securities;** **iii)** **corporate**

**bonds; iv) non-financial firms’ commercial**
**papers; v) equity funds, and vi) real estate**
**investment funds. Some** members added that the
US Federal Reserve established new liquidity swap
lines with other central banks. **One mentioned the**
decrease in the minimum reserve requirements for
banks implemented by the US Federal Reserve.
**Another** member mentioned that some central
banks in emerging economies have taken measures
to contain the depreciation pressures or to improve
foreign exchange market trading conditions.

**Most members pointed out that the governments**
**of** **different** **economies** **have** **implemented**

**expansionary fiscal policies aimed at reducing**
**the impact of the pandemic, in order to support**
**households and businesses.** However, **one**
member pointed out that the announced measures
have failed to alleviate the nervousness among
investors, which makes it essential to have firm and
integral policies, capable of coordinating both fiscal
and monetary efforts that guarantee income and
employment in strategic sectors, and that are
perceived as sufficient to reverse the shock on
economic activity.

**In this context, all members highlighted the**
**significant deterioration of international financial**
**markets, underlining the greater volatility and**
**risk aversion. Some** members indicated that the
above is due to the uncertainty regarding the length
of the pandemic and the extent of its effects. **Most**
**members added that it is also the result of the fall**
**in oil prices. Some** members mentioned that the
deterioration of international markets is comparable
to that observed during the 2009 global financial
crisis. **One** member pointed out that this negative
performance is expected to continue during the
following months and underlined the high levels of
the VIX index. **Most members noted that stock**
**exchanges** **around** **the** **world** **have** **been**

**negatively affected. One** member stated that in
advanced economies considerable outflows from
stock markets towards fixed income instruments
have been observed. **Most members pointed out**
**that emerging economies have also been**
**affected, and emphasized the capital outflows**
**that have exerted pressure on the exchange**
**rates, interest rates and stock markets. Such**
**members also noted that country risk indicators**
**have deteriorated. One** member highlighted that
lower crude oil prices are a risk factor, given that all


oil and gas companies are facing additional falls in
the value of their assets, equity and debt securities.
**Another one stated that the balance of risks for**
financial markets is significantly biased to the
downside.

**_Economic activity in Mexico_**

**Most members mentioned that timely information**
**released prior to the pandemic-related events**
**shows that domestic economic activity has**
**remained weak. On the production side,** **one**
member noted that the deceleration of industrial
activity, particularly of manufacturing, as well as the
weakness of services, which registered a higher
number of subsectors with annual contractions,
persisted. As for domestic demand, he/she

mentioned that all components remain weak,
especially investment, and, more recently,

consumption. He/she pointed out that regarding
external demand, automotive exports increased at
the beginning of the year, while the remaining sectors
exhibited weakness.

**Most members pointed out that technical**
**shutdowns began to be observed across**
**different sectors in March due to the shortage of**
**inputs. Such members also noted that a**
**significant impact on domestic demand is**
**anticipated, in particular, on consumption and**
**investment. Some members** underlined the impact
on domestic demand of the social distancing
measures and the fear of contagion among the
population. **One** member highlighted that, so far,
economic activity and inflation indicators are still not
reflecting the impact of the shocks caused by the
pandemic and by the lower oil prices. He/she
indicated that said shocks would materialize in a
situation characterized by an inflation rate and its
short- and long-term expectations above target, as
well as by a weak economy.

**Most members mentioned that the disruption in**
**global supply chains and the restriction of flows**
**of individuals and international goods will**
**strongly affect tourism and services in general.**
**Some** members added that households will face a
contraction in their income and will have fewer
spending opportunities. **One** member noted that,
based on the experience of the A (H1-N1) epidemic
in 2009, indeed, the strongest impact might be
perceived in certain segments of the services sector,
such as education, restaurants, tourism, and
transport. He/she added that businesses will face
significant challenges such as lower revenues and
high uncertainty regarding the demand for their

2


-----

goods and services, which can generate solvency
and unemployment problems. **Some** members
mentioned that the manufacturing export sectors will
also be affected. **One** member highlighted the
possible impact of the global pandemic on Mexico’s
external demand. Another one noted that additional
technical shutdowns can occur due to the lack of
inputs.

**Most members noted that the impact of the**
**pandemic on economic activity, in a context of a**
**greater weakness of the global economy, leads**
**to a deterioration of the growth outlook. Such**
**members stated that, although it is not possible**
**to accurately estimate the magnitude of the**
**impact on economic activity, an economic**
**contraction is foreseen for 2020. One** member
pointed out that this would result from a combination
of different shocks, from both the supply and demand
sides. **Some** members noted that their length and
depth would depend on the duration of the
suspension of activities. **One** member added that,
based on data provided by the authorities, the impact
of COVID-19 is expected to worsen during the
second quarter and to extend for a yet undetermined
period. He/she mentioned that analysts and
international organizations’ expectations for

economic activity in 2020 and 2021 have been
revised downwards. **Some** members specified that
for 2020 these lie at a range of between -1% and
slightly above -5%. **One** member noted that most
estimates lie between -2 and -4%. Another member
mentioned that estimates are still characterized by
high uncertainty and a downward bias.

**Most members considered that the balance of**
**risks for growth is strongly biased to the**
**downside. Some** members signaled the risk of a
greater contagion of COVID-19. **One** member
mentioned the possibility of a more prolonged impact
on world economic activity. Meanwhile, **some**
members stated that there are a number of risks for
local financial markets, which could negatively
impact domestic economic activity. **One** member
specified that a pronounced epidemic phase would
significantly affect the income of both the private and
public sectors, and would contribute to a

deterioration of credit risk, which could lead to
financial and solvency problems. He/she added that
the shock of oil prices is particularly negative for
economies with an important hydrocarbon sector,
such as the Mexican one, which will make the
adjustment of the economy more complex. Finally,
he/she acknowledged that domestic factors that
affect both confidence and the economic outlook
persist.


As for the labor market, one member pointed out that
the trend of lower job creation has prevailed. He/she
added that, in the current context, employment is
foreseen to be considerably affected. **Some**
members considered that economic slack has
increased. In view of the deteriorated growth outlook,
**most members mentioned that** **an even greater-**
**than-anticipated widening of slack conditions is**
**foreseen.**

**_Inflation in Mexico_**

**Most members mentioned that, between January**
**and February, headline inflation increased,**
**mainly due to a rebound in the non-core**
**component. One** member indicated that the latter
was due to the comparison base effect and to
pressures on agricultural and livestock product
prices. Another member stated that the increase in
the non-core index was anticipated, given

expectations that the fall in agricultural and livestock
product prices observed in 2019 would revert. As to
the core component, some members highlighted that
it has shown persistence. One member argued that
this confirms that, despite the greater slack, other
factors, such as wage increases, have prevented it
from decreasing. Meanwhile, another member
pointed out that this component remained on a
slightly declining trend. He/she added that food
merchandise inflation decreased after the increase
observed in January, as a result of an adjustment to
the Excise Tax (IEPS, for its acronym in Spanish),
and that services inflation continued to decline.

**Some** members indicated that although inflation is
expected to continue its trend to Banco de México’s
target in the time frame in which monetary policy
operates, it could be slower and is subject to
important risks, both to the upside and to the
downside. **One** member stated that, in view of the
deterioration of global and domestic conditions,
inflation forecasts are subject to high uncertainty.
**Another member considered that the combination of**
supply and demand shocks, as well as higher
uncertainty, will probably result in upward pressures
on inflation in 2020.

**As for inflation risks, most members mentioned**
**that the expected widening of the negative output**
**gap and the fall in international energy prices**
**could imply downward inflation pressures.**
**Nonetheless, such members considered that this**
**could be offset by the upward pressure the peso**
**exchange rate depreciation might exert on**
**prices. One** member argued that, even if the
depreciation persists, it would occur in a context of

3


-----

economic contraction. He/she mentioned that the
pass-through to prices will depend on the persistence
of the exchange rate adjustment and on the
economy’s cyclical position. Among upward risks for
inflation, **some** members mentioned the pressures
stemming from the disruption of global value chains
and from the shortage of certain goods as a result of
the suspension of activities.

**One member** mentioned that a key price in the future
developments of inflation is gasoline prices. He/she
indicated that the international reference has
declined by a greater percentage than the exchange
rate depreciation, and thus the price of gasoline in
Mexican pesos should decrease. He/she stated that
this has already started to take place in different parts
of the country. He/she added that, given its
contribution to headline inflation and its role in the
determination of other prices, the fall in energy prices
would become an important downward bias for
inflation.

In this context, some members considered that the
uncertainty over the balance of risks for inflation has
intensified. One member highlighted that, given the
complex environment, both upward and downward
risks have increased. **Another** member stated that
there is uncertainty over the magnitude and the
duration of different supply and demand shocks, as
well as over the persistence of adverse conditions in
financial markets, and therefore their effect on
inflation in the short, medium and long terms is
uncertain. One member considered that the balance
of risks is biased to the upside. **Another one**
mentioned that it is slightly biased to the downside
due to the following: i) the shock on agricultural and
livestock product prices usually fades in a few
months; ii) the fall in energy prices; and iii) although
the peso exchange rate has depreciated, commodity
prices and the fall in aggregate demand will end up
exerting a greater influence on inflation.

**_Macrofinancial environment_**

**In an environment of greater risk aversion**
**worldwide, most members highlighted that**
**domestic financial markets exhibited a negative**
**performance.** **Some members underlined the**
deterioration of trading conditions in these markets.
In this context, **all** **members noted that the peso**
**exchange rate depreciated significantly. One**
member mentioned that this is explained by several
factors, such as the greater risk aversion and the fall
in oil prices, which also affected the exchange rate of
other oil-exporting countries’ currencies. **Some**
members added that this depreciation was greater


than that observed in most emerging economies and
**one member added that the depreciation of the peso**
exchange rate vis-à-vis other emerging currencies
reflects idiosyncratic factors, such as the concerns
regarding Pemex and public finances, as well as the
respective credit ratings, and that other risks such as
those stemming from the US elections persist.

**The majority of members pointed out that interest**
**rates** **of** **government** **securities** **increased**

**significantly for all terms. One member added that**
over the last weeks, outflows by foreign investors
have increased importantly. **Some** members

highlighted that the stock market fell considerably.
**Most members noted that** **risk premia increased**
**sharply. One member stated that the dramatic fall in**
oil prices contributed to such an increase, and thus
Pemex continues to be a significant risk factor for
public finances and raises an alarm regarding the
possibility of a downgrade to the sovereign’s credit
rating in the near future. **The majority explained**
**that, although interest rate spreads between**
**Mexico and the United States widened, after**
**adjusting for FX volatility, they have in fact been**
**narrowing.**

**Most members mentioned the possibility of**
**implementing fiscal measures to address the**
**needs of the health sector and support the**
**population, firms and sectors that are most**
**affected.** **Some members stated that, given the**
constraints that public finances face, the above is
subject to a reallocation of public spending that
carefully considers the priorities to allocate resources
to. **Some** members argued that an option for the
government is to use the sources of extraordinary
revenues at its disposal, which would enable it to
meet the public balance target. One member added
the possibility of postponing the primary surplus
target at least for this year and stated that both
options would imply a greater debt-to-GDP ratio.
He/she emphasized that fiscal policy faces the
dilemma between acting or not and the need to meet
its fiscal targets or not. Another member noted that,
in response to the contingency, increased spending
would exert greater pressure on public finances,
which already are in a vulnerable situation, and thus
the possibility of a countercyclical fiscal support
package should necessarily be accompanied by a
reassessment of priorities that allows for an efficient
allocation of available resources immediately to the
needs of the health sector, and, at a later stage, to
the reactivation of economic activity in the strategic
sectors affected, firms, and families, as well as to a
vigorous public investment.

4


-----

**The majority of members warned that both the**
**fall in oil prices and the lower economic growth**
**increase fiscal accounts’ vulnerability. In this**
**context, they highlighted the importance of**
**maintaining the sustainability of public finances.**
**One member added that this would be achieved with**
measures that boost economic growth.

**Most members pointed out that the already weak**
**financial situation of Pemex became more**
**complex due to the fall in oil prices. One member**
noted that an assessment of its current projects and
a greater financial support by the federal government
cannot be ruled out. Another member mentioned
that, in light of the current juncture, Pemex’s
business plan should be re-assessed. The majority
**emphasized that the situation of Pemex is a risk**
**factor for public finances, underlining the**
**possibility of a downgrading of both the**
**sovereign and the State-owned company’s credit**
**rating. One member stated that yield spreads on**
Pemex bonds have already increased considerably.
Finally, **some members pointed out that solving**
Pemex’s problems should be given special attention
at this moment.

**Given an adverse juncture as the current one, the**
**majority of members highlighted the importance**
**of** **maintaining** **sound** **macroeconomic**

**fundamentals and adopting actions that foster a**
**better adjustment of financial markets and of the**
**economy overall. Similarly, they pointed out that,**
**in an environment as the one described above, it**
**is even more relevant to generate public policies**
**that provide certainty to private investment. In**
this regard, **some members warned that it is**
important to avoid changing the rules for already
made investments. They expressed concern about
the impact on investment confidence of the
scheduled public consultation to authorize the
operations of a brewery, whose construction is
already 80% completed. Such members added that,
if the project is cancelled, the negative effect on the
business climate would be even greater. **One**
member added that the controversies in 2019
regarding gas pipeline contracts awarded to the
private sector increased the negative sentiment
among investors. He/she argued that no monetary or
fiscal measure would have the expected benefits if
there is no confidence to invest. **Some members**
noted the concerns of the private sector regarding
the prevailing challenges in terms of legal certainty,
insecurity, and public policies’ clarity. As for growth
in the medium and long term, **one member argued**
that: i) strengthening the rule of law; ii) increasing
economic productivity; and, iii) promoting actions that


improve confidence and investment expectations are
essential.

**_Monetary policy_**

**Given the foreseen impact of the shocks**
**stemming from the COVID-19 pandemic, most**
**members decided to move forward the date of the**
**monetary policy announcement from March 26 to**
**20 and lower the target for the overnight**
**interbank interest rate by 50 basis points to** **6.5%,**
**as well as to adopt other measures to provide**
**liquidity and improve the functioning of domestic**
**financial markets. One member voted for lowering**
the target to 6.75%. **One member added that all**
available tools to fulfill the constitutional mandate of
preserving the peso’s purchasing power and
ensuring the well-functioning of financial markets and
payment systems must be used.

**The majority of members pointed out that,**
**considering the risks implied by the COVID-19**
**pandemic,** **significant** **challenges** **arise** **for**

**monetary policy. In this regard, they highlighted**
**that the economic outlook has deteriorated**
**significantly, while the peso exchange rate has**
**depreciated considerably, in an environment**
**where risk premia and volatility in financial**
**markets have increased.** **One member stated that,**
in light of the complex environment, the monetary
policy decision must assess the trade-offs associated
with the inflation outlook in an environment in which,
despite the uncertainty as to the extent and
persistence of the shocks it is subject to, it is highly
likely that a significant economic contraction and
recession occurs.

He/she added that the above takes place in a context
where the monetary conditions in the major
economies have eased considerably, and such
economies have adopted a broad range of stimuli to
revert the deterioration of their financing conditions.
He/she also noted that the situation of the current
monetary policy stance should also be considered,
as such stance, despite having faced other shocks
and their inflationary effects over the last years, and
albeit being already in a downward adjustment
process, is still at relatively high levels, in an
economy that, in face of the COVID-19 pandemic,
will suffer a very sizable impact that will lead it to a
significant recession. He/she mentioned that,

additionally, the financial shock also associated with
the pandemic may imply upward risks for the price
formation process due to the pressures associated
with the depreciation of the peso exchange rate. In
this regard, he/she highlighted that its pass-through

5


-----

to prices will depend on the persistence of the foreign
exchange adjustment and on the economy’s cyclical
position, which is already characterized by a negative
output gap that will widen considerably due to the
pandemic shock.

**Most members considered that, in light of the**
**higher risk premia, the relative monetary policy**
**stance may not have such an ample margin as**
**may be perceived. One member argued that,**
despite the greater volatility and higher risk premia,
the relative monetary policy stance still has certain
room for maneuver; however, he/she acknowledged
that the absolute monetary policy stance is close to
the neutral rate. Some members highlighted that the
Mexican peso has a high level of sensitivity due to its
use as a hedge currency and, therefore, it should be
taken into account that lowering short-term interest
rates in Mexico reduces the cost of this type of
transactions. One member pointed out that given an
environment of foreign exchange instability, a greater
interest rate spread is needed, which implies acting
with extreme caution.

**One member pointed out that a standard argument**
in favor of high interest rates is that they are a
protective mechanism against risks, which allows for
a better behavior of the exchange rate and that,
ultimately, contributes to macroeconomic stability.
However, he/she noted that those countries with
greater interest rate spreads vis-à-vis the United
States were those that recently suffered the most
severe exchange rate depreciations, which is
evidence against the above mentioned standard
argument. He/she considered that some reasons
explaining the above are i) that the high interest rates
attract speculative capital that, in episodes of risk
aversion, is the first to exit a market and at a speed
that is usually greater than that at which it entered,
so a gradual process of exchange appreciation could
be followed by a sudden depreciation; ii) that
maintaining a high real interest rate for a prolonged
period erodes the macroeconomic foundations of the
country, by decreasing consumption, investment and
growth, and also affects public finances, which
eventually impacts sovereign risk premia. He/she
added that the lack of growth affects corporate
earnings, which eventually affects equity markets.
He/she noted that it should not be surprising that
when the global economic outlook deteriorates, the
most affected currencies are the ones of those
economies that maintained very restrictive monetary
policies, affecting the already deteriorated economic
outlook. He/she stated that the economy is at a
juncture where there are very worrying signs of a
deterioration of economic activity, along with a


stable, or even positive, outlook for inflation. He/she
considered that, although the primary objective of
Banco de México is to ensure the convergence of
inflation to its target, this must occur with the lowest
possible costs for the economy. He/she argued that
continuing to maintain an overly restrictive monetary
policy stance is very costly and risks the attainment
of the inflation target itself. He/she noted that, given
the economic outlook, and the downward risks to
inflation, the Central Bank is responsible for
minimizing the costs of monetary policy on the
economy, and should therefore seek to move as
soon as possible towards a neutral or even slightly
accommodative policy stance. He/she noted that
policy rates in some Latin American economies are
at historically low levels.

**Most** **members** **highlighted** **that** **monetary**

**policy’s ability to mitigate the fall in economic**
**activity that might be observed is limited.** **One**
member argued that this is because, in Mexico, the
credit channel of the monetary policy transmission
mechanism is less effective due to the low level of
financial inclusion and in the presence of supply
shocks. Nevertheless, he/she stated that the
reduction of the policy rate sends an important signal
of commitment with the economic challenge that is
being confronted. **Another** one mentioned that in
light of the effect of real shocks, such as those
stemming from COVID-19, the scope of action of
monetary policy is centered on the policy rate and on
fostering an orderly functioning of financial markets;
however, it cannot by itself offset the real effects of
the observed shocks. One pointed out that it is widely
accepted that, in Mexico, the effect of interest rates
on economic activity throughout the cycle is modest.
He/she also underlined that most analysts consider
that although central bank actions can reduce
financial tensions, it is very unlikely that monetary
policy has a relevant impact on the real sector’s
cyclical trajectory to confront shocks such as the one
stemming from COVID-19. He/she stated that in the
present juncture it is difficult to foresee a relevant
response from consumers and firms to interest rate
adjustments. He/she argued that in this type of cases
the implementation of measures well targeted to the
most affected sectors is more effective.

**Most members highlighted that the policy that is**
**the most effective in responding to the current**
**conditions** **is** **fiscal** **policy.** **One** member

highlighted the importance of taking measures
targeted directly to the fundamental causes of the
crisis, that is, the public health problem. He/she
indicated that it is difficult to expect a significant
reduction in market uncertainty so long as important

6


-----

progress in that direction is not perceived. He/she
pointed out that, simultaneously, other measures
must be implemented that allow the productive sector
and the financial system to avoid being severely
damaged, which would allow for a fast recovery once
the shock fades away. This member pointed out that
the magnitude and nature of the financial crisis
requires actions in different fronts and that monetary
policy is only an instrument, and not the most
important one. He/she added that actions to
strengthen confidence in the authorities’ capacity to
overcome the current situation would increase
monetary policy’s margin of maneuver.

**Some** members emphasized the importance of
Banco de México acting with prudence and caution.
**One** member considered fundamental for the
monetary policy statement to mention that the
Central Institute will follow closely the evolution of the
present juncture and, within its sphere of

competence, will take actions so that the economy
adjusts in an orderly way to the current conditions.
**Another** member argued that the nature of the
shocks stemming from the pandemic and the lower
oil prices has relevant differences for the case of
Mexico, as compared to those observed in advanced
economies, which have very low inflation levels, and
in most emerging economies, which have inflation
levels below their respective targets. In this context,
he/she mentioned that concerns for inflationary
pressures are lower, or even non-existent, in these
economies. In contrast, he/she noted that Mexico’s
monetary policy had already been facing a very
complex situation due to a stagnant or slightly
contracting economic activity being observed

simultaneously with a relatively high inflation rate,
and a situation of high uncertainty. He/she pointed
out that, with the recent shocks, the degree of
complexity has increased in all of these fronts.
He/she added that, in circumstances of high
uncertainty, it is preferable to err on the side of
prudence. He/she mentioned that a downward
correction to the policy rate is less problematic than
an upward one, and that under the current
conditions, the potential costs of excessively
decreasing interest rates are greater than those of
temporarily deferring their reduction. However,
he/she acknowledged that the Central Bank must
take advantage of the space that becomes available
to further ease monetary policy, for instance, in light
of clearer evidence that the demand shock will
prevail over the other shocks, and that this is
consistent with the convergence of inflation to the
target during the period of influence of monetary
policy. He/she added that the monetary authority


must be ready to act in the way and direction so
required, considering that the circumstances might
change rapidly in any direction.

**One** member argued that when assessing the
magnitude and speed of a downward adjustment to
the policy rate that must be undertaken in the current
contingency, three limiting factors must be taken into
account: i) Mexico is a small and open economy that
is facing an external shock and the margin offered by
the world’s lax external monetary policy is uncertain
considering global risk premia and the sharp
depreciation of the peso exchange rate; ii) monetary
policy may have moderate effects given the sharp
decline of economic activity under the current
juncture; and iii) medium-term considerations of
guaranteeing the convergence to the inflation target,
given a balance of risks for inflation to the upside.
Delving into said limiting factors, he/she pointed out
that the Mexican economy currently faces an
aggregate shock that has generated a reallocation of
flows towards lower risk assets and currencies, and
therefore an excessive reduction of the policy rate
could exacerbate this phenomenon. He/she

mentioned that the IMF recommends lowering
interest rates to the extent possible and emphasizing
forward guidance on the expected pattern of
monetary policy. He/she underlined that, for
emerging economies, this institution also

recommends a balance between fostering growth
and the evident need for liquidity to face external
pressures. He/she added that this is the case of the
Mexican economy, which by being linked to external
markets, is more susceptible to adjustments in risk
aversion. He/she underlined that the recent

increases in this indicator have contributed to the
significant depreciation of the peso exchange rate. In
this regard, such member warned that even when
econometric estimates suggest that the exchange
rate pass-through to inflation is very low, the current
levels of the peso exchange rate could affect inflation
expectations. He/she also included the worsening of
public finances as an additional risk factor that must
be considered.

He/she elaborated on the fact that medium-term
considerations together with a balance of risks for
inflation to the upside prescribe some degree of
prudence in the path towards a lax policy stance.
Such member mentioned that it is necessary to have
a medium-term strategy that considers both a
balance of risks for inflation to the upside and the
postponing of the convergence to the target, as it
already occurred and was mentioned in the Quarterly
Report October-December 2019. He/she pointed out
that the unanchoring of inflation expectations must

7


-----

be avoided. In this regard, he/she considered that an
excessive easing would send a wrong signal for the
formation of inflation expectations, and might
compromise the convergence of inflation to the
target. Nevertheless, he/she also mentioned that the
emergency situation that is being faced with the
current pandemic suggest putting less emphasis in
meeting the point inflation target in the short run.

Considering these limiting factors, this member
indicated that the situation of crisis and emergency
suggests that a significant reduction in the policy rate
would be desirable. Nevertheless, in the proposal for
the adjustment of the policy rate, he/she considered
attaining a greater consensus in order to send a
much clearer signal. He/she pointed out that a
greater deterioration of financial markets will be
considered in order to assess the need for
implementing additional measures if required.
He/she considered that in the present context of
fragility and uncertainty, now more than ever Banco
de México needs to remain vigilant to the current
events and take into account relevant information for
its decision making.

**Regarding the possible measures to supply**
**Mexican peso and US dollar liquidity, all**
**members agreed that these would contribute to**
**improve liquidity conditions and to the well-**
**functioning of domestic financial markets. Given**
the very significant and erratic adjustments in asset
prices, **one member highlighted the need for**
improving market trading conditions and fostering a
better price discovery process. **Another** member
stated that given the worsening of financial markets
and the risks associated for the instrumentation of
monetary policy and financial stability, Banco de
México needs to act promptly, and underlined the
following actions: i) lowering the target rate; ii)
complementary measures to improve liquidity
conditions, allowing financial institutions to offset the
external pressures and prevent disequilibria in their
balances or involuntary increases in their risk
exposures; iii) additional measures to foster an
adequate functioning of financial markets, and iv)
moving the monetary policy decision forward as
much as possible with the implicit message of
urgency and of emergency in response the crisis
induced by the coronavirus. He/she mentioned that
by guaranteeing liquidity in financial markets, the aim
is to support aggregate demand determinants as well
as consumers and firms’ confidence. Thus, with
these measures, a healthy behavior of the financial
system is fostered. One member stated that now is
the time to consider asset purchase programs like
those adopted by other central banks. He/she


mentioned that the latter makes sense given that part
of the instability is due to the fall in oil prices
originated by the combination of supply and demand
shocks, where at least one of them is transitory.
He/she added that the loss of value of some critical
assets and the corresponding destruction of
collateral must be avoided. He/she also mentioned
that, under the current conditions, the measures to
provide liquidity contribute to make more effective the
transmission of monetary policy easing to the real
economy.

**Most members stated that actions to improve the**
**well-functioning of markets had already been**
**adopted in previous days. In particular, they**
**pointed out that on March 9[th], the Foreign**
**Exchange Commission increased the size of its**
**foreign exchange peso hedge program and**
**auctions were carried out on March 12[th] and 18[th].**
**One member mentioned that these measures were**
taken to improve trading and liquidity conditions in
the foreign exchange market and not based on the
level of the peso exchange rate. **Some members**
added that on March 19[th], Banco de México
announced the establishment of currency swap lines
with the US Federal Reserve for up to 60 billion US
dollars, for at least 6 months. **One** member stated
that these swap lines are mutual and temporary
mechanisms similar to those agreed between the US
Federal Reserve and other central banks, including
Banco de México, in 2008. He/she highlighted some
of the benefits of the proposed measures: i) US dollar
auctions contribute to a better functioning of the
foreign exchange rate market, preventing possible
distortions in US dollar financing, using the currency
swap line agreed with the Federal Reserve; ii) the
reduction in the cost of collateralized financing of
more than twice the funding rate to one slightly above
the funding rate, increases the peso-financing
alternatives for the banking system; iii) the reduction
of the monetary regulation deposit increases the
availability of resources for commercial and

development banks to address the additional
financing requirements of households and firms;
moreover, it offers important benefits by being
implemented directly and implying a reduction of
Central Bank liabilities rather than an increase in its
lending; iv) the strengthening of the market makers
program, which is a program sponsored by the
Ministry of Finance and Public Credit and in which
Banco de México participates as a financial agent,
may offer market makers new alternatives to better
manage their holdings of securities as well as
additional incentives to purchase securities, thus

8


-----

improving operations in the government securities
market and the conditions to buy/sell securities.

**3. MONETARY POLICY DECISION**

Considering the risks for inflation, economic activity
and financial markets implied by the COVID-19
pandemic, significant challenges arise for monetary
policy and for the economy in general. In light of the
foreseen implications, with the presence of all its
members, Banco de México’s Governing Board
decided by majority to lower the target for the
overnight interbank interest rate by 50 basis points to
6.5%. One member voted for lowering the target to
6.75%.

The Governing Board will take the necessary actions
on the basis of incoming information so that the
policy rate is consistent with the orderly and
sustained convergence of headline inflation to Banco
de México’s target in the time frame in which
monetary policy operates. Perseverance in

strengthening the macroeconomic fundamentals and
in adopting the necessary actions, regarding both
monetary and fiscal policies, will contribute to a
successful adjustment of domestic financial markets
and of the economy as a whole.

**4. VOTING**

Alejandro Díaz de León-Carrillo, Irene EspinosaCantellano, Gerardo Esquivel-Hernández, and

Jonathan Ernest Heath-Constable voted in favor of
lowering the overnight interbank interest rate by 50
basis points to 6.5%.


Javier Eduardo Guzmán-Calafell voted in favor of
lowering the overnight interbank interest rate by 25
basis points to 6.75%.

**5. DISSENTING OPINIONS/VOTES**

**Vote. Javier Eduardo Guzmán-Calafell**

The COVID-19 pandemic, together with the fall in
international oil prices, have increased the already
complex challenges of monetary policy by exerting
pressures in opposite directions for inflation and by
raising uncertainty, as reflected in the latter’s case by
the peso exchange rate having undergone the
greatest depreciation among emerging market
currencies since mid-February. This situation, along
with other domestic and external challenges,
demand that monetary policy be implemented
prudently, and taking into consideration that the
impact of the interest rate on economic activity,
modest for Mexico according to numerous

calculations, is even more limited in the presence of
shocks such as the one currently faced. With a
diffuse scenario for inflation and a high level of
nervousness in financial markets, I believe that
lowering the policy rate by 25 basis points is
preferable. In a rapidly changing environment,
monetary policy must adjust at the time and in the
magnitude required, and the Central Bank must
continue to foster orderly conditions in domestic
financial markets and in the foreign exchange
market. Nevertheless, it is important to bear in mind
that, in order to overcome the crisis, public health and
fiscal actions need to be taken.

9


-----

**ANNEX**

The information in this Annex was prepared for this
meeting by the staff of Banco de México’s General
Directorate of Economic Research and General
Directorate of Central Bank Operations. It does not
necessarily reflect the considerations of the

members of the Governing Board as to the monetary
policy decision.

**A.1. External conditions**

**A.1.1. World economic activity**

The rapid global spread of the COVID-19 outbreak
has severely affected the world economy’s growth
outlook and has led to a substantial deterioration of
global financial conditions (Chart 1). The adoption of
measures to face the health emergency has had an
impact on supply chains and on sectors such as
energy, tourism and transportation. In addition, the
sharp increase in uncertainty has resulted in a strong
deterioration of household and business confidence,
which, in turn, will negatively affect investment and
consumption. The sharp expected decline in world
demand has also led to a fall in oil prices. The latter
has been intensified by the breakdown of the
agreement on oil production cuts between Saudi
Arabia and Russia. Thus, forecasts for global growth
for 2020 have been considerably revised

downwards. Similarly, the balance of risks for growth
has become significantly more negative in light of the
high uncertainty about the scope of the global health
crisis and its effect on the real economy, as well as
its impact on international financial markets. All of the
above has led several central banks of advanced and
emerging economies to lower their interest rates, in
some cases ahead of schedule. At the same time,
other extraordinary monetary and fiscal measures
have been implemented to mitigate the effects of the
expected decline in internal and external demand, as
well as to guarantee the proper functioning of
financial markets.


**Chart 1**

**Global Purchasing Managers Index:**

**Manufacturing**

Diffusion index, s. a.

58

56

54

52

50

48

Manufacturing

46 Manufacturing (excl. China)

Services

Services (excl. China)

44 February

42

2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020

s. a. / Seasonally adjusted figures.
Source: Markit.

In the United States, GDP growth is anticipated to
decrease significantly during the first half of the year
due to the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on
supply chains and on the reduction of household and
business confidence. In particular, the measures to
contain the virus’ spread and the possible negative
effects of financial volatility on household wealth are
anticipated to bring about a sharp reduction of private
consumption. Similarly, the weakness in equipmentand-fixed-structures investment is expected to
persist, given the uncertainty about the effects of the
pandemic on economic activity. In March, the US
government declared a national emergency and
announced several measures aimed at addressing
this situation. The government and Congress of that
country are pondering a stimulus package of over 1
trillion US dollars to mitigate the effects of the health
emergency.

Although data on US industrial production for
February was still not reflecting evident effects from
the COVID-19 outbreak, leading indicators available
for March, such as the manufacturing sector
Purchasing Managers’ Index (PMI) (New York
Empire State Bank and Federal Reserve Bank of
Philadelphia), contracted significantly.

Available US labor market indicators for February
exhibited relative strength. In particular, the growth of
the non-farm payroll increased from 184,000 new
jobs in December 2019 to 273,000 in February of this
year, above the level necessary to absorb the growth
of the labor force. The unemployment rate decreased
from 3.6% to 3.5% between January and February.
Nevertheless, unemployment insurance (UI) initial

10


-----

claims picked up by 70,000 on the week ending
March 14, reaching 281,000 claims, the highest level
in two years, thus suggesting a significant weakening
of the US labor market during this period (Chart 2).

**Chart 2**

**USA: Unemployment Insurance Initial Claims**

Thousands, s. a.

300

290

280

270

260

250

240

230

220

210 Weekly

200 4-week moving average

March 14

190

2016 2017 2018 2019 2020

s. a. / Seasonally adjusted figures.
Source: US Department of Labor.

In the euro area, economic activity is expected to
contract during the first half of the year because of
the impact of the pandemic. Although economic
confidence indicators and the composite PMI output
index up to February were not yet reflecting said
impact, the future output and export order

components have decreased, suggesting a fall in
demand. The greater delays in the delivery of inputs
forewarn possible effects on supply chains. The
European Commission proposed a 25 billion euro
initiative and ratified its willingness to ease certain
budget rules to face the economic emergency, while
the European Investment Bank will mobilize 40 billion
euros in financing to firms affected by the
emergency.

In Japan, economic activity is expected to contract
during the first quarter of 2020. This would be the
second consecutive quarter of contraction for that
economy and would be a reflection of a sharp fall in
private consumption, particularly in services, due to
the measures to contain the COVID-19 spread and
of a negative contribution of net exports derived from
supply chains disruptions. The Japanese

government has channeled significant resources to
the implementation of both prevention and control
measures, as well as for supporting affected
households and firms.

In emerging economies, leading indicators as well as
the latest growth forecasts suggest that economic
activity will weaken sharply during the first half of the
year, particularly in those Asian economies that are


highly integrated to China and in commodity
exporting countries. In China, recent plant closures
and mobility restrictions to contain the coronavirus
spread led to a sharp contraction of economic activity
during the first quarter of the year. In particular,
significant contractions were observed in industrial
production, retail sales and investment in fixed
assets during the first two months of the year (Chart
3), while exports and imports also decreased
considerably due to the temporary closure of
factories and the interruptions in the transportation
sector. In Latin America, although so far there is a
smaller number of reported coronavirus cases
registered vis-à-vis other regions, the measures to
contain the virus, the weaker global demand, tighter
external financing conditions, and the lower oil prices
are expected to have a negative impact on GDP
growth during the first half of the year.

**Chart 3**

**China: Economic Activity Indicators**

Annual change and accumulated annual

percentage change

20

15

10

5

0

-5

-10 Retail sales

-15 Fixed investment 1/

Industrial production

-20

-25

February

-30

2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020

1/ Annual accumulated percentage change.
Source: Haver Analytics.

International commodity prices registered a sharp fall
since Mexico’s previous monetary policy decision. In
particular, crude oil prices fell significantly as a result
of the anticipated lower world demand for oil due to
the global effects of the pandemic. Such fall
intensified following the breakdown of the agreement
on oil production cuts between Saudi Arabia and
Russia, which generated fears that world crude oil
supply would increase significantly in the next
months in an environment of weak oil demand.
Industrial metal prices decreased in light of
expectations that the weakening of economic activity
will lower the demand for manufacturing goods.
Finally, grain prices fell sharply because of fears that
contingency measures will weaken the international
demand and international trade of grains, particularly
of those associated with ethanol production.

11


-----

**A.1.2. Monetary policy and international financial**
**markets**

Headline and core inflation in advanced economies
remain low and are expected to decrease in the
coming months because of the fall of commodity
prices, particularly crude oil prices, as well as other
goods and services prices, as a result of the fall in
global demand associated with measures to face the
pandemic. Inflation expectations from surveys and
financial instruments are already reflecting such
dynamics (Chart 4). As to emerging economies,
although headline inflation remains low in several
countries, the number of countries where it has been
above the target has increased. The recent
pressures on their exchange rates may lead to higher
inflationary pressures in a larger number of these
countries.

In this environment of low inflation and greater risks
to the world economy in the short and medium term,
central banks of major advanced economies have
announced monetary easing actions and/or several
measures to promote liquidity and credit flows in
those economies and, in general, to ensure the wellfunctioning of financial markets. Expectations
derived from market instruments anticipate that
central banks will maintain a highly accommodative
monetary policy (Chart 5). In emerging economies,
several central banks have announced cuts to their
interest rates, particularly Chile, Czech Republic,
South Korea, Poland, Turkey, and Peru, among
others. Similarly, several banks have announced
liquidity measures and interventions in financial
markets to face the greater volatility stemming from
the pandemic and to ensure their proper functioning.

**Chart 4**

**5-year-ahead Inflation implied by 5-year Inflation**

|% %|― US Federal Reserve* ― Bank of England ― Bank of Japan ― Bank of Canada|Forecast|Col4|Col5|
|---|---|---|---|---|
|% % %|― European Central Bank deposit rate ― OIS implicit trajectory 19 Mar 2020 --- OIS implicit trajectory 10 Feb 2020 --- OIS implicit trajectory 31 Dec 2019|ts|||
|%|||||
|%|||||
||||||


1/ OIS: Fixed floating interest rate swap where the fixed interest rate is the
effective overnight reference rate.

- In the case of the US observed reference rate, the average interest rate of
the federal funds target range is used (0.0% - 0.25%).
Source: Bloomberg.

Some of the monetary policy decisions of the main
central banks during the period were the following:

i) In unscheduled meetings, the US Federal Reserve cut
the policy rate twice, first by 50 basis points on March
3, and then by 100 basis points towards mid-March,
lowering the federal funds target range to 0-0.25%. In
addition, it expanded the amount of its repurchase
agreement operations, while extending their term to 1and 3-months for the remainder of March in order to
address unusual disruptions in Treasury financing
markets and US money markets. Similarly, it
announced an increase in its holdings of Treasury
securities by at least 500 billion dollars and in its
holdings of mortgage-backed securities by at least 200
billion US dollars. It also announced actions to support
the credit needs of American households and firms to
ensure the well-functioning of financial markets. In
order to reduce pressures on global US dollar funding
markets, the Fed, in coordination with other central
banks of advanced economies (United Kingdom,
Canada, Japan, euro area and Switzerland), released
adjustments to the US liquidity swap line, while
announcing new liquidity swap lines with other central
banks, including Banco de México, which will last for at
least six months.

ii) In its March meeting, the European Central Bank (ECB)

left its key policy rates unchanged, albeit announcing a
package of measures to face the impact of the COVID19 spread. In particular, it will temporarily conduct
additional longer-term refinancing operations (LTROs),
mainly for Small and Medium Enterprises (SMEs);
additional net asset purchases of 120 billion euros in
the remainder of the year; and will continue to reinvest
the principal payments from the maturing securities
purchased under the Asset Purchasing Program
(APP) for an extended period. The ECB announced

12


**Chart 5**

**Reference Rates and Implied Trajectories in**

**OIS Curves[1/]**

Percent


3.0% **― US Federal Reserve***

**― Bank of England**
**― Bank of Japan**

2.5% **― Bank of Canada**

**― European Central Bank deposit rate**
**― OIS implicit trajectory 19 Mar 2020**

2.0% **--- OIS implicit trajectory 10 Feb 2020**

--- OIS implicit trajectory 31 Dec 2019

1.5%

1.0%

0.5%

0.0%

-0.5%

End of End of End of
2019 2020 2021

-1.0%

2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022


0.5

J M S J M S J

2018 2019 2020

|Col1|Chart 4 ar-ahead Inflation implied by 5-year Inflatio Swaps (Selected Countries) Percent|
|---|---|
||United States Euro area United Kingdom|
|3.5||
|||
|2.5 2.0 1.5 1.0||
|||


Source: Bloomberg.


-----

later a 750 billion euro Pandemic Emergency Purchase
Program (PEPP) of public and private assets, which will
last until the end of 2020 or until the COVID-19 crisis is
over.

iii) In unscheduled meetings, the Bank of England cut

twice its policy rate by a total of 65 basis points to 0.1%.
It also increased by 200 billion the size of its asset
portfolio to a total of 645 billion pounds sterling. It also
introduced a new term financing scheme with
incentives for SMEs, as well as a new corporate
financing facility, and decreased the countercyclical
capital buffer rate from 1.0% to 0%.

iv) The Bank of Japan adopted a more accommodative

monetary policy stance in an unscheduled meeting in
mid-March in which, while leaving its short-term policy
interest rate unchanged at -0.1% and its long-term
interest rate (indexed to its 10-year bond) at 0%, it
announced several measures to ease its monetary
policy by increasing the provision of funds through
purchases of government bonds and the provision of
funds in US dollars; granting facilities to corporate
financing; and increasing its purchases of exchangetraded funds (ETFs) and Japanese real estate trust
funds (J-REITs).

v) The Bank of Canada cut its policy interest rate twice in

March, once in its scheduled monetary policy meeting
and once in an unscheduled one. Both cuts were of 50
basis points each, lowering the policy rate from 1.75%
to 0.75%. It also announced a mortgage bond purchase
program for 500 million Canadian dollars per week until
conditions so require. This central bank also took
several measures to ensure liquidity in its funding
market.

As a result of the evolution of the pandemic and
concerns about its impact on world economic activity,
financial markets registered a considerable increase
in volatility (Chart 6), a higher sentiment of risk
aversion by investors, a greater tightening of financial
conditions, and a deterioration of liquidity conditions
worldwide. The main stock indexes of advanced
economies fell considerably; the US dollar

appreciated against the rest of the currencies of
advanced economies; interest rates of these
countries registered mixed adjustments, with sharp
falls in the United States and increases in Europe;
and the spreads of corporate bonds vis-à-vis
government bonds widened. The fall of the US 10year bond rate since early 2020 stands out,
registering historically low levels and temporarily
inverted the slope of the yield curve in that country,
although it turned positive once again in recent
weeks (Chart 7). In this context, emerging economies
registered capital outflows, both in fixed income and
equity markets, with flows towards certain safehaven assets (Chart 8). It is worth noting that despite
the liquidity and credit measures implemented by


several central banks, a negative behavior continues
to be observed in international financial markets.

Looking ahead, the risk that the pandemic spread
may extend or intensify prevails, possibly affecting
global trade and economic growth more than
anticipated. Greater episodes of volatility in financial
markets stemming from the high uncertainty on the
effectiveness of the measures adopted and the
severity of the pandemic’s economic effects cannot
be ruled out, and there is a risk that the tightening of
financial conditions may worsen the impact of this
health emergency on the real economy. In addition
to the above, several risk factors persist, including
the possibility of a new escalation of trade tensions
among some of the major economies as well as
geopolitical events. The differences prevailing
among members of the Organization of Petroleum
Exporting Countries (OPEC) and other crude oil
producers stand out as well.

**Chart 6**

**Selected Implied Volatility Indexes**

Percent, basis points

200 280

<- VIX (S&P)1/

180 <- V2X (Eurostoxx) 2/

240

<- CVIX (Currencies) 3/

160

<- OVX (Oil) 4/

140 -> MOVE (Interest rates) 5/ 200

120

160

100

120

80

60 80

40

40

20

0 March 0

J J J J J J J

2007 2009 2011 2013 2015 2017 2019

1/VIX: Weighted index of 1-month implied volatilities of S&P500 options Source: Banco de México with Bloomberg data. 1/VIX: The Chicago Board Options Exchange Volatility Index measures the market expectation
published by the Chicago Board Options Exchange. 2/V2X: Weighted index
of 1-month implied volatilities of Euro Stoxx50 options published by
Deutsche Borse and Goldman Sachs. 3/CVIX: 3-month implied volatility
index of most traded FX rates with the following weights: EURUSD: 35.9%,
USDJPY: 21.79%, GBPUSD: 17.95%, USDCHF: 5.13%, USDCAD: 5.13%,
AUDUSD: 6.14%, EURJPY: 3.85%, EURGBP: 2.56%, and EURCHF:
1.28%. 4/ OVX: Weighted index of 1-month implied volatilities of crude oil
options (CBOE Crude Oil Volatility Index). 5/ MOVE: Index of US Treasury
yield volatility implied by current prices of 1-month at-the-money options on
2-year, 5-year, 10-year and 30-year Treasuries, calculated by Merrill Lynch.
Source: Banco de México with Bloomberg data.

13


-----

**Chart 7**

**Change in Selected Financial Indicators**

**from February 10 to March 19, 2020**

Percent, basis points

40% **<-- Stock markets** **<-- Currencies** **government 2-year** **government 10-year**

30% **bond yields -->** **bond yields -->**

Italy Italy

20% Spain

France

10% DXY 2/ Spain Germany


160

120

80

40

0


0%

-10%

-20%

-30%

-40%

-50%


-40

-80

-120

-160

-200


1/ MSCI Emerging Markets Index (includes 24 countries).
2/ DXY: Weighted average of the nominal exchange rate of the six main
world-traded currencies (calculated by Intercontinental Exchange, ICE) with
the following weights: EUR (57.6%), JPY (13.6%), GBP (11.9%), CAD
(9.1%), SEK (4.2%), and CHF (3.6%).
3/ J.P. Morgan Index constructed from a weighted average of the nominal
exchange rate of emerging economies’ currencies with the following
weights: TRY (8.3%), RUB (8.3%), HUF (8.3%), ZAR (8.3%), BRL (11.1%),
MXN (11.1%), CLP (11.1%), CNH (11.1%), INR (11.1%), and SGD (11.1%).
Source: Bloomberg and ICE.

**Chart 8**

**Emerging Economies: Financial Assets**

**Performance from February 10 to March 19,**

**2020**

Percent, basis points

**Equity** **Interest** **Interest**
**Region** **Country** **Currencies** **CDS**

**markets** **rates 2Y** **rates 10Y**

**Mexico** **-28.53%** **-20.65%** **79** **161** **185**

**Latin** **Brazil** **-17.82%** **-39.30%** **96** **199** **235**

**America** **Chile** **-8.31%** **-33.41%** **-58** **24** **105**

**Colombia** **-18.39%** **-45.24%** **-31** **106** **259**

**Russia** **-23.45%** **-25.69%** **188** **181** **238**

**Poland** **-9.30%** **-28.59%** **-84** **-57** **20**

**Emerging**

**Turkey** **-8.85%** **-28.01%** **58** **254** **310**

**Europe**

**Czech Republic** **-13.25%** **-36.18%** **-140** **-72** **17**

**Hungary** **-7.83%** **-33.78%** **-7** **10** **39**

**Malaysia** **-6.43%** **-20.94%** **-41** **-6** **144**

**India** **-5.24%** **-30.97%** **-30** **-18** **137**

**Asia** **Philippines** **-0.63%** **-37.78%** **-10** **-20** **117**

**Thailand** **-4.10%** **-31.99%** **7** **41** **28**

**Indonesia** **-16.05%** **-31.03%** **74** **148** **207**

**Africa** **South Africa** **-16.62%** **-33.22%** **-56** **200** **226**

Note: Interest rates correspond to interest rate swaps for 2-year/10-year Note: Interest rates correspond to interes rate swaps for 2-year/10-year maturities. In the
maturities. In the case of Argentina, rates in US dollars are used since they
are the most liquid ones and those that reflect more adequately the
performance of the fixed income market in that country.
Source: Bloomberg.

**A.2. Current situation of the Mexican economy**

**A.2.1. Mexican markets**

Since Banco de Mexico’s previous monetary policy
decision, financial asset prices in Mexico, as in other
emerging economies, exhibited a negative

performance (Chart 9). This occurred in an
environment of high volatility and greater risk


aversion generated by the potential worldwide
negative effects of the COVID-19 spread, which were
exacerbated by the fall in oil prices. Thus, the peso
exchange rate fluctuated in a wide range of 18.5224.65 Mexican pesos per US dollar, with the latter
value representing a new historical intraday high
(Chart 10). The above took place in a context where
both FX spot and forward outright trading conditions
deteriorated considerably. In this regard, in its first
action since the end of 2017, the Foreign Exchange
Commission announced an increase in the nondeliverable FX forwards program from 20 to 30 billion
US dollars and has auctioned 4 billion of these
instruments in the last two weeks. For their part,
Banco de México and the US Federal Reserve
established mutual and temporary swap lines for up
to 60 billion US dollars. These new swap lines will
support the provision of US dollar liquidity in Mexico
and will remain effective for at least six months.


8.9

8.4

7.9

7.4

6.9

6.4

5.9


**Chart 9**

**Mexican Markets’ Performance**

Percent, pesos/US dollar and index

4.1 25.0 48,000


46,000

44,000

42,000

40,000

38,000

36,000

34,000


24.0

23.0

22.0

21.0

20.0

19.0

18.0


M Bond


3.9

3.7

3.5

3.3

3.1

2.9

Inflation indexed bonds


Range in year Range since last monetary policy decision 10-Feb-20 Last level

Source: Prepared by Banco de México.

**Chart 10**

**Mexican Peso Exchange Rate**

**and its Moving Averages**

Pesos/US dollar


Range in year Range since last monetary policy decision 10-Feb-20 Last level


24.50

24.00

23.50

23.00

22.50

22.00

21.50

21.00

20.50

20.00

19.50

19.00

18.50

18.00

17.50

17.00


2017 2018 2019 2020

Source: Prepared by Banco de México.


14


-----

Interest rates of government securities increased
significantly, up to 174 basis points, throughout the
entire yield curve, with long-term rates registering the
greatest adjustments (Chart 11). Such adjustments
took place in a context where trading conditions
deteriorated significantly. In this environment, and for
the purpose of contributing to the well-functioning of
Mexican debt markets, the Ministry of Finance and
Public Credit announced two exchange operations
where it switched long-term government securities
for short-term instruments totaling 76.8 billion
Mexican pesos.

**Chart 11**

**Nominal Yield Curve on Government Securities**

Percent, basis pointsPercent,basis points

8.90 190

8.70

8.50

158

8.30 30

8.10 6

7.90 5 127

7.70

7.50

95

7.30

7.10

6.90 63

6.70

6.50

32

6.30

6.10

5.90 0

Feb-10-20 March-19-20 Change (Feb-10-20 to March-19-20)

Trading range over the period

Source: PIP.

As to expectations regarding the path of the
monetary policy rate, information implied in the
Interbank Equilibrium Interest Rate (TIIE, for its
acronym in Spanish) swap curve practically

discounts a 25-basis point cut for the March
monetary policy decision, while private sector
forecasters surveyed by Citibanamex are expecting
a 50-basis point cut. For the end of 2020, market
variables are anticipating a policy rate of around
6.50% (Chart 12), while the median of forecasters
surveyed remained at 6.00%.


**Chart 12**

**Banxico Overnight Interbank Rate Implied in**

**TIIE IRS Curve**

Percent

8.50

8.25

8.00

7.75

7.50

7.25

7.00

6.75

6.50

6.25 Banxico overnight rate (policy rate)

6.00 Rest of the period

5.75 Last monetary policy decision

5.50 Last level

5.25

5.00

A   O  J A   J   S   D   F   M   A  O  J   A  J   S   D

2018   2019              2020           2021

Source: Prepared by Banco de México with Bloomberg data.

15


-----

**A.2.2. Economic activity in Mexico**

According to available information, in early 2020 and
prior to the COVID-19 spread, the stagnation that
Mexico’s economic activity has been exhibiting for
several quarters continued (Chart 13), although
some indicators were suggesting a certain

improvement up to February, which may have
persisted in the absence of the pandemic. Indeed,
the limited information available for February did not
yet seem to reflect a significant impact from the
pandemic, although some technical shutdowns
began to be reported in March due to shortage of
imported inputs, mainly those from China, as well as
the cancellation of certain activities, mainly

educational, recreational, and cultural. Similarly, in
light of the domestic spread of the pandemic and the
greater weakness of the global economy, the
negative economic impact is expected to deepen in
the second quarter of the year and to extend for a yet
undetermined period.

**Chart 13**

**Gross Domestic Product**

Quarterly percentage change, s. a.

2

1

0

-1

Q-IV

-2

I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV

2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019

s. a. Seasonally adjusted figures.
Source: Mexico’s National Accounts System (SCNM, for its acronym in
Spanish), INEGI.

In January 2020, manufacturing exports improved
vis-à-vis the weakness observed at the end of 2019.
Such performance was mainly due to a rebound in
automotive exports, both to the United States and to
the rest of the world (Chart 14). Looking ahead, the
greater weakness of the world economy is expected
to have an unfavorable impact on the Mexican export
sector.

In the last quarter of 2019 private consumption
exhibited weakness due to stagnant consumption of
domestic goods and services and the slower rate of
consumption of imported goods. Timely indicators of
consumption, such as sales of light vehicles, rose at
the beginning of 2020, prior to the pandemic spread.


As for gross fixed investment, it remained on a
downward path at year-end 2019. Within this
indicator, both spending in construction and
machinery and equipment exhibited weakness.
Given the measures adopted to cope with the health
emergency, both consumption and investment are
expected to be significantly affected at the end of the
first quarter.

**Chart 14**

**Total Manufacturing Exports**

Indices 2013 = 100, s. a.

170

Total

160 Automotive

Non-automotive

150

140

130

120

110

100

90

January

80

J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J

2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020

s. a. / Seasonally adjusted series and trend series based on data in nominal
US dollars. The former is represented by a solid line and the latter by a
dotted line.
Source: Prepared by Banco de México with data from the Tax
Administration Service (SAT, for its acronym in Spanish), the Ministry of the
Economy (SE, for its acronym in Spanish), Banco de México, the National
Institute of Statistics and Geography (INEGI, for its acronym in Spanish),
Mexico’s Merchandise Trade Balance, and the National System of
Statistical and Geographical Information (SNIEG, for its acronym in
Spanish).

Industrial production continued to exhibit weakness
at the beginning of the first quarter of 2020, while
services ended 2019 with lackluster growth (Chart 15
and Chart 16). The limited information available for
February would appear not to reflect significant
effects from the COVID-19 spread yet. Nevertheless,
some technical shutdowns in certain manufacturing
sectors were reported in March due to the shortage
of imported inputs, mainly from China, and to
technical shutdowns in the automotive industry as a
preventive measure in light of the health emergency.
Similarly, the cancellation of several activities, mainly
educational, recreational, and cultural, was

announced to support the social distancing

measures. The negative economic impact caused by
the pandemic is expected to intensify in the second
quarter of the year and to extend for a still
undetermined period.

As to the economy’s cyclical position, a greater-thananticipated widening of slack conditions is foreseen,
with a balance of risks significantly biased to the
downside (Chart 17). As to the labor market, in
January 2020, the considerable contraction that

16


-----

national and urban unemployment rates had
exhibited at the end of 2019 reverted (Chart 18),
while the weakness in the creation of IMSS-insured
jobs persisted. For its part, with information available
at the fourth quarter of 2019, unit labor costs in the
overall economy registered its highest level of the
last years as a result of the behavior of productivity
and real average earnings (Chart 19).

**Chart 15**

**Economic Activity Indicators**

Indexes 2013 = 100, s. a.

120 140

Total IGAE 1/

Industrial production 2/

115 130

Services IGAE 1/

Agricultural / livestock products IGAE 1/

110 120

105 110

100 100

December

January

95 90

J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J

2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020

s. a. / Seasonally adjusted and trend series. The former is represented by a
solid line and the latter by a dotted line.
1/ Figures up to December 2019.
2/ Monthly industrial activity indicator figures up to January 2020.
Source: Mexico’s National Accounts System (SCNM, for its acronym in
Spanish), INEGI.

**Chart 16**

**Industrial Activity [1/]**

Indexes 2013 = 100, s. a.

130

120

110

100

90

Total

Mining (22.3%)

80

Manufacturing (49.7%)

70 Construction (23.3%)

Utilities (4.7%)

January

60

J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J

2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020

s. a. / Seasonally adjusted and trend series. The former is represented by a
solid line and the latter by a dotted line.
1/ Figures in parentheses correspond to their share in the total in 2013.
Source: Mexico’s National Accounts System (SCNM, for its acronym in
Spanish), INEGI.


s. a. / Calculations based on seasonally adjusted figures.
1/ Output gap estimated with a tail-corrected Hodrick-Prescott filter; see
Banco de México (2009), “Inflation Report (April-June 2009)", p.74.
2/ Fourth quarter of 2019 GDP figure and December 2019 IGAE figure.
3/ Output gap confidence interval calculated with a method of unobserved
components.
4/ Excludes both oil and gas extraction, support activities for mining, and
petroleum and coal products' manufacturing.
Source: Prepared by Banco de México with INEGI data.

**Chart 18**

**National Unemployment Rate and Urban**

**Unemployment Rate**

Percent, s. a.

8.5

National unemployment rate

8.0

7.5 Urban unemployment rate

7.0

6.5

6.0

5.5

5.0

4.5

4.0

3.5

3.0

January

2.5

J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J

2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020

s. a. / Seasonally adjusted and trend series. The former is represented by a
solid line and the latter by a dotted line.
Source: National Survey of Occupations and Employment (ENOE, for its
acronym in Spanish), INEGI.

17


**Chart 17**

**Output Gap Estimates [1/]**

**Excluding Oil Industry [4/ ]**

Potential output percentages, s. a.


8

Global Economic Activity Indicator 2/

6 Gross Domestic Product 2/

95% Confidence interval 3/

4

2

0

-2

-4

-6

-8

-10

Q-IV

December

-12

J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S D

2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019


-----

**Chart 19**

**Global Labor Productivity Index (IGPLE for its**

**acronym in Spanish) and Unit Labor Costs [1/]**

Indexes 2013 = 100, a. e.

120

Productivity

115 Unit labor costs

110

105

100

95

Q- IV

90

I II IIIIV I II IIIIV I II IIIIV I II IIIIV I II IIIIV I II IIIIV I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV

2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019

s. a. / Seasonally adjusted and trend series. The former is represented by a
solid line and the latter by a dotted line. Trend series estimated by Banco
de México.
1/ Productivity based on hours worked.
Source: IGPLE published by INEGI. Unit labor costs prepared by Banco de
México with INEGI data.

In January 2020, domestic financing to the private
sector continued showing a reduction in its growth
rate. Within it, financing to private firms continued to
decelerate, following the trend that has been
observed since the second half of 2018. This trend is
explained by the lower growth of bank credit and a
lower domestic debt issuance. As to the household
segment, mortgages exhibited lesser dynamism,
whereas consumer credit continued growing at low
rates. As for interest rates, those of firm financing
decreased, in line with the reduction in the overnight
interbank funding interest rate. For its part, mortgage
rates decreased slightly in December 2019, after
having remained stable since the second quarter of
2017. In the segment of consumer credit, interest
rates on credit cards and personal loans stopped
following the upward trend observed lately.

Regarding portfolio quality, firm and mortgage
delinquency rates remained at low levels, while those
related to consumption did not register significant
changes and remain at high levels.

**A.2.3. Development of inflation and inflation**
**outlook**

Annual headline inflation increased from 3.24 to
3.70% between January and February 2020 (Chart
20 and Table 1). This behavior was due to a decline
of 4 basis points in the incidence of core inflation and
an increase of 50 basis points in that of non-core
inflation.


13

CPI

12

11 Core

10 Non-core

9

8

7

6

5

4

3

2

1 February

0

J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J

2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020

Source: Banco de México and INEGI.

Annual core inflation declined from 3.73 to 3.66%
between January and February 2020. In particular,
the annual rate of change of food merchandise prices
decreased from 5.10 to 4.99%, while that of non-food
merchandise prices went down from 2.68 to 2.58%
(Chart 21). For its part, the annual rate of change of
services prices decreased marginally from 3.51 to
3.48% in the same months (Chart 22), which is
mainly associated with the lower increases in tourist
and food services prices vis-à-vis the previous year.

**Chart 21**

**Merchandise Core Price Subindex**

Annual percentage change

8

Food, beverages and tobacco

Non-food merchandise

7

6

5

4

3

2

1

February

0

J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J

2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020

Source: Banco de México and INEGI.

18


**Chart 20**

**Consumer Price Index**

Annual percentage change


-----

**Chart 22**

**Merchandise and Services Core Price Subindex**

Annual percentage change

7

Merchandise

6 Services

5

4

3

2

1

February

0

J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J

2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020

Source: Banco de México and INEGI.

Annual non-core inflation increased from 1.81 to
3.81% between January and February 2020 (Chart
23 and Table 1). This was due to the increase in the
annual rate of change of agricultural and livestock
product prices, especially of fruit and vegetable
prices. Said increase was partially offset by a
reduction in the annual rates of change of gasoline
and LP gas prices.

**Chart 23**

**Non-core Price Subindex**
Annual percentage change

20

Non-core
Agricultural and livestock products
Energy and government-authorized prices

15

10

5

0

February

-5

J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J

2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020

Source: Banco de México and INEGI.


As for inflation expectations drawn from Banco de
México’s Survey of Private Sector Forecasters,
short-, medium- and long-term headline inflation
remained relatively stable between January and
February, albeit above 3%. Those corresponding to
core inflation registered slight mixed adjustments.
Finally, long-term inflation expectations (average of 6
to 10 years) implied in long-term market instruments,
as well as the inflation risk premium, decreased
marginally in the same period, although both
breakeven inflation and inflation risk have increased
at the margin in a context of volatility.

The COVID-19 pandemic poses significant risks for
inflation albeit with uncertain effects. The expected
widening of the negative output gap together with the
decline in international energy prices, may imply
downward pressures on this indicator. Nevertheless,
these could be offset by upward pressures on prices
exerted by the depreciation of the peso. In this
context, there is high uncertainty as to the magnitude
and duration of the different demand and supply
shocks, as well as to the size and persistence of the
shocks to financial markets, so the effects on inflation
in the short and medium term remain unclear. Thus,
the uncertainty over the balance of risks for inflation
has increased.

19


-----

**Table 1**

**Consumer Price Index and Components**

Annual percentage change

**Item** **December 2019** **January 2020** **February 2020**

**CPI** **2.83** **3.24** **3.70**

**SubyacenteCore** **3.59** **3.73** **3.66**

**Merchandise** **3.56** **3.92** **3.82**

Food, beverages and tobacco 4.45 5.10 4.99

Non-food merchandise 2.62 2.68 2.58

**Services** **3.64** **3.51** **3.48**

Housing 2.91 2.93 2.94

Education (tuitions) 4.73 4.69 4.55

Other services 4.05 3.78 3.72

**No SubyacenteNon-core** **0.59** **1.81** **3.81**

**Agricultural and livestock products** **-0.03** **1.44** **7.82**

Fruits and vegetablesFruits abd vegetables -5.40 -1.76 11.23

Livestock productsLivestock 4.98 4.45 4.91

**Energy and government-authorized prices Energéticos y Tarifas Aut. por Gobierno** **1.04** **2.08** **1.01**

Energy productsEnergy -0.54 0.86 -0.54

Government-authorized pricesTarifas Autorizadas por Gobierno 5.05 5.07 4.86

Source: INEGI.

20


-----

-----

-----

