-----

-----

**FOREWARNING**
This document is provided for the reader’s convenience only.
The translation from the official Spanish version was made
by Banco de México’s staff. Discrepancies may arise
between the original document in Spanish and its English
translation. For this reason, the original Spanish version is
the only official document.


**1. PLACE, DATE, AND PARTICIPANTS**

**1.1. Place:** Meeting held by virtual means.

**1.2. Date of Governing Board meeting: September**
23, 2020

**1.3. Participants:**
Alejandro Díaz de León-Carrillo, Governor.
Irene Espinosa-Cantellano, Deputy Governor.
Gerardo Esquivel-Hernández, Deputy Governor.
Javier Eduardo Guzmán-Calafell, Deputy Governor.
Jonathan Ernest Heath-Constable, Deputy

Governor.
Arturo Herrera-Gutiérrez, Secretary of Finance and
Public Credit.
Gabriel Yorio-González, Undersecretary of Finance
and Public Credit.
Elías Villanueva-Ochoa, Secretary of the Governing
Board.

Prior to this meeting, preliminary work by Banco de
México’s staff analyzing the economic and financial
environment as well as the developments in inflation
and the determinants and outlook for inflation, was
conducted and presented to the Governing Board
(see Annex).

**2. ANALYSIS AND RATIONALE BEHIND THE**
**GOVERNING BOARD’S VOTING**

**_International environment_**

**Most members mentioned that global economic**
**activity has been recovering. Some** members
noted that in various advanced economies the
recovery has been greater than expected. In this
regard, **one member highlighted the cases of the**
United States and, to a lower extent, the euro area.

**The majority of members stated that the**
**economic performance has been heterogeneous**
**across** **economies** **and** **sectors,** **and** **that**

**economic activity is still far from pre-pandemic**
**levels. Some members pointed out that the**
heterogeneity in pandemic contention measures and
stimulus policies has influenced the differentiated
recovery across economies. **One** member added
that the dynamics of the COVID-19 pandemic, the


relative importance of the most affected sectors, the
labor market flexibility, the strength of the macroeconomy and public finances, as well as the
adjustment and soundness of the financial system
have also influenced these developments. **Another**
member noted that, in aggregate terms, there was a
greater dynamism of investment, production, and
foreign trade, as well as a significant increase in
private consumption. **One member stated that the**
reopening of various sectors enabled a mild recovery
of industrial production in advanced and emerging
economies, while the recent behavior of consumption
has responded to the stimulus measures adopted.
He/she highlighted the cases of the United States
and the euro area, where comparing the latest
figures available with those at the end of 2019,
consumption even increased. **Another** member
emphasized the case of China, where industrial and
capital goods’ production, as well as exports,
exceeded pre-pandemic levels. Regarding the labor
markets, he/she noted that various countries
exhibited a favorable performance, although the euro
area and Japan registered a significant reduction of
hours worked.

**In this context of global economic recovery, most**
**members pointed out that economic activity**
**forecasts for 2020 have been adjusted upwards,**
**while those for 2021 have been revised**
**downwards. They mentioned that the world**
**economy is subject to several risks, including**
**those associated with the pandemic. Some**
members underlined the resurgence of infections in
various countries. **One member considered the**
possibility that lockdown measures could be
extended or reestablished. He/she added that,
although it is unlikely that these new measures would
be as strict as in the early stages of the pandemic,
they would imply significant costs for economic
activity.

**Another member noted that although the reopening**
of activities may prompt a turning point in economies,
recovery in the medium term will be associated with
the permanent effects of the pandemic on the most
affected sectors, as well as with the strength and
support of consumption and investment, and the
dynamics of external demand. One member argued
that economic policy actions will continue to be a key
determinant of the trajectory of the world economy in
the short, medium and long terms. He/she stated that
the stimulus provided by central banks has been
reinforced. As for fiscal policy, he/she pointed out
that the materialization of continuing support may
face greater restrictions due to the absence of room
for maneuver and to political factors. He/she added

1


-----

that trade policy will be crucial for the international
flows of goods and services and the reconfiguration
of global value chains.

**Most members mentioned that** **inflation in**
**advanced economies remains below their central**
**banks’ targets. The abovementioned despite the**
**increase in food merchandise inflation and the**
**rebound of energy prices. One member pointed**
out that inflation in these economies has remained
low due to the fall in aggregate demand. **Another**
member stated that the monetary authorities of these
countries anticipate that headline and core inflation
will remain below their targets for an extended
period. **Some members underlined that in a large**
number of emerging economies inflation is also
below target as a result of the impact on services and
the weakness of demand. In this regard, **one**
member stated that, despite the greater slack, in
some emerging economies, increases in energy and
food merchandise prices, as well as the exchangerate depreciation, have led to positive deviations visà-vis their inflation targets.

**Most members mentioned that the monetary**
**authorities of advanced economies are** **expected**
**to maintain accommodative stances for an**
**extended period. Some** members highlighted the
asset purchase programs implemented by these
authorities. **Regarding the Federal Reserve, the**
**majority of members mentioned that in its**
**September decision it maintained the range for**
**the federal funds rate at 0-0.25%. Some members**
noted that its projections indicate that the rate will
remain in such range at least until the end of 2023.
**The majority of members highlighted the**
**announcement of a new monetary policy strategy**
**that will maintain monetary stimulus until**
**inflation is moderately above its 2% target.** **The**
**majority also emphasized that this adjustment is**
**due to the limitations faced by monetary policy to**
**influence aggregate demand when the target rate**
**is at the zero lower bound and inflation**
**expectations remain persistently below the**
**target.** **One member recalled how the impossibility of**
having a sufficiently low real interest rate during the
financial crisis of 2008-09 led to a slower-thandesirable recovery of the US economy. He/she
argued that the restriction on real interest rates was
due to a combination of low inflation and a zero lower
bound on the federal funds rate. In this regard,
he/she stated that introducing the possibility of
inflation remaining above 2% for some time would
allow for a greater reduction of real interest rates, and
thus the Federal Reserve anticipates that it could


now be able to provide a greater stimulus to the
economy.

**Some members added that the Federal Reserve also**
adopted a new definition of the full employment
target, which will be used asymmetrically and
respond only when employment is below maximum
levels. **One member pointed out that these**
adjustments are relevant due to the importance of the
US dollar as a reserve currency and its role as a
reference for investments in international financial
markets, particularly in Mexico. He/she mentioned
that, on the one hand, this strategy would delay
interest rate increases until inflation is consolidated
at levels above its target, thus decreasing

expectations of short-term interest rates, and argued
that this contributed to a depreciation of the US dollar
after the strategy’s announcement, which deepened
after September’s monetary policy decision. On the
other hand, he/she considered that this new strategy
introduces greater uncertainty about the future
behavior of inflation, which may lead to higher
inflation risk premia. In this regard, he/she noted that
long-term interest rates increased slightly after the
announcement.

**Some members pointed out that other central banks**
are also considering adjusting their monetary policy
frameworks. **Some members mentioned that the**
Bank of England is evaluating the possibility of
adopting negative interest rates. One member added
that most central banks of emerging economies have
also privileged fostering accommodative financial
conditions by setting low real interest rates to
strengthen the flow of credit. He/she mentioned that
ten out of 14 emerging countries analyzed have a
negative ex-ante real interest rate. He/she added that
even countries with an inflation level above their
targets have cut their real interest rate to levels close
to zero or below, while in Mexico the ex-ante real
interest rate remains at positive levels. He/she noted
that expectations for the average reference interest
rate in emerging economies for the end of 2020 are
below 3%.

**Most members agreed that global financial**
**markets have shown a positive behavior in the**
**last weeks, reflecting the effects of the measures**
**implemented in advanced economies. One**
member added that the improvement in economic
figures has also driven this behavior. **Some**
members highlighted the generalized weakening of
the US dollar against a broad group of currencies.
**One member underlined the narrow and mixed**
adjustments of interest rates and the steepening of
the yield curve in the United States due to

2


-----

expectations of greater levels of inflation in the long
term.

As for financial markets of emerging economies,
**some members highlighted that in an environment of**
lower risk aversion, there were capital flows to fixedincome assets. However, **one member added that**
flows to equity assets continued to register negative
balances, partly due to the recent adjustments to
growth expectations of emerging economies.

**Another** emphasized that markets have exhibited
some improvement in recent weeks and added that,
despite showing some volatility, various emerging
market currencies have appreciated against the US
dollar and risk premia have diminished.

Nevertheless, he/she mentioned that financial
conditions observed at the beginning of the year, in
terms of risk premia and value of emerging market
currencies against the US dollar, have not been
attained yet. **One member added that in an**
environment subject to risks, there were recent
episodes of volatility, in which the exchange rates of
emerging economies’ currencies lost some of the
ground gained during previous weeks. He/she added
that these economies have faced lower commodity
prices and negative impacts on other revenues,
which led to downgrades and negative outlooks on
sovereign ratings.

**Most members considered that international**
**financial markets are subject to several risks. In**
**addition to those associated with the pandemic,**
**they mentioned: i) the US election process; ii) the**
**escalation of trade tensions; iii) political and**
**geopolitical** **conflicts,** **and** **iv)** **a** **possible**

**adjustment of the prices of some higher risk**
**assets, such as the stocks of technology sector**
**firms.** In this context, **one member mentioned that**
given these risks, although the external environment
seems to be favorable, it is still a fragile equilibrium.
**Another** member argued that emerging economies
are particularly exposed due to their dependency on
external financial conditions and to the idiosyncratic
risks they face. **One** member added that the
environment of economic weakness, uncertainty
about the pandemic, lower public revenues and
pressures on government spending, imply

considerable challenges for emerging economies
overall. He/she also highlighted that, in these
economies, public sector’s borrowing requirements
have increased considerably and that they could face
greater restrictions in domestic and international
financial markets.


**_Economic activity in Mexico_**

**All members highlighted that, after a deep**
**contraction in April and May, economic activity in**
**Mexico began to recover in June and July. One**
member noted that during the second quarter of
2020, GDP registered an annual fall of 18.7% using
seasonally adjusted data, while **another member**
added that it decreased 17.1% with respect to the
first quarter of this year.

**As** **for** **the** **supply** **side,** **most** **members**

**highlighted the heterogeneity in the pace of**
**recovery of different sectors. They pointed out**
**that the industrial sector has exhibited the best**
**performance,** **driven** **by** **manufactures,**

**particularly automotive, while, in contrast,**
**services continue to show weakness. One**
member explained that industrial production fell at an
annual rate of 11.6% in July, a smaller decline than
the 30.1% contraction registered in April. He/she
added that construction has shown a slower recovery
and contracted at an annual rate of 23.7% in July.
He/she stated that services remain weak, particularly
those related to accommodation, which contracted at
an annual rate of 28.6% in June, and arts,
entertainment and recreation and food services,
which fell 68.8%. **Another member mentioned that**
the tertiary sector is expected to recover at a slower
pace than the secondary sector as long as all
activities are not fully reopened.

**As for the demand side, most members agreed**
**that its recovery has been driven by the external**
**sector. Some** members underlined that exports
started to increase in June. One member stated that,
compared to December 2019, exports rose from
60.4% in April to 92.1% in July. **Another member**
stated that exports are expected to be the driving
force behind demand.

**Most members highlighted that consumption and**
**investment remain sluggish. One member added**
that the behavior of imports, consumption and
investment points to a slow recovery of domestic
demand. Another member highlighted the sharp fall
in consumption in April and its recovery in June and
July, although he/she underlined that it continues to
be far below the level observed at the end of 2019,
which contrasts with the recovery of this aggregate in
some advanced economies that have implemented
economic relief programs. One member pointed out
that, in August, several consumption indicators
registered levels close to those prior to the pandemic,
while other indicators, such as credit card purchases
or domestic car sales, remain deteriorated. Another
member mentioned that remittances, which are a

3


-----

determinant of consumption, continue increasing,
although with heterogeneity among sender and
receiver states. **One member highlighted that**
investment has not shown signs of recovery and that
its weakness can be seen in the figures of the second
quarter and in the timely indicators of construction
and capital goods imports. **Another member**
underlined that investment is facing the effects
associated with the pandemic and that, as a result, in
April it contracted at an annual rate of 38.2%, and in
June it registered a level 25.2% lower than that of the
previous year, as well as an environment unfavorable
for investment, as stands out in the results drawn
from business opinion surveys.

**All members underlined the large impact on the**
**labor market, although one of them highlighted that**
said market has started to normalize gradually. Most
**members pointed out that the underemployment**
**rate, unemployment rate and the rate of workers**
**who are not part of the labor force but who are**
**available to work, remain at high levels. Some**
members pointed out that the unemployment rate
rose from 2.9% in March to 5.4% in July. **One**
member noted that, following the outflow of over 12
million workers from the labor force, as of July 7.2
million workers had rejoined the labor force. Another
member underlined that, although the labor

participation rate has recovered to a level of 55%, it
is below the average level of the last 6 years, of
approximately 59%. He/she added that it could take
several years to return to the employment levels
observed prior to the pandemic. One member added
that almost 6 million jobs were lost between March
and July, with and extended unemployment rate of
22.1% in July. As a result, the labor gap has reached
historically high levels, with 23.3 million people in
need of full-time jobs. **Another member noted that,**
despite the improvement, 5.4 million workers left the
labor force between March and July and added that
the jobs created after May have been mainly in the
informal sector. **One member indicated that, as a**
consequence of the above and of the increase of
underemployment, a loss of job quality is observed,
with individuals who have returned to their jobs but
are now earning lower wages. He/she added that
there are differentiated effects by gender, which will
require particular attention. **Some members stated**
that formal employment, measured through the
number of IMSS-insured workers, contracted by over
one million during the first seven months of the year.
**Some members highlighted that formal employment**
showed a slight recovery in August.

**Most members emphasized that the economic**
**recovery will be difficult and prolonged, and**


**added that it is subject to uncertainty. One**
member pointed out that a 10% contraction is
anticipated in 2020 and emphasized that the
magnitude of the recovery over the next months is
key to determine how long it will take to return to the
levels of economic activity observed during the third
quarter of 2018, in order to end the recovery phase
and start an expansion phase. He/she estimated that
the recovery phase might last from two to six years,
or even up to a decade if per capita GDP is
considered. Another member underlined that, given
the difficulty to forecast a central scenario for
economic growth, Banco de México has maintained
three scenarios with different recovery trajectories,
depending on the evolution of the pandemic and the
performance of advanced economies and domestic
demand, all of which continue to be subject to a high
degree of uncertainty. One member pointed out that,
based on the most recent surveys, private sector
analysts already estimate the Mexican economy’s
long-term growth to be below 2%.

**Most members agreed that wide slack conditions**
**are anticipated throughout the horizon in which**
**monetary** **policy** **operates.** **The** **majority**

**highlighted that there are downward risks to**
**economic** **activity** **and** **underlined** **the**

**implications for productive activity derived from**
**the evolution of the pandemic. One** member
mentioned a high probability of a second wave of
infections in the short term, mainly associated with
the easing of lockdown measures, a situation that
could become more complicated in view of the
beginning of the influenza season. He/she added
that, even with a vaccine available, a recovery that
relatively quickly offsets the contraction registered in
2020 is unlikely to occur. This, due to the fact that an
imbalance in the determinants of GDP growth is
foreseen to persist during 2021. He/she stated that a
higher-than-expected growth of the US economy and
of world trade, combined with the USMCA, should
stimulate exports. Nevertheless, he/she warned that
consumption will recover more slowly due to the high
levels of unemployment, fears of virus contagion, and
the absence of sufficient fiscal support. He/she
pointed out that the latter factor and an unfavorable
business climate would limit the recovery of private
investment. In addition to the above described risks
to growth, **another member added the following: i)**
that the negative effects on goods and services’
production and on businesses and households’
revenues continue; ii) that additional episodes of risk
aversion in financial markets are observed; iii)
pressures on public revenue, which could affect the
sovereign risk outlook and the conditions of access
to financial markets, and iv) solvency problems of

4


-----

households and businesses affected by the

pandemic.

**_Inflation in Mexico_**

**All members pointed out that in August, headline**
**inflation ended above 4%. Most members**
**highlighted that, with this, it exceeded the upper**
**limit of the variability interval around the 3%**
**target. One** member stated that in that month
inflation registered its highest level since May 2019.
**Another member added that it has increased over**
the last four months, as compared to the downward
trend observed in numerous advanced and emerging
economies.

**Most members considered that inflation has**
**continued to be affected by the pandemic, which**
**has implied supply and demand shocks, thus**
**contributing to a recomposition in relative prices.**
**One member mentioned that these adjustments took**
place in the context of a marked weakness of
demand. He/she highlighted that seasonally adjusted
monthly changes of the items that registered upward
shocks in recent months have started to show
variations closer to their average of the last ten years.
**Another member argued that supply and demand**
shocks, and the behavior of the exchange rate, are
reflected in both the divergent evolution of
merchandise and services’ prices and in the
contrasting price increases of different items of the
CPI basket. He/she noted that slightly more than a
half of said basket registers annualized monthly price
increases higher than 4% and close to a third
annualized monthly price increases below 2%.
He/she pointed out that headline inflation has
remained high and above the expected level as
certain upward risks to the core component have
materialized. One member mentioned that inflation of
services and of energy prices are below their
respective historical average levels, while prices of
food merchandise and agricultural and livestock
products register cumulative inflations above said
levels, although the most recent data suggests these
have somewhat moderated or stabilized.

**Delving into the core component, all members**
**mentioned that services inflation remains low**
**and merchandise inflation has increased. One**
member pointed out that services prices have been
affected by a lower demand caused by social
distancing measures and by lower private spending.
**Another member stated that services inflation is**
below the target level, although this has not offset the
upward pressures in merchandise prices. **One**
member noted that the lower services inflation has
moderated, which, in addition to the increases in


merchandise inflation, has led to upward pressures
on core inflation. **Some members stated that food**
merchandise prices have been pressured by supply
chain disruptions, changes in the consumption
basket, and the concentration of spending on these
goods. **One member added that changes in the**
excise tax (special tax on production and services,
also known as IEPS) on soft drinks and tobacco have
also affected said prices. **Another** member

highlighted that pressures stemming from

merchandise prices have become generalized, given
that, although food prices register higher annual
increases, non-food prices are contributing to a
larger extent to the acceleration of inflation.

**As for non-core inflation, most members**
**underlined the increase in energy prices. One**
member added that the evolution of these prices
reflects the impact of reductions in supply and the
recent recovery of world economic activity. **Some**
members noted the increase in agricultural and
livestock prices.

**Some** members mentioned that headline inflation
expectations for the end of 2020, and to a lower
extent for 2021, have increased. **One member**
considered that this suggests that the less favorable
outlook has started to extend to the following year.
**Another member noted that expectations for the end**
of 2021 are far above those of the Central Bank and
added that short-term core inflation expectations
have also continued to increase. **Some members**
added that medium- and long-term expectations
remained stable at levels above the 3% target. In this
regard, one member highlighted that the dispersion
around 3.5% has practically disappeared, which
indicates a stronger entrenchment of long-term
expectations at levels above the target. **Another**
member considered that despite the recent increase
in observed inflation, inflation expectations for both
the medium-term and for the end of 2021 have
remained stable, while those for the next 12 months
have decreased after having increased at the
beginning of the pandemic, although they remain
above the 3% target. He/she added that the average
of one to 10 years of annual inflation expectations
implicit in market instruments was of around 3% in
September, which suggests that the recent price
increases are considered as transitory and have not
contaminated inflation expectations.

**All members pointed out that inflation is**
**anticipated to converge to the target in the**
**horizon in which monetary policy operates. One**
member noted that, in the expected scenario,
inflation is estimated to show in the short term the

5


-----

effects of some recent price adjustments. He/she
pointed out that in the 12-to-24 month forecast
horizon, headline and core inflation are anticipated to
be around 3%. **Another member considered that,**
looking forward, prices will remain contained by both
a depressed demand and low energy prices. He/she
stated that some sectors that exhibited increases in
sales and in prices, due to a recomposition in
spending, have already started to be affected by the
decrease in aggregate demand. **One member**
estimated that, due to their nature, both supply
shocks and other upward pressures on certain
products derived from the pandemic should fade off
or, at least, be mitigated, once the health problem is
resolved, while economic weakness will most
probably persist for a longer period. In this context,
**some members argued that the effect of the**
contraction of demand on prices should prevail, thus
contributing to the convergence of inflation to its
target.

**One** member mentioned that supply and demand
pressures on inflation are foreseen to continue until
the first half of 2021, to later decelerate and reach the
target by the end of that year. He/she pointed out that
core inflation is still subject to pressures derived from
increases in energy prices, the exchange rate and
wages. He/she pointed out that the food

merchandise subcomponent has been particularly
under pressures stemming from tax adjustments,
supply chain disruptions, and changes in

consumption baskets. Nevertheless, he/she stated
that these are expected to be transitory. **Another**
member mentioned that both headline inflation and
its components continue on an upward trend, despite
the wide slack and the exchange rate appreciation.
He/she noted that, while inflation is still anticipated to
converge to 3% during the fourth quarter of 2021, the
foreseen trajectory has been adjusted upwards for
the entire forecast horizon.

As to the balance of risks for inflation, **some**
members highlighted the risk of additional episodes
of exchange rate depreciation. **One of them stated**
that this is particularly relevant in an environment
characterized by numerous domestic and external
challenges. In addition to the above, he/she
underlined that the inflation scenario also faces
different risks stemming from the recent performance
of inflation and the relative impact of supply and
demand shocks. Another member stated that further
impacts from the supply side cannot be ruled out.
**One member mentioned the persistence of core**
inflation, highlighting that it has averaged 3.7% over
the last 30 months, and that it is expected to continue
until March 2021. He/she added that although the


trajectory of non-core inflation is difficult to anticipate,
it could reverse to its historic mean of around 6%,
causing a deviation from the baseline scenario.
He/she also underlined the risk of inflation
expectations de-anchoring, since inflation has
remained above the target for an extended period,
although he/she stated that analysts agree that said
deviation is transitory. He/she added the risk
associated with the impact of the wage policy and
expectations of a considerable increase in 2021.
He/she pointed out that, since 2018, unit labor costs
have increased and productivity has declined, which
implies that profit margins have decreased and/or a
partial or a total pass-through effect to prices has
taken place. In this context, **some members**
considered that the balance of risks for the foreseen
inflation trajectory remains uncertain. **One member**
indicated that, despite the above, upward risks have
increased. Meanwhile, another member considered
that risks are balanced and that he/she does not
identify factors that could significantly affect the
foreseen trajectory for inflation in the Central Bank
forecasts. He/she considered that this implies that
inflation will return to its target within the time frame
in which monetary policy operates.

**_Macrofinancial environment_**

**Regarding financial markets, most members**
**highlighted the appreciation of the Mexican peso,**
**although it has recently been subject to episodes**
**of volatility. Some members mentioned that the**
Mexican peso has been one of the currencies that
has appreciated the most among emerging countries’
currencies. **One member stated that although the**
negative balance of the net currency position
stopped widening, the cumulative annual flow to
fixed-income instruments remains negative by more
than USD 14 billion.

**Most members pointed out that moderate inflows**
**of foreign capital have been observed. Some**
members added that sovereign risk has improved,
although it remains above its level at the beginning
of the year. One member stated that it has recently
increased marginally. **Some members noted that**
interest rates on government securities exhibited
limited and mixed adjustments. **One** member
mentioned that the stock market fell, in line with the
global trend.

In this context, **some members mentioned that**
trading conditions remain deteriorated. However,
**one member noted the improvement in the**
conditions of the fixed-income market and stated that
financial markets will continue to improve as the
recovery advances, although episodes of volatility

6


-----

are not ruled out. **Another member highlighted that**
the risk of episodes of turbulence caused by
domestic or external factors remains latent, as shown
by the recent experience with the exchange rate.

**Most members pointed out that the situation of**
**public finances is a risk factor. In this regard, one**
member stated that between 2019 and 2020, Public
Sector Borrowing Requirements will increase from
2.3 to 4.7%, while their historical balance will do so
from 44.8 to 54.7% as a percentage of GDP. Some
members noted that the economic package for 2021
represents a continuation of the policy of the previous
two years, with an emphasis on an austere
management of public finances and on channeling
spending to the current administration’s priority
programs. Another member highlighted the modest
increase proposed for health spending and the cuts
in public investment to its lowest level in 20 years.
He/she emphasized that resource allocation and
social profitability of the projects to be financed will
compromise the country’s growth potential even
further.

**Some members highlighted the risk that the**
depletion of the stabilization funds’ resources implies
for 2021. They argued that several assumptions of
the economic package might not materialize,
emphasizing those related to the evolution of oil
production and economic activity. **One member**
stated that the oil revenue target assumes a
production of 1.8 million barrels per day, compared
to the 1.6 million currently produced. He/she pointed
out that the extension of lockdown measures due to
insufficient control of the health crisis has had a
greater-than-expected impact on economic activity,
exerting an additional pressure on public finances.
**Another member pointed out the need to consider**
redirecting government spending and to permanently
strengthen public revenues.

**Most members expressed their concern about**
**Pemex’s situation. Some members highlighted the**
possibility that the state firm requires additional fiscal
support. One member considered that this, together
with a materialization of a downgrade in the state oil
company’s or the sovereign’s ratings, as well as
pressures on spending originated by the extension of
the pandemic, could negatively affect public
finances. **Another member emphasized that public**
finances face challenges due to the absence of a
long-term solution to Pemex’s problems.

**Some members mentioned that the impact of the**
pandemic continued to affect financing to firms and
households. **One member pointed out that the**
growth of credit granted by commercial banks to


firms continues registering negative figures at an
annual rate. He/she indicated that the decline in
credit is a worrisome particularly in the case of
smaller firms, for which it fell at an annual rate of 5.4% in July. He/she added that the spread between
the rate that these firms face and the risk-free interest
rate continued to increase, which implies that the
cost of credit is not decreasing at the same rate as
the reference rate, thus making it difficult to restore
credit flows. **Another member noted that although**
there was a tightening in bank financing conditions,
the adjustments have moderated recently. He/she
pointed out that the deterioration of delinquency rates
of consumer and firm credit has eased.

**Most members highlighted that there is an**
**unfavorable environment for private investment.**
**One member mentioned that ongoing sit-in protests,**
takeovers of rail infrastructure and toll booths, the reemergence of fuel theft, and increased insecurity
discourage the private investment needed for
sustained economic growth. **Another member**
pointed out that the lack of sufficient fiscal support
will increase the risk of long-term damage to the
productive capacity, especially in the case of smalland medium-sized firms. He/she noted that this
environment, combined with unfavorable business
conditions, will limit the recovery of investment. One
member stated that a policy adverse to private
investment will further compromise potential growth.

**Another** member argued that in face of such a
complex environment, a solid and sustainable
macroeconomic policy stance that contributes to an
orderly adjustment of financial markets and of the
economy as a whole is required. This within a
framework that maintains the sustainability of public
finances, a low and stable inflation, and a solid and
well-capitalized financial system.

**_Monetary policy_**

**Taking the referred risks for inflation, economic**
**activity and financial markets into account, major**
**challenges arise for monetary policy and for the**
**economy in general, and based on the foreseen**
**scenarios for inflation and considering the room**
**for maneuver that on balance these provide to**
**monetary policy, all members agreed to lower the**
**target for the overnight interbank interest rate by**
**25 basis points to a level of 4.25%. All members**
**considered that monetary policy implementation**
**will depend on the evolution of the factors that**
**have an incidence on the outlook for inflation and**
**its expectations, including the effects that the**
**pandemic might have on both of them.**

7


-----

**One member mentioned that among the challenges**
faced by monetary policy under the current complex
environment, the significant supply and demand
shocks which affect economic activity and inflation,
as well as the fragility prevailing in global financial
markets and risk appetite, which are subject to
episodes of volatility and capital outflows, stand out.
He/she highlighted that inflation has continued to
suffer the effects of the pandemic and has increased
in recent months. Although he/she recalled that
headline and core inflation are expected to be on
target in the horizon in which monetary policy
operates, he/she emphasized that risk factors to
inflation persist. He/she added that in order to
consolidate an orderly adjustment of the national
economy and maintain low and stable inflation, the
well-functioning of domestic financial markets is
required. Considering the above, he/she highlighted
monetary policy’s limited room for maneuver, and
that in the future the available room will depend on
the evolution of the factors that influence inflation
forecasts.

**Another member pointed out that at the beginning of**
the pandemic, monetary policy faced unprecedented
challenges, since the possible impact of this shock
on the economy, its duration, depth, scope and risks
were unknown. He/she added that currently there is
valuable, available information that should be
considered for the monetary policy decision,
although high uncertainty persists. He/she

mentioned that, although a favorable evolution of
financial markets has been observed, price

dynamics, the evolution of inflation expectations, as
well as the persistence of uncertainty worldwide and
of idiosyncratic risk factors indicate that prudence
and caution should be reinforced when conducting
monetary policy. He/she considered that with the
referred reduction of 25 basis points, the space for
monetary easing has probably been exhausted,
which will allow for inducing the trajectory of inflation
and its expectations to its 3% target in the horizon in
which monetary policy operates. Finally, he/she
highlighted that the monetary policy announcement
has to communicate that the trajectory and current
levels of inflation have reduced the margin of
maneuver for future target rate cuts and that future
decisions will depend on the deviations that are
observed in the trajectory of inflation to the 3% target.

**One member pointed out that given the uncertainty**
about the impact of the pandemic on the economy,
there is no clear information about how the main
macroeconomic aggregates will behave during
monetary policy’s period of influence. He/she noted
that the statistical exercises conducted suggest that


the convergence of inflation to the target is feasible
during the second half of 2021, even with a further
reduction to the monetary policy rate. However,
he/she emphasized that upward risks to inflation
have increased. In this regard, he/she underlined that
in recent weeks inflation reached levels above
Central Bank’s expectations and the target, which
has resulted in a certain increase in the forecasts for
coming months. On the other hand, he/she added
that adjustments to the reference rate since August
2019 have decreased or even reversed the
comparable interest rate spread relative to other
emerging economies, posing challenges to an
economy highly exposed to capital movements and
with a very liquid currency in international markets.
He/she pointed out that this is happening in a context
where inflation expectations for both the second half
of 2021 and the long term have not converged to the
target. He/she added that the latter is combined with
other sources of uncertainty in addition to those
associated with the pandemic, such as, among
others, the US presidential elections, the challenges
for Pemex and for public finances in Mexico, the risks
to the sovereign’s rating which could even affect the
investment grade, a wage policy for 2021 still to be
defined, and an important electoral process in
Mexico in that year. He/she considered that, under
these circumstances, the implementation of a
monetary policy that is even more prudent than in
previous months, is necessary. He/she pointed out
that this implies not only slowing down the pace of
monetary policy easing, but also acknowledging that
the margins of maneuver for additional easing have
probably already been exhausted, which underlines
the convenience of beginning a pause after this
decision, although he/she recognized that this will
depend on the evolution of inflation and its
expectations.

**Another** member considered that the referred
reduction of 25 basis points would benefit the
Mexican economy without putting price stability at
risk. He/she mentioned that the cycle of monetary
easing should slow down, but that there is space to
continue, since from various perspectives, in his/her
opinion, the monetary easing is still insufficient.
Comparing the current situation with the 2009 crisis,
he/she pointed out that GDP fell -6.5% in the first nine
months of 2009, while in the first six months of 2020,
it did so by -10.1%. He/she added that inflation and
its expectations are currently behaving more
favorably than eleven years ago. He/she highlighted
that inflation expectations for the next 12 months are
at 3.58%; while in 2009 they were well above 4% and
even exceeded 5% at some point. He/she added that
the persistence of monthly inflation has been

8


-----

reduced to less than half the level of 2009, thus
contributing to prevent expectations from being
contaminated. Thus, he/she considered that these
elements allow for a policy easing at least equivalent
to that of 2009, when monetary easing took the real
interest rate even to negative levels. He/she argued
that making a pause in the current cycle of easing
would imply ignoring Banco de México’s

achievements and would deprive the economy of an
additional impulse, which might be highly beneficial
and very necessary in the current conditions. In this
regard, he/she pointed out that several studies show
that monetary policy’s credit channel operates in
Mexico. He/she said that an accommodative
monetary policy can reduce credit costs, thus
contributing to its flow to households and firms.
He/she referred to different, credit-related areas of
demand that remain depressed, such as credit card
purchases, domestic car sales, and investment.
He/she considered that, for this reason, monetary
policy is still insufficient and might yet play a
significant role in the economic recovery process.
He/she added that the negative economic effects
associated with a very high real interest rate are
documented in the literature. In this regard, he/she
referred to the case of the United States during the
global financial crisis and the recent change in the
monetary policy strategy of the Federal Reserve. On
the other hand, he/she argued that although inflation
in Mexico is higher than in other emerging
economies, the key variable is the real ex-ante
interest rate, which depends on inflation expectations
and not on observed inflation. He/she pointed out
that the expected inflation in Mexico has not changed
significantly and is well anchored, so that real ex-ante
rates are positive, which could eventually be
incompatible with a sustained recovery. He/she
considered that it would not be convenient to send a
signal that the cycle of monetary easing has ended.
He/she pointed out that the current conditions of the
Mexican economy could be aligned with what other
central banks are doing and contribute to the
recovery process, without jeopardizing the priority
objective of price stability.

**One member considered that monetary easing**
should continue given the depressed economic
activity that faces a difficult, fragile and potentially
long recovery. However, he/she pointed out that it is
advisable to adjust its speed and focus carefully on
the performance of economic indicators in the
following months. In his/her opinion, this adjustment
is due to four factors. First, he/she mentioned the
described inflationary outlook. In this regard, he/she
highlighted that the increase in current inflation may
not be temporary and that several shocks may shift


inflation away from its expected trajectory. Second,
he/she mentioned that the room for maneuver
offered by the absolute and relative monetary policy
stances is starting to narrow. Regarding the absolute
policy stance, he/she noted that the temporary
increase in inflation has partially offset the room for
maneuver offered by the economic slowdown. As to
the relative stance, he/she mentioned that there is
room for maneuver due to both the expectation that
the Federal Reserve will keep interest rates low for a
prolonged period and the containment of risk
aversion worldwide. However, he/she considered
that Mexico’s interest rate spread is not so high when
considering exchange rate volatility, so each
additional reduction must be done with caution.
He/she noted that with increased risk appetite and
the marked foreign exchange rate appreciation
observed in the last weeks, the interest rate spread
is likely to become more relevant. He/she added that
portfolio outflows seem to have stopped, although we
are still far from regaining the investment flows lost
due to the shocks of the pandemic. Third, he/she
noted that maintaining the current pace of easing
could be interpreted as the price stability objective
taking second stage. He/she added that the cut to the
policy rate has a limited impact, as the credit channel
is inefficient due to limited credit depth and low
financial inclusion. In contrast, he/she considered
that the expectations channel has shown a greater
effectiveness. In this regard, strengthening the
central bank’s credibility regarding its commitment to
contain the price increases is fundamental. Fourth,
he/she referred to the idiosyncratic risks related to
public finances and uncertainty for investment,
among others mentioned above. Finally, he/she
highlighted the importance of never disregarding the
inflationary concerns and preventing the loss of
purchasing power from further eroding households,
which currently face a significant decline in their
income.

**Most members noted that the extraordinary**
**measures adopted by the Central Institute have**
**mitigated the impact of the crisis on the financial**
**system. The majority highlighted the importance**
**of recently extending these measures until**
**February 28, 2021, for the well-functioning of**
**financial markets, given the challenges that**
**continue to be faced. Additionally, some members**
pointed out the need to monitor the restructuring of
credit portfolios subject to the special accounting
criteria, in view of their expiration, as this could have
implications for financial stability, and highlighted the
risks to the payment capacity of the households and
firms most affected by the pandemic. **One member**
also underlined the potential challenges for the

9


-----

financial system as the crisis begins to be reflected
more evidently in the solvency of some firms.

**3. MONETARY POLICY DECISION**

Taking into account the referred risks for inflation,
economic activity and financial markets, major
challenges arise for monetary policy and for the
economy in general. Based on the foreseen
scenarios for inflation and considering the room for
maneuver, although narrow, that on balance these
provide to monetary policy, with the presence of all
members, Banco de México’s Governing Board
decided unanimously to lower the target for the
overnight interbank interest rate by 25 basis points to
a level of 4.25%. Monetary policy implementation will
depend on the evolution of the factors that have an
incidence on the outlook for inflation and its
expectations, including the effects that the pandemic
might have on both of them.

The Governing Board will take the necessary actions
on the basis of incoming information and considering


the large impact on productive activity as well as the
evolution of the financial shock that we are currently
facing. The latter in order for the policy rate to be
consistent with the orderly and sustained

convergence of headline inflation to Banco de
México’s target within the time frame in which
monetary policy operates. Perseverance in

strengthening the macroeconomic fundamentals and
adopting the necessary actions regarding both
monetary and fiscal policies will contribute to a better
adjustment of domestic financial markets and of the
economy as a whole.

**4. VOTING**

Alejandro Díaz de León-Carrillo, Irene EspinosaCantellano, Gerardo Esquivel-Hernández, Javier
Eduardo Guzmán-Calafell and Jonathan Ernest
Heath-Constable voted in favor of lowering the target
for the overnight interbank interest rate by 25 basis
points to a level of 4.25%.

10


-----

**ANNEX**

The information in this Annex was prepared for this
meeting by the staff of Banco de México’s General
Directorate of Economic Research and General
Directorate of Central Bank Operations. It does not
necessarily reflect the considerations of the

members of the Governing Board as to the monetary
policy decision.

**A.1. External conditions**

**A.1.1. World economic activity**

Available information indicates that the recovery of
world economic activity that began in May and June
continued during July and August, although at a more
moderate pace and with a high heterogeneity among
countries. This recovery has been driven by a greater
dynamism of private consumption, a slight

reactivation of investment, and a greater volume of
foreign trade, the latter pushing a higher growth of
manufacturing activity. In addition, higher frequency
indicators, such as the purchasing managers’ and
mobility indexes, continue to show a gradual
improvement (Chart 1). In most advanced economies
headline and core inflation have recently increased,
due mainly to the rebound of energy and goods’
prices, in a context of gradual reopening of economic
activity. However, headline inflation remains below
their central banks’ targets. In emerging economies
inflation has exhibited a more heterogeneous
behavior.

In this context, monetary and fiscal authorities have
continued to implement stimulus measures to
mitigate the adverse effects of the pandemic on the
economy. In particular, in addition to keeping interest
rates at historically low levels and continuing to use
their balance sheets to promote an orderly
functioning of financial markets, the major central
banks have emphasized their commitment to
maintain accommodative monetary policy stances
for a prolonged period until they attain their inflation
targets. The monetary, fiscal and financial stimulus
measures implemented in advanced economies,
along with the gradual recovery of their economic
activity and certain progress in the development of a
vaccine against COVID-19, favored a relative
stability in financial markets during the period
immediately after Mexico’s latest monetary policy
decision. However, in recent weeks there have been
periods of volatility associated with a combination of
factors, including the uncertainty about the approval
of an additional package of fiscal support measures


in the United States, pauses in the development of
the COVID-19 vaccine, an increase in the number of
infections in several countries, concerns about the
valuation of certain financial assets, and the
possibility of the United Kingdom leaving the
European Union without a trade agreement.

In this environment, the forecasts of multilateral
organizations and analysts for world economic
growth in 2020 have been revised to the upside due
to the materialization of a lower than expected
contraction during the second quarter, particularly in
advanced economies. In turn, growth expectations
for 2021 were revised slightly to the downside due to
the lower economic contraction expected in 2020 and
the expectation that social distancing will continue
during that year. It is worth noting that these
forecasts are subject to a high degree of uncertainty.
The number of infections in the United States and
Latin America remains high and it has increased
once again in several European and Asian countries,
which may lead to the adoption of new lockdown
measures that may limit the recovery of economic
activity.

**Chart 1**

**Global: Purchasing Managers’ Index (PMI)**

**Production Component**

Diffusion index, s. a.

60

55

50

45

40

35

Manufacturing

30 Manufacturing (excl. China)

Services

Services (excl. China)

25

August

20

2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020

s. a. / Seasonally adjusted figures.
Source: Markit.

In the United States, available information suggests
economic activity rebounded during the third quarter
of 2020, after having contracted at a seasonally
adjusted annualized rate of 31.7% during the second
quarter (Chart 2). This recovery would be driven by
spending in private consumption, which would in turn
respond to the fiscal stimuli and reopening of the
economy as well as to residential investment in light
of the low level of mortgage interest rates. Other
indicators, such as capital goods’ orders and exports

11


-----

have shown a more moderate recovery. Higher
frequency indicators, such as purchasing managers’
and mobility indexes, are consistent with the rebound
exhibited by economic activity during the third
quarter.

During July and August, US industrial production
recovered at a slower pace, growing at an average
monthly rate of 1.8% during these months, after
having grown 6.1% in June. This trend reflected
some deceleration in manufacturing, and the
stagnation of mining activity as a result of the
negative impact of Hurricane Laura during August.

US employment continued to recover in July and
August, partly due to the return to work of employees
that had been temporarily dismissed. In particular,
the unemployment rate has continued trending
downwards, registering 8.4% in August, after having
reached 14.7% in April. Nevertheless, it still remains
above pre-pandemic levels. Between May and
August, 10.6 million of the more than 22 million jobs
that were lost between March and April in the nonfarm sector have been recovered. The level of initial
claims of unemployment insurance continued to
decrease, although it still remains high.

**Chart 2**

**United States: Real GDP and its Components**

Annualized quarterly percentage change and

contributions in percentage points, s. a.

10

5

0

-5

-10

Private consumption expenditures

-15

Residential investment

-20 Change in private inventories

-25 Net exports

Nonresidential investment

-30

Government consumption expenditures

-35 Total


-40


0

|Chart 2 United States: Real GDP and its Components Annualized quarterly percentage change and contributions in percentage points, s. a.|Col2|Col3|Col4|Col5|
|---|---|---|---|---|
|Private consumption expenditures Residential investment Change in private inventories Net exports Nonresidential investment Government consumption expenditures Total|||||
|I II III IV 2016|I II III IV 2017|I II III IV 2018|I II III IV 2019|I II 2020|


s. a. / Seasonally adjusted figures.
Source: Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA),

In the Euro area, available indicators also point to a
gradual recovery of economic activity during the third
quarter. Particularly, in the major economies of the
region, retail sales continued to recover in July,
although at a more moderate pace, after having
significantly rebounded in May and June. This
recovery was driven by greater mobility and
improved consumer confidence. Industrial

production continued to grow in July, with


improvements in all of its items. The purchasing
managers’ indexes suggest that economic activity
moderated its pace of recovery in August, particularly
in the services sector. In this context, the
unemployment rate increased only slightly, from
7.7% in June to 7.9% in July, largely as a result of the
implementation of several job retention schemes, as
well as a lower labor force participation in several
countries of the region.

In the United Kingdom, available information to July
suggests a recovery of economic activity, mainly
driven by the growth of manufacturing and
construction, while the services sector has recovered
at a more moderate pace, and still remains below
pre-pandemic levels despite the lifting of mobility
restrictions and the reopening of shopping centers.
The purchasing managers’ indexes continued to
improve in August, while the services sector
registered a greater rebound during that month. In
this context, the unemployment rate rose from 3.9%
in June to 4.1% in July, while the number of partially
employed workers remained high.

In Japan, available indicators point to a gradual
recovery of economic activity during the third quarter
of the year. In particular, after having strongly
rebounded in June, domestic consumption grew
moderately in July due to the increase in the number
of COVID-19 infections. Industrial production and
new orders rebounded in July and the purchasing
managers’ index in the manufacturing sector
continued to improve in August, although it still
remains in contractionary levels. In this context, the
unemployment rate remained at low levels, partly as
a result of job retention schemes, increasing from
2.8% in June to 2.9% during July.

In emerging economies, economic conditions have
varied considerably depending on the spread of the
pandemic, the effectiveness of the measures to
contain it, and the economic stimuli implemented. In
China, indicators of economic activity in August
suggest that the recovery would extend to the third
quarter of the year, driven by industrial activity,
exports, consumption, and investment. In emerging
economies of Eastern Europe and Asia, available
indicators to July and August, mainly those related
with industrial production and foreign trade, suggest
a gradual recovery in the Czech Republic, Hungary,
Poland, Russia, India, Malaysia and the Philippines,
among others. Finally, in most Latin American
economies economic activity has remained weak.

Since Mexico’s previous monetary decision, the
international prices of commodities have registered a

12


-----

mixed behavior. Oil prices continued to increase in
August, supported by the perception of compliance
with production cuts by the Organization of
Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC) and other
producers and fears about the hurricanes in the Gulf
of Mexico. Later, at the beginning of September, oil
prices decreased due to the resurgence of COVID19 infections in several countries, which increased
the uncertainty about the pace of recovery of the
world economy, although in recent dates they rose
once again in light of the statements by the OPEC
regarding the strong measures it will take against the
countries that fail to comply with the agreed
production cuts. Industrial metal prices have
continued to trend upwards due to the restart of
industrial production, while those of gold, after having
reached historically high levels in August, fell slightly
as a result of a greater risk appetite. Finally, grain
prices were driven up by the gradual recovery of their
demand, as well as unfavorable weather conditions,
especially in the United States.

**A.1.2. Monetary policy and international financial**
**markets**

In most advanced economies, headline inflation has
increased recently due mainly to the increase in
energy prices, although it remains below their
respective central banks’ targets (Chart 3). Core
inflation also rose, largely reflecting the increase in
goods prices, while services prices overall remain
weak. In this context, inflation expectations drawn
from financial instruments have increased recently
for major advanced economies, although in general
they remain at low levels.

In emerging economies, headline and core inflation
showed a more mixed behavior, reflecting a
combination of factors. Although the weakening of
economic activity and the decline in some services
prices generated downward pressures on inflation in
most countries, various economies were subject to
upward pressures generated by increases in food
and energy prices and by the depreciation of their
currencies.

In this context, the main central banks, in addition to
maintaining their reference interest rates at

historically low levels and continuing to use their
balance sheets to foster an orderly functioning of
financial markets, emphasized their commitment to
maintain highly accommodative monetary policy
stances for an extended period by adjusting their
future guidance regarding their interest rates or asset
purchase programs or by suggesting the possible
adoption of new monetary policy instruments to attain


their inflation targets. Looking ahead, expectations
drawn from market instruments continue to anticipate
that central banks will maintain highly

accommodative monetary policies (Chart 4).

**Chart 3**

**Selected Advanced Economies: Headline**

**Inflation**

Annual percentage change

3.5 United States
Euro area

3.0 Japan

Canada

2.5 United Kingdom

2.0

1.5

1.0

0.5

0.0

-0.5 August

-1.0

2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020

Source: Bureau of Labor Statistics, Eurostat, Bank of Japan, Statistics
Canada, Office of National Statistics.

**Chart 4**

**Reference Rates and Implied Trajectories in**

**OIS Curves***

**Percent**

3.0% **― US Federal Reserve 2/**

**― Bank of England**
**― Bank of Japan**

2.5% **― Bank of Canada**

**― European Central Bank deposit rate**
**― OIS implicit trajectory 18 Sep 2020**

2.0% **--- OIS implicit trajectory 07 Aug 2020**

1.5%

1.0%

0.5%

0.0%

-0.5%

End of End of End of
2019 2020 2021

-1.0%

2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022

OIS: Fixed floating interest rate swap where the fixed interest rate is the
effective overnight reference rate.
** In the case of the US observed reference rate, the average interest rate
of the federal funds target range is used (0.0% - 0.25%).
Source: Prepared by Banco de México with Bloomberg data.

Among the monetary policy decisions in this period,
the following stand out:

i) The Federal Reserve announced in August adjustments to

its monetary policy strategy, adopting a flexible average
inflation target. Among the most significant adjustments,
the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) emphasized
that maximum employment is considered a broad and
inclusive objective and informed that its decisions will seek
to eliminate the “employment deficit vis-à-vis its full

13


-----

employment level”. In addition, it pointed out that it will seek
to achieve a 2% average inflation over time. Thus, in its
September meeting, the Federal Reserve left unchanged
its range for the federal funds rate at 0%-0.25% and
adjusted its statement to adapt it to the modifications in its
monetary policy strategy. In this regard, the Fed noted that
it expects that maintaining the current range for its
reference interest rate will be appropriate until labor market
conditions have reached levels consistent with its full
employment estimate and inflation has increased to 2%
and is heading to moderately exceed the 2% target for
some time. In this context, the medians of FOMC forecasts
suggest that the federal funds rate will remain unchanged
until 2023. Likewise, both market variables and the
consensus of forecasters incorporate that this central bank
will maintain its reference rate unchanged during 2020 and
2021.

ii) In its September meeting, the European Central Bank

(ECB) left its policy rates unchanged, maintaining its
refinancing rate, key deposit facility rate and key lending
facility rate at 0.0, -0.5 and -0.25%, respectively. It
reiterated that these interest rates will remain at or below
their current levels until inflation forecasts converge to a
level sufficiently close but below the 2% inflation target, and
that this convergence has been consistently reflected in
core inflation dynamics. It also kept its asset purchase
program unchanged and mentioned that it will continue
with the Pandemic Emergency Purchase Program (PEPP)
until the end of June 2021 or until the Committee considers
that the crisis phase has ended. In a press conference, the
President of the ECB pointed out that the Monetary Policy
Committee acknowledged that the recent appreciation of
the euro has exerted downward pressure on inflation, that
the central bank does not have a mandate on the exchange
rate level and that, although the balance of risks for growth
is biased to the downside, it considers that deflationary
risks have decreased since June.

iii) In its September meeting, the Bank of Japan left its short
term policy interest rate unchanged at -0.1% and its longterm interest rate (indexed to its 10-year bond) at around
0%, and reiterated that it will continue its asset purchase
program. It pointed out that economic activity in Japan has
recovered gradually, although it continues in a severe
situation due to the impact of COVID-19. It noted that
economic activity will probably continue to improve as
demand increases, with the support of accommodative
financial conditions and economic stimulus measures by
the government, although the pace of recovery is expected
to be moderate as long as the effects of the pandemic
persist. It will continue to support financing of firms and
financial market stability. This institution reiterated that it
will not hesitate to take additional measures if necessary
and that it expects interest rates to remain at or below their
current levels.

iv) The Bank of England kept its reference interest rate

unchanged at 0.10% in its September meeting and the
amount of its asset purchase program at £745 billion. It
reiterated that it will continue to closely monitor the
situation, standing ready to adjust its monetary policy in


order to comply with its mandate, keeping under review the
whole range of actions that could be implemented. In this
regard, it highlighted the discussion around the possibility
of setting a negative reference rate level and its
effectiveness. This central bank also pointed out that the
Committee does not intend to tighten its monetary policy
stance until there is clear evidence that it is reducing
excess productive capacity and moving towards its 2%
inflation target in a sustainable manner.

v) In its September meeting, the Bank of Canada left its

reference rate unchanged at 0.25%, reiterating that it will
keep its reference interest rate at levels close to zero until
the slack has been reduced, so that the 2% inflation target
is reached in a sustained manner. Although it stated that it
will continue its large-scale asset purchase program at the
current rhythm and until economic recovery is clearly
underway, it is worth highlighting that, in its latest meeting,
this central bank mentioned that such program will be
gauged to provide the necessary monetary stimulus. As for
its short-term liquidity programs, it pointed out that their use
has decreased due to the proper functioning of financial
markets.

Since Banco de México’s previous monetary policy
decision, most central banks of emerging economies
left their reference interest rates unchanged, while
some banks maintain various measures to ensure
the supply of liquidity, provide credit, and foster the
well-functioning of financial markets.

International financial markets showed a relatively
stable behavior during the period after Mexico’s
latest monetary policy decision, driven by the gradual
recovery of economic activity, the fiscal, monetary
and financial stimulus measures adopted in

advanced economies, and certain progress in the
development of a vaccine against COVID-19.
Nevertheless, due to the combination of factors that
have influenced investors’ sentiment, there have
been episodes of greater volatility in recent weeks.
As a result, financial markets registered a mixed
behavior by type of asset and region. In particular,
financial assets showed mixed adjustments with
episodes of high volatility in advanced economies. In
particular, stock markets exhibited slight gains and a
volatile behavior (Chart 5). The case of the United
States stands out since, after its stock indexes
reached maximum levels, such gains reversed
recently, in a context of stock market losses in the
technological sector, lack of progress in the approval
of an additional fiscal stimulus package, uncertainty
regarding the development of a vaccine against
COVID-19, and in light of the possible

implementation of new lockdown measures in
response to the resurgence of coronavirus infections
in various countries. Most currencies of advanced
economies exhibited limited adjustments, with a

14


-----

trend towards appreciation against the US dollar,
although the pound sterling depreciated and
exhibited higher volatility in recent weeks, in an
environment of greater uncertainty about the United
Kingdom’s exit agreement from the European Union.
Finally, interest rates of long-term government bonds
exhibited mixed adjustments, with the steepening of
the US yield curve standing out. Emerging
economies registered net capital inflows, mainly to
fixed-income assets, while their stock markets
registered slight losses and their foreign exchange
markets exhibited less volatility in general (Chart 6).

**Chart 5**

**Change in Selected Financial Indicators**

**from August 7 to September 18, 2020**

**Percent, basis pointsPercentage, basis points**


**Chart 6**

**Emerging Economies: Financial Assets**

**Performance from August 7 to**

**September 21, 2020**
Percent, basis points


20%

10%


40

20


0%

-10%


0

-20


-20%


-40


1/ MSCI Emerging Markets Index (includes 24 countries).
2/ DXY: Weighted average of the nominal exchange rate of the six main
world-traded currencies (calculated by Intercontinental Exchange, ICE) with
the following weights: EUR (57.6%), JPY (13.6%), GBP (11.9%), CAD
(9.1%), SEK (4.2%), and CHF (3.6%).
3/ J.P. Morgan Index constructed from a weighted average of the nominal
exchange rate of emerging economies’ currencies with the following
weights: TRY (8.3%), RUB (8.3%), HUF (8.3%), ZAR (8.3%), BRL (11.1%),
MXN (11.1%), CLP (11.1%), CNH (11.1%), INR (11.1%), and SGD (11.1%).
Source: Bloomberg and ICE.


Note: Except for Mexico, interest rates correspond to interest rate swaps for Note: Interest rates correspond to interes rate swaps for 2-year/10-year maturities,
2-year/10-year maturities, respectively.
Source: Banco de México with PIP and Bloomberg data.

Looking ahead, new episodes of risk aversion in
financial markets cannot be ruled out, which will
depend largely on the evolution of the pandemic, the
development, approval and distribution process of a
vaccine and the capacity of governments to contain
new waves of infections and mitigate the negative
impact on economic activity. Along with the above
there is the persistence of other risk factors that may
lead to new episodes of global financial conditions
tightening, including the perception of overvaluation
of certain financial assets, a new escalation of trade
and political tensions between the United States and
some of its trade partners, a worsening of geopolitical
and social conflicts in different world regions, the US
election process, and the end of economic relief
programs that had been implemented to face the
pandemic, among others.

**A.2. Current situation of the Mexican economy**

**A.2.1. Mexican markets**

Since Banco de Mexico’s previous monetary policy
decision to date, the prices of financial assets in
Mexico exhibited a mixed behavior by asset class
(Chart 7). This occurred in an environment where
uncertainty about the effects of the pandemic and
caution by investors towards risky assets persists.

In the case of the Mexican peso, it appreciated
slightly, although it has recently been subject to
episodes of high volatility. In particular, it traded in a
range between 20.87 and 22.44 pesos per US dollar

15


-----

and ended the period with an appreciation of 4.60%
(Chart 8). This occurred in a context where both spot
and forward trading conditions stabilized, although
still above those observed prior to the pandemic.

In this regard, in line with the swap mechanism
established between Banco de México and the US
Federal Reserve on March 19 this year, in
September the Foreign Exchange Commission
instructed Banco de México to renew maturing
positions and provide additional liquidity in US dollars
for a total of USD 7.5 billion.

As to the measures announced by Banco de México
on April 21, on September 15, the central bank
announced the extension of their validity to February
28, 2021, as well as a redistribution of amounts
among facilities for government securities

repurchase agreements and temporary collateral
exchange for a total of 50 billion pesos.

**Chart 7**

**Mexican Markets’ Performance**

Percent, MXN/USD and index


2020

Source: Prepared by Banco de México.

Nominal government bond yields decreased for
shorter terms and exhibited minor adjustments for
longer terms (Chart 9). Likewise, the yield curve of
real-rate instruments registered mixed adjustments
at the short-term nodes, while longer-term

instruments showed a slight upward correction. In
this context, breakeven inflation and inflationary risk
premia implicit in the spreads between nominal and
real instruments exhibited moderate adjustments
(Chart 10). It is worth noting that said adjustments
occurred in a context where trading conditions have
improved in the last sessions, after having
deteriorated during most of the period due to the
summer seasonality.


**Chart 8**

**Mexican Peso Exchange Rate**

**with Moving Averages**

MXN/USD


10.0

9.0

8.0

7.0

6.0

5.0

4.0


26.0

25.0

24.0

23.0

22.0

21.0

20.0

19.0

18.0


48,000

46,000

44,000

42,000

40,000

38,000

36,000

34,000

32,000


M Bond


4.5

4.0

3.5

3.0

2.5

2.0

1.5

1.0

0.5

0.0

Inflation indexed bonds


Range in year Range since last monetary policy decision Aug-07-20 Last level

Source: Prepared by Banco de México.


**Chart 9**

**Nominal Yield Curve of Government Securities**

Percent, basis points

8.00

7.50

6

7.00 #¡REF!

6.50

6.00

5.50

5.00

4.50

4.00

Aug 7 Sep 21 Change (Aug 7 to Sep 21)

Trading range over the period


Range in year Range since last monetary policy decision Aug-07-20 Last level


Source: PIP.


16


-----

**Chart 10**

**Breakeven Inflation and Inflation Risk implicit in**

**Government Securities’ Interest Rate Curves**

Basis points

500

475

450

425

400

375

350

325

300

3 years

275 10 years

250 30 years

225 3-year average

200 10-year average

30-year average

175

150

J          M          S          J          M          S

2019                             2020

Source: PIP.

Finally, as to expectations regarding the path of the
monetary policy target rate, information implied by
the Interbank Equilibrium Interest Rate (TIIE, for its
acronym in Spanish) swap curve discounts with a
60% probability a 25-basis point cut for the monetary
policy decision of September (Chart 11). Private
sector forecasters surveyed by Citibanamex are also
expecting a 25-basis point cut. For the end of 2020,
market variables are anticipating a target level of
around 4.00%, while the median of surveyed
forecasters expects a level of 4.25%.
.

**Chart 11**

**Banxico’s Overnight Interbank Rate Implied in**

**TIIE IRS Curve**

Percent

8.50
8.25
8.00
7.75
7.50
7.25
7.00
6.75
6.50
6.25
6.00
5.75
5.50 Banxico overnight rate
5.25 (reference rate)
5.00
4.75 Latest figure (21/09/2020)
4.50
4.25 Last monetary policy decision
4.00 (13/08/2020)
3.75
3.50

J   M M   S   N   F   M   J   O   D   M   J    A   N

2019                   2020                  2021

Source: Prepared by Banco de México with Bloomberg data.


**A.2.2. Economic activity in Mexico**

During the second quarter of 2020, as a result of the
effects of the pandemic and the actions implemented
to contain it, particularly in April and May, Mexico’s
GDP exhibited the highest seasonally adjusted
quarterly contraction in the history of this indicator
(Chart 12). Notwithstanding the above, in a context
of easing of measures implemented to face the
health crisis, greater population mobility, and
improvement of external demand, economic activity
began to recover in June and July, although an
environment of uncertainty and downward risks
persists.

As for external demand, after having recovered in
June, manufacturing exports once again expanded in
July. This reflected both the continued reactivation of
several productive sectors, as well as the gradual
recovery of external demand, particularly in the
United States. By type of good, this monthly
improvement was mainly explained by the increase
in automotive exports, while the rest of

manufacturing exports slowed down (Chart 13).

**Chart 12**

**Gross Domestic Product**

Quarterly percentage change, s. a.

4

0

-4

-8

-12

-16

-20 Q-II

I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV I II

2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020

s. a. / Seasonally adjusted figures.
Source: Mexico’s System of National Accounts (SCNM, for its Spanish
acronym), INEGI.

17


-----

**Chart 13**

**Total Manufacturing Exports**

Indexes 2013 = 100, s. a.


180

160

140

120

100

80

60

40

20

0

J

2013


A J O J

2014


A J O J

2015


A J O J

2016


A J O J

2017


A J O J

2018


A J O J

2019


A J O J

2020


A J


s. a. / Seasonally adjusted series and trend series based on data in nominal
US dollars. The former is represented by a solid line and the latter by a
dotted line.
Source: Prepared by Banco de México with data from the Tax
Administration Service (SAT, for its Spanish acronym), the Ministry of the
Economy (SE, for its acronym in Spanish), Banco de México, the National
Institute of Statistics and Geography (INEGI, for its Spanish acronym),
Mexico’s Merchandise Trade Balance, and the National System of
Statistical and Geographical Information (SNIEG, for its acronym in
Spanish).

According to its monthly indicator, in June private
consumption showed a slight recovery associated
with increases in all of its components. Timely
information suggests that at the beginning of the third
quarter this indicator continued to recover gradually.
In particular, National Association of Self-Service and
Department Stores (ANTAD, for its acronym in
Spanish) and light vehicle sales grew moderately
both in July and August. In June, gross fixed
investment increased slightly, although it remains at
levels well below those at the beginning of the year.
Within this indicator, both investment spending on
construction and machinery and equipment

recovered slightly. Indicators related to this

aggregate, such as capital imports, suggest that
investment continued recovering gradually at the
beginning of the third quarter.

As for production, industrial activity continued to
recover in July, after its reactivation in June (Chart
14). Within this indicator, manufacturing continued to
exhibit a relatively high dynamism (Chart 15). In
contrast, construction performed weakly and mining
continued to slow down, despite the conclusion in
July of the scheduled cutback in crude oil production
as part of Mexico's commitments to OPEC. Tertiary
activities recovered slightly in June, although their
reactivation has been gradual, moderate and mixed
among subsectors. Progress was observed mainly in
retail and wholesale trade; transportation,

warehousing and information; and accommodation
and food services, although the latter remain at


particularly low levels. In contrast, decreases were
observed in finance, real estate, management of
companies and enterprises, and administrative and
support services.

**Chart 14**

**Economic Activity Indicators**

Indexes 2013 = 100, s. a.

120 140

115 130

110 120

105 110

100 100

95 90

Total IGAE 1/

90 Industrial production 2/ 80

Services IGAE 1/

85 Agricultural and livestock products IGAE 1/ 70

80 60

75 June 50

July

70 40

J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J

2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020

s. a. / Seasonally adjusted and trend series. The former is represented by a
solid line and the latter by a dotted line.
1/ Figures as of June 2020.
2/ Figures as of July 2020 from the Monthly Industrial Activity Indicator.
Source: Mexico’s National Accounts System (SCNM, for its acronym in
Spanish), INEGI.

**Chart 15**

**Industrial Activity [1/]**

Indexes 2013 = 100, s. a.

130

120

110

100

90

80 Total

Mining (22.3%)

70 Manufacturing (49.7%)

Construction (23.3%)

60

Utilities (4.7%)

July

50

J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J

2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020

s. a. / Seasonally adjusted and trend series. The former is represented by a
solid line and the latter by a dotted line.
1/ Figures in parentheses correspond to their share in the total in 2013.
Source: Mexico’s National Accounts System (SCNM, for its acronym in),
INEGI.

As to the economy’s cyclical position, although the
significant widening of slack conditions in the second
quarter is anticipated to reverse partially during the
third, ample slack conditions are expected to prevail
(Chart 16). According to the results of INEGI's
Telephone Survey on Occupation and Employment
(ETOE, for its Spanish acronym), several labor
market indicators continued to improve slightly in
July, although at a more moderate pace than in June
and showing weakness in regards to formal
employment. Labor participation increased slightly,

18


-----

while the employed population also rose, reflecting
higher levels of informal employment, given that
formal employment decreased at the margin. After
having grown in the previous months, the

unemployment rate registered a slight monthly
decrease (Chart 17). The creation of IMSS-insured
jobs exhibited a moderate recovery in August,
although jobs related to services for firms, individuals
and home cleaning continued to decrease. Finally, as
a reflection of the recovery of production and of hours
worked, largely as a result of the gradual reactivation
of manufacturing, after having increased significantly
in April, unit labor costs in this sector accumulated
three consecutive monthly falls (May to July)
although they still remain above pre-pandemic levels
(Chart 18).

**Chart 16**

**Output Gap Estimates [1/]**

**Excluding Oil Industry [4/ ]**

Potential output percentages, s. a.

8

4

0

-4

-8

-12

-16

Global Economic Activity Indicator (IGAE) 2/

-20

Gross Domestic Product 2/

-24 95% Confidence interval 3/

Q-II

June

-28

J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S JM J

2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020

s. a. / Calculations based on seasonally adjusted figures.
1/ Output gap estimated with a tail-corrected Hodrick-Prescott filter; see
Banco de México (2009), “Inflation Report (April-June 2009)", p.74.
2/ GDP figure as of the second quarter of 2020; IGAE figure as of June
2020.
3/ Output gap confidence interval calculated with a method of unobserved
components.
4/ Excludes both oil and gas extraction, support activities for mining, and
petroleum and coal products' manufacturing.
Source: Prepared by Banco de México with INEGI data.


n. s. a. / Not seasonally adjusted (original series).
Source: Prepared by Banco de México with data from ENOE up to March
2020 and from the ETOE from April to June 2020.

**Chart 18**

**Productivity and Unit Labor Costs in the**

**Manufacturing Sector [1/]**

Indexes 2013 = 100, s. a.

170

Unit labor costs

160

Productivity

150

140

130

120

110

100

90

July

80

J J J J J J J J J J J J J J J J J J J J J J J J J J

2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020

s. a. / Seasonally adjusted and trend series. The former is represented by a
solid line and the latter by a dotted line.
1/ Productivity based on hours worked.
Source: Prepared by Banco de México with seasonally adjusted data of the
Monthly Manufacturing Industry Survey and industrial activity indicators of
Mexico’s National Accounts System (Sistema de Cuentas Nacionales de
_México, SCN), INEGI._

In July, for the second consecutive month, domestic
financing to firms contracted at an annual rate, thus
reverting the increase that had been observed in
April. Indeed, although in March and April the growth
rate of bank lending to large firms increased, it has
reversed since May. The domestic market for
corporate debt showed a slight recovery in August,
after exhibiting a low level of activity for four
consecutive months. Meanwhile, bank lending to
smaller firms contracted further at an annual rate,
although it stabilized slightly in July. As for credit to
households, it contracted once more in July, mainly
as a result of a reduction in consumer credit, as well
as a slowdown in mortgages. Regarding interest
rates of bank credit to private firms, in July they
declined, in line with the reduction of banks' overnight

19


6.0

5.5

5.0

4.5

4.0

3.5

3.0

2.5


**Chart 17**

**National Unemployment Rate**

Percent of EAP, n. s. a.

ENOE^N July 2020

ETOE April-June 2020 5.5

5.4

ENOE

4.7

4.2

July

J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J

2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020


-----

funding rate. However, the margins of intermediation
of interest rates of new loans to firms increased
slightly, although less than in previous months. In
June, interest rates of mortgages continued at levels
below those registered at the beginning of the year,
while those of credit cards remained slightly below
the levels of February and April. Regarding portfolio
quality, corporate and mortgage loan delinquency
rates remained low, while those for consumption
credits continue at high levels, although they appear
to have stabilized after the deterioration observed
since March.

In line with the measures announced by Banco de
México to promote an orderly functioning of financial
markets, strengthen the credit channels, and provide
liquidity for the sound development of the financial
system, the start of the facility to provide resources
to banking institutions to channel credit to micro,
small- and medium-sized firms and individuals
affected by the pandemic stands out. In August, five
credit institutions signed agreements to use this
facility.

**A.2.3. Development of inflation and inflation**
**outlook**

Annual headline inflation rose from 3.62 to 4.10%
between July and the first fortnight of September
2020. This behavior was associated with an increase
of 37 and 11 basis points in the incidence of its noncore and core components, respectively (Chart 19
and Table 1).

Annual core inflation rose from 3.85 to 3.99%
between July and the first fortnight of September
2020. Within it, the annual inflation of merchandise
prices increased from 5.19 to 5.36% during the same
period (Chart 20), as a result of the greater annual
rates of change of both food and non-food
merchandise prices (Chart 21). The annual inflation
of services rose from 2.40 to 2.50% during the same
period, due to the greater price increases in services
other than housing and education.

Annual non-core inflation increased from 2.92 to
4.44% between July and the first fortnight of
September 2020 (Chart 22 and Table 1). In this
regard, the annual inflation of agricultural and
livestock product prices rose from 5.55 to 8.39%
between July and the first fortnight of September
2020. The annual rates of change of energy prices
increased from -0.41 to 0.20% during the same
period.


**Chart 19**

**Consumer Price Index**

Annual percentage change


13

12 CPI

Core

11

Non-core

10

9

8

7

6

5

4

3

2

1

0

-1 F1 Sep.

-2

-3

J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S

2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020

Source: Prepared by Banco de México with data from INEGI.

**Chart 20**

**Merchandise and Services Core Price Subindex**

Annual percentage change

7

Merchandise

6 Services

5

4

3

2

1

F1 Sep.

0

J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S

2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020


Source: Prepared by Banco de México with data from INEGI.

**Chart 21**

**Merchandise Core Price Subindex**

Annual percentage change

8

7

6

5

4

3

2

1

0

-1 Food, beverages and tobacco Non-food merchandise

F1 Sep.

-2

J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S

2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020

Source: Prepared by Banco de México with data from INEGI.


20


-----

**Chart 22**

**Non-core Price Subindex**
Annual percentage change


20

15

10

5

0

-5

-10

-15


F1 Sep.


J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S

2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020

Source: Prepared by Banco de México with data from INEGI.

As for inflation expectations drawn from Banco de
México’s Survey of Private Sector Forecasters,
between July and August the medians for headline
and core inflation for the end of 2020 increased from
3.61 to 3.82% and from 3.73 to 3.92%, respectively.


The medians of medium- and long-term expectations
for headline and core inflation remained at around
3.50%. Finally, breakeven inflation and inflation risk
decreased since the last monetary policy decision,
although this indicator exhibited volatility.

These forecasts are subject to considerable risks in
the short and medium terms. To the downside: i) a
greater than expected impact of the widening of the
negative output gap; ii) downward inflationary
pressures worldwide; and, iii) social distancing
measures reducing the demand for certain services.
To the upside: i) additional episodes of foreign
exchange depreciation; ii) a high persistence of core
inflation; and iii) logistical problems and higher costs
associated with the sanitary measures. The balance
of risks for the projected trajectory of inflation
remains uncertain.


**Table 1**

**Consumer Price Index and Components**

Annual percentage change

**1st fortnight Sep.**

**Item** **July 2020** **August 2020**
**2020**

**CPI** **3.62** **4.05** **4.10**

**SubyacenteCore** **3.85** **3.97** **3.99**

**Merchandise** **5.19** **5.36** **5.36**

Food, beverages and tobacco 6.89 7.04 6.98

Non-food merchandise 3.38 3.58 3.62

**Services** **2.40** **2.46** **2.50**

Housing 2.38 2.28 2.21

Education (tuitions) 4.31 3.11 2.17

Other services 2.02 2.47 2.83

**No SubyacenteNon-core** **2.92** **4.30** **4.44**

**Agricultural and livestock products** **5.55** **8.09** **8.39**

Fruits and vegetablesFruits abd vegetables 8.43 13.12 13.35

Livestock productsLivestock 3.26 4.10 4.43

**Energy and government-authorized prices Energéticos y Tarifas Aut. por Gobierno** **0.95** **1.50** **1.53**

Energy productsEnergy -0.41 0.27 0.20

Government-authorized pricesTarifas Autorizadas por Gobierno 4.01 4.25 4.51

Source:INEGI.


21


-----

-----

