-----

-----

**FOREWARNING**
This document is provided for the reader’s convenience
only. The translation from the official Spanish version was
made by Banco de México’s staff. Discrepancies may arise
between the original document in Spanish and its English
translation. For this reason, the original Spanish version is
the only official document.


**1. PLACE, DATE, AND PARTICIPANTS**

**1.1 Place:** Meeting held by virtual means.

**1.2. Date of Governing Board meeting:** November
11, 2020.

**1.3. Participants:**
Alejandro Díaz de León-Carrillo, Governor.
Irene Espinosa-Cantellano, Deputy Governor.
Gerardo Esquivel-Hernández, Deputy Governor.
Javier Eduardo Guzmán-Calafell, Deputy Governor.
Jonathan Ernest Heath-Constable, Deputy
Governor.
Arturo Herrera-Gutiérrez, Secretary of Finance and
Public Credit.
Gabriel Yorio-González, Undersecretary of Finance
and Public Credit.
Elías Villanueva-Ochoa, Secretary of the Governing
Board.

Prior to this meeting, preliminary work by Banco de
México’s staff analyzing the economic and financial
environment as well as the developments in inflation
and the determinants and outlook for inflation, was
conducted and presented to the Governing Board
(see Annex).

**2. ANALYSIS AND RATIONALE BEHIND THE**
**GOVERNING BOARD’S VOTING**

**_International environment_**

**Most members mentioned that global economic**
**activity has been recovering.** **Some noted that it**
still remains at levels below those prior to the
pandemic and that the recovery has been
heterogeneous among countries and sectors. **One**
member pointed out that in the short term the
reopening of activities led to an increase in
production and, in the medium term, the recovery is
associated to the evolution of aggregate demand.
He/she stated that differences in economic recovery
among countries are due to: (i) the rate of COVID-19
infections and the measures adopted to contain it; (ii)
the relative importance of the most affected services;
(iii) the characteristics of both the labor market and


the informal sector; (iv) the strength of the
macroeconomy and of the financial system, and (v)
the magnitude of employment and income support
programs. In this regard, he/she noted that
economies with significant relief measures have
shown a greater-than-expected recovery. In this
respect, **some** members mentioned that
consumption and investment have recovered in
certain advanced economies. **One of them added**
that the latest indicators, such as the purchasing
managers' indexes, are in expansionary territory and
trending upwards. In this context, **some members**
pointed out that global growth forecasts for 2020
have been adjusted upwards.

**The majority of members highlighted the**
**resurgence of COVID-19 infections in several**
**countries,** **mainly** **European,** **and** **the**
**reestablishment of measures to contain it in**
**these countries. One member pointed out that, as a**
result, the recovery is losing strength, as suggested
by the latest data. Another member stated that while
the new measures are less strict than those adopted
at the beginning of the pandemic, their effects are
foreseen to hinder the economic recovery. In this
**context, most members highlighted the risks to**
**global economic growth associated with the**
**pandemic, especially those related to the**
**dynamics of infections and the establishment of**
**additional social distancing measures. Some**
members considered that such measures may be
less disruptive, as more information is available
about which are the most effective public health
actions. Nevertheless, some highlighted the risk that
distancing measures could be maintained for an
extended period and that their effect may be
substantial. Most members also considered the
**risk that fiscal stimuli could prove insufficient to**
**support the recovery. One** member added the
unsustainability of public and corporate debt, the
potential post-electoral tensions in the United States,
and the lack of definition of the terms by which the
United Kingdom may leave the European Union.
**Some members expressed that the balance of risks**
for global growth is negative.

**Most members mentioned that inflation in**
**advanced economies remains below their central**
**banks’ targets.** **One member stated that these**
institutions expect the above to continue for a
prolonged period. Some members highlighted that a
recomposition of relative prices, with increases in
those of certain merchandises and reductions in
those of services, has been observed. One member
added that energy prices exerted a downward impact

1


-----

on inflation at the beginning of the pandemic, but that
this impact has recently moderated. He/she noted
that in the United States inflation of food products has
increased, which has been largely offset by
decreased pressures in services prices. He/she
added that in the euro area the increase in food
prices has been smaller, which, together with the
weakness in services prices, has led headline and
core inflation to levels close to zero. Most **members**
**underlined that in a large number of emerging**
**economies inflation rates have decreased,** and
**one member noted that they are below their targets.**
In contrast, **some members pointed out that in**
Mexico inflation has increased. **One member**
mentioned that this is partly due to the fact that the
weight factors used in Mexico give more importance
to those components that have had larger increases.
**Another member pointed out that in some emerging**
economies inflation was subject to upward pressures
due to exchange rate depreciations and increases in
energy and food prices.

**Most members mentioned that the central banks**
**of advanced economies reiterated that they will**
**maintain** **accommodative** **monetary** **policy**
**stances for an extended period.** **They highlighted**
**the Federal Reserve's decision to maintain its**
**range for the federal funds rate at 0%-0.25% until**
**its inflation and employment targets are met. One**
member stated that given its new monetary policy
strategy, it would take longer than before for this
central bank to raise its interest rate. **Another**
member added that both private sector forecasters
and market variables suggest that the federal funds
rate will remain unchanged during 2020 and 2021.

**Most members highlighted the possibility that**
**central banks of advanced economies increase**
**their monetary stimuli. One member mentioned**
that the Federal Reserve is assessing the possibility
of extending the terms of its lending facilities.
**Another member added that the Bank of Canada will**
focus its asset purchases on longer-term bonds, with
the aim of having a more direct influence in the rates
relevant for households’ and firms’ financing. **One**
member stated that fiscal authorities in some
advanced economies have also announced
extensions to their relief programs. Another member
noted that Federal Reserve board members pointed
out that it may be necessary to increase the fiscal
stimulus. **One member noted that the margin**
available to implement macroeconomic and financial
policies to stimulate the economy could be
exhausted. He/she explained that this possibility is
low for major advanced economies, particularly


regarding monetary policy, while in emerging
economies both upward inflationary pressures
resulting from exchange rate effects or supply
shocks, as well as doubts about the sustainability of
their public finances, could lead to a premature
withdrawal of stimuli.

**The majority of members noted that global**
**financial markets exhibited volatility, although it**
**has decreased recently due to the results of the**
**US election and favorable news about the**
**development of a vaccine. One member expressed**
that markets were closely attentive to the US
electoral process, the extension of the relief
measures, the tax policy outlook and the type of
leadership in that country. **Some** members
emphasized the better performance of US stock
markets and the narrow adjustments of interest rates.
However, **one member added that in view of the**
deterioration of growth expectations, the prices of
commodities, particularly of crude oil, suffered
declines, although most recently there was a
moderation of these declines. **Another** member
added that the performance of financial markets is
expected to continue improving and the gaps of
economic activity to continue narrowing by the end of
the year.

**Some members stated that emerging economies’**
financial markets exhibited a positive behavior. They
noted that inflows to fixed-income and equity
instruments continued, although one member added
that inflows to equity instruments registered only
small changes. **Another member noted that the**
currencies of emerging economies appreciated, their
stock markets registered gains, their risk premia
decreased and their interest rates exhibited mixed,
albeit narrow, adjustments.

**Most members considered that international**
**financial markets are subject to risks, with those**
**already mentioned for global activity standing**
**out.** **One** member added idiosyncratic risks,
especially in emerging economies. He/she added
that if they were to materialize, there would be
potentially disorderly adjustments resulting from
abrupt changes in market sentiment. He/she noted
that this would particularly affect emerging
economies, as capital flows to these countries and
their asset prices have still not returned to their prepandemic levels.

2


-----

**_Economic activity in Mexico_**

**All members pointed out that timely information**
**suggests that, after a deep contraction in the**
**second quarter, economic activity showed a**
**recovery in the third one. Most members**
**highlighted that the GDP flash estimate points to**
**a seasonally adjusted growth rate of 12% during**
**the third quarter relative to the previous one,**
**driven by external demand and the reopening of**
**activities. Some members noted that economic**
activity remains below pre-pandemic levels. **One**
member noted that between January and September
2020 GDP was nearly 10% lower than during the
same period of 2019, while **another member**
emphasized that it decreased 8.6% at an annual rate
during the third quarter of 2020. He/she added that in
monthly terms, the greatest contraction was
observed in April and to a lesser extent in May, while
in June and July there was a significant recovery that
moderated in August and that is expected to remain
moderate in September.

**On the supply side, most members highlighted**
**the heterogeneity in the recovery of different**
**sectors. Some members pointed out that the**
industrial sector, driven by manufacturing, has shown
the best performance, while services continue to
show weakness. One member outlined that industrial
production fell at an annual rate of 29.4% in May and
of 7.5% in September. He/she added that, in
contrast, accommodation and food; transportation,
information, and arts, entertainment and recreation
services contracted at an annual rate of 53.4, 20.8
and 21.8% in August, respectively. Another member
mentioned that tourism faces the most complex
situation and that tourist sector businessmen
estimate that the recovery could be achieved only
until 2022.

**On the demand side, all members underlined that**
**external demand has shown greater dynamism.**
**The majority of members highlighted that in**
**September exports reached levels close to those**
**observed before the pandemic. Some** members
highlighted the trade balance surplus. Most
**members noted that consumption, investment**
**and imports continue showing a lackluster**
**performance.** **One** member emphasized the
weakness in the consumption of services and of
durable goods. Another member stated that private
consumption in August was 13.08% lower than in the
previous year. He/she added that non-oil imports of
consumer goods registered an annual contraction of
25.5% in September. He/she mentioned that


remittances, which are a determinant of
consumption, have continued to grow. He/she
pointed out that in August investment registered an
annual contraction of 16.64% as a result of the
impact of the pandemic and an environment that is
not conducive to investment.

**Most members noted that the labor market has**
**started to recover, although it continues to show**
**a considerable deterioration. They highlighted**
**the reduction in the labor participation rate and**
**increases** **in** **unemployment** **and**
**underemployment. One member pointed out that in**
September, the labor participation rate was below
56%, the unemployment rate was 4.73%, and the
underemployment rate was above 15%. He/she
added that is outside of the labor force but available
for work remains above 10%, as compared to 6%
before the pandemic. Another member pointed out
that while unemployment did not increase as much
as in other crises, it continues to be disguised by the
number of people that have left the labor market.
**One member pointed out that by the end of the year**
the extended unemployment rate could be close to
20%.

**One member noted that formal and informal**
employment decreased by 12.5 million persons
between February and April. He/she stated that it has
gradually recovered since those months and that in
September it was 4.6 million below the level
registered in February. Another member mentioned
that, despite this improvement, the decline is
considerable with respect to what was observed prior
to the pandemic. As for the creation of IMSS-insured
jobs, **one member mentioned that, after registering**
negative growth rates between March and July,
positive ones were observed in August and
September, which were close to their historical
averages. Another member stated that the recovery
in employment is explained almost entirely by the
increase in informality. Some members agreed that
the adjustment in the labor market has affected
women to a greater extent, with one member adding
that this also applies to young people.

**Most members noted that the economic recovery**
**will be gradual and prolonged. One member**
mentioned that, given the weakness of some
aggregate demand components, it is foreseeable
that the recovery will begin to slow down once the
effects of the reopening of activities fade. **Another**
member pointed out that the recovery will be difficult
and thus could be extended until mid-2024. **Some**
members noted that growth expectations for 2020

3


-----

were revised slightly upwards. One member added
that this was due to a stronger than expected
rebound in the third quarter. He/she explained that
according to the most recent surveys of private
sector forecasters, growth expectations for 2020
changed from -9.8 to -9.3%, while they remained at
3.2% for 2021. Another member mentioned that the
GDP flash estimate for the third quarter points to a
trajectory of economic activity during 2020 close to
the less pessimistic scenario published in the
Quarterly Report April-June 2020. **One member**
added that he/she expects a GDP fall of 9.0% in
2020.

**In view of the economic contraction and the**
**expected recovery scenarios, most members**
**emphasized that wide slack conditions are**
**foreseen in the horizon in which monetary policy**
**operates. One member specified that, although the**
output gap will remain negative, the anticipated
trajectory of economic activity implies a lower level of
slack throughout the horizon in which monetary
policy operates. **Another member argued that,**
based on the GDP flash estimate for the third quarter,
the negative output gap has started to decrease,
although it still exhibits wide slack. He/she added
that, in light of the current magnitude of the gap, in
2021 it is expected to remain negative even under
optimistic growth scenarios. He/she considered that
it is difficult to estimate the output gap in the two-year
horizon in which monetary policy has an effect, given
the environment of uncertainty and the possibility that
the potential growth of the economy is below the
estimated figure. He/she indicated that it has most
probably been affected by both weak investment and
the absence of sufficient efforts to boost productivity
since before the emergence of the pandemic, along
with the effects of the latter on both physical and
human capital stocks and on total factor productivity.

**Most members mentioned that an environment of**
**uncertainty and downside risks to economic**
**activity persists, especially risks related to a new**
**outbreak of the pandemic. Some members warned**
about the possibility of new distancing measures
being implemented. One member referred to states
of Mexico that have once again adopted stricter
lockdown measures —similarly to what has been
observed in some European countries— and that
consequently the economic outlook depends
significantly on the virus’ trajectory. He/she stated
that a resurgence of the virus could not only delay the
economic recovery even more, which implies
collateral damage to employment, but that
additionally the pandemic represents a sizeable risk


for the productive outlook in the medium term, which
could cause structural damage to the economy.
**Another** member pointed out the uncertain
economic environment for 2020 and 2021. He/she
stated that, despite promising news on the possibility
of having a vaccine, there is still no certainty over
when the vaccine or an effective treatment to the
virus would be available, or over how long it would
take to produce and distribute said vaccine, once it is
available, in order for a relevant economic impact to
be observed. Among risks for growth, some
members highlighted the impact on public finances
and its possible consequences on the conditions of
access to financial markets. They indicated that other
external risks of an economic, political and
geopolitical nature should be added to the above.
**One of them added those of idiosyncratic nature that**
the country faces. **Another member highlighted**
episodes of risk aversion, trade tensions, and
solvency problems of households and businesses.

**_Inflation in Mexico_**

**Most members mentioned that annual headline**
**inflation increased between September and**
**October and that it is above the 3% target. One**
member underlined that inflation in October was at
its highest level in 17 months and that its evolution
has exceeded Banco de México’s projections.

**Most members considered that inflation has**
**continued to be affected by the pandemic, which**
**has implied supply and demand shocks, as well**
**as an exchange rate depreciation, which has led**
**to changes in relative prices. Some** members
noted on the one hand the logistical and supplyrelated problems, and on the other the reallocation of
consumers’ spending. **One member stated that**
increases in prices caused by the closure of
establishments and by logistical problems are
beyond the traditional domain of monetary policy.
**Another member pointed out that the decline in**
aggregate demand and the fall in energy prices have
favored price reductions. **One member mentioned**
that the decline in demand has still not been reflected
thoroughly on inflation.

**Regarding** **core** **inflation,** **most** **members**
**highlighted the increase in the annual rate of**
**change of merchandise prices, especially food**
**merchandise, and reductions in that of services**
**prices. One indicated that the decline in the prices**
of services has not compensated the price increases
in those of merchandise, mainly food merchandise
that are still at levels near 7%. Another member

4


-----

considered worrisome that in October, this
component was practically at the upper limit of the
variability interval of the inflation target for the third
consecutive month. **One member underlined that**
core inflation slightly decelerated during the second
fortnight of October, showing an increase of only 7
basis points with respect to the previous fortnight.
He/she mentioned that processed food prices, which
had increased considerably in March and April,
showed signs of stabilizing, even registering a slight
deflation during the second fortnight of October with
respect to the previous fortnight. **Some highlighted**
that in October the annual change of services prices
was 2.4%. **One member pointed out that the lower**
annual rate of change in services prices reflects a
lower demand generated by the social distancing
measures. **Another member mentioned that in the**
short term the negative output gap’s influence on
inflation has been insufficient, given that fundamental
core inflation has not decreased significantly.

**Most members expressed that non-core inflation**
**increased, highlighting the rise in the annual rate**
**of change of fruit and vegetable prices. One**
member noted that agricultural and livestock
products’ prices unexpectedly rose at a faster rate in
October, which explains why inflation was above the
variability interval during said month. **Another**
member pointed out that the less favorable dynamics
in energy prices also drove non-core inflation
upwards.

**Most members considered that there are signs of**
**stabilization in some components of inflation.**
**One member pointed out that this is due to the recent**
evolution of food merchandise, services and energy
prices. **Another member stated that the pressures**
on prices associated with value chain disruptions,
input costs, energy prices and the exchange rate are
starting to be contained. For this reason, an
important decline in annual headline inflation is
anticipated for November with respect to October.
He/she added that distortions caused by the
lockdown have made the reading of inflation difficult
given that CPI’s fixed weights have become
obsolete. He/she mentioned that the consumption
pattern has changed, as the purchase of foods has
increased and spending on transportation, apparel,
recreation and tourism has decreased. In turn, the
prices of the former group have increased more,
while those of the latter group have increased less or
even decreased, and thus households’ cost of living
has increased more than is indicated by inflation.
He/she considered that this goes beyond monetary
policy’s usual domain.


**Some** members stated that headline inflation
expectations for the end of 2020 increased, while
medium- and long-term expectations remained
stable at levels above 3%. One member added that
expectations for the end of 2021 rose as well.
**Another member noted that the latter still exceed the**
central bank’s projections by a relatively ample
margin. **One member noted that analysts will likely**
adjust their inflation expectations downwards for the
end of the year, given that the impact on certain
prices apparently has started to recede. **Another**
member specified that private sector forecasters’
inflation expectations for the end of 2021 are at 3.5%
and for the next 12 months have remained stable and
below the level registered at the beginning of the
pandemic. He/she added that expectations implicit in
market instruments are at 3.2% for the average of
one to five years. He/she considered that all of the
above implies that inflation expectations have not
been contaminated significantly by the recently
observed inflation levels. Meanwhile, **one member**
added that the 10-year inflation risk premium implicit
in market instruments is still increasing.

**Most members considered that the recent**
**behavior of headline and core inflation implies a**
**slight increase in the foreseen trajectories within**
**forecast horizon, although those for the next 12**
**to 24 months are anticipated to be around 3%.**
**One** member noted that this scenario considers a
gradual fading of supply-related pressures and
greater effects of economic slack on headline and
core inflation within the forecast horizon.

**Some members pointed out that the convergence of**
inflation to the 3% target during the second half of
2021, as had been anticipated, is not the most
feasible scenario. One member stated that headline
and core inflation will probably remain relatively high
over the next months and that it will be until mid-2021
when they will decrease considerably, as a result of
both the direct and indirect impact of the fading of the
base effect generated by the fall in oil prices during
the second quarter of 2020. **Another member**
underlined that despite a more appreciated
exchange rate and the lower gasoline prices,
expectations for headline and core inflation were
adjusted to the upside throughout the forecast
horizon, delaying the convergence to the target from
the fourth quarter of 2021 to the first quarter of 2022.
He/she pointed out that the higher prices of
merchandise and agricultural and livestock products
contributed to the above.

5


-----

Meanwhile, some members considered that inflation
lies on the foreseen path to reach the target, although
a transitory increase is expected during the second
quarter of 2021. **One member pointed out that this**
rebound in inflation is associated with a low
comparison base. He/she mentioned that the
decreasing trajectory is based on the expected or
observed evolution of different determinants,
highlighting that: i) energy prices remain relatively
stable; ii) the exchange rate has appreciated
significantly for seven consecutive months, thus
reverting a sizeable fraction of the initial shock of the
pandemic, and iii) the economy continues operating
with a large amount of slack. **Another** member
indicated that, despite current pressures, inflation is
expected to decrease significantly during the second
quarter of 2021 and the target is expected to be
attained by the end of that year. He/she highlighted
that there are signs of a moderation in the growth of
prices that had increased the most.

**As for downward risks to inflation, most**
**members highlighted the economic slack. One**
member added the possibility of lower inflationary
pressures at a global level and a new outbreak of the
virus lowering the demand for goods and services.
**Another member considered that, in general,**
inflation pressures observed so far are transitory
and/or associated with supply-related factors. **One**
member noted that the recent appreciation of the
Mexican peso suggests lower pressures on prices in
the following months. He/she added that the current
nil fiscal pressure on inflation is positive. He/she
mentioned that no new taxes or extraordinary
increases in government-authorized prices have
been registered, especially in energy prices, and thus
non-core inflation could have a downward influence
on inflation.

Among upward risks, **some members highlighted**
possible episodes of exchange rate depreciation.
**One member considered the behavior of the**
exchange rate as one of the main risks to inflation in
the following months, as would be expected of such
a liquid emerging economy currency as the Mexican
peso. He/she added that the outcome of the US
presidential elections and the recent news on the
development of a vaccine have attenuated the
considerable risks faced by inflation, although they
have not eradicated them. **Some members added**
that upwards pressures caused by the pandemic
might continue. One member added the implications
of a complex international context and domestic
factors, such as the situation of public finances, the
minimum wage increase for 2021, and the electoral


process in Mexico in the following year. He/she
considered that the wide output gap will prevail over
the previous ones, but that the most recent forecasts
suggest that the convergence of inflation to the target
will take longer than foreseen. **Another member**
underlined the risk of volatility in the financial
markets, although he/she stated that it seems to be
limited. Some members pointed out the persistence
of core inflation at high levels. One member added
that this phenomenon, observed since 2018, has
worsened as a result of the pandemic through the
food merchandise component, without the wide slack
conditions having offset the upward pressures.
He/she considered that the balance of risks to
inflation has deteriorated. **Another member noted**
that the balance of risks associated to the new
foreseen trajectory for inflation is uncertain.

**_Macrofinancial environment_**

**Most members noted that financial markets**
**exhibited a favorable behavior. One member**
stated that significant fluctuations were observed,
caused mainly by the US elections and by the
expectations about the availability of a vaccine
against COVID-19.

**Most members highlighted that, in said context,**
**the Mexican peso exhibited volatility and an**
**appreciation. One** member added that trading
conditions in the foreign exchange market have
recently improved. Another member mentioned that
the Mexican peso has been one of the emergingeconomy currencies that has appreciated the most
and added that, at the end of October, the negative
balance of the net foreign-exchange position
declined, reaching its lowest level since March.

**Most members pointed out that interest rates**
**exhibited mixed and narrow adjustments. One**
member mentioned that short-term government bond
rates registered marginal adjustments, while longterm ones increased. **Another member underlined**
that the latter registered fluctuations. **Some**
members underlined the decline in sovereign risk
and the increase in the stock market. One member
indicated that outflows in government securities were
registered, although smaller than those observed in
March and April.

**Some** members mentioned that risks to financial
markets persist and that new volatility episodes that
could exert pressure on the exchange rate cannot be
ruled out. **One member highlighted the risks**
associated with the weakening of public finances,

6


-----

Pemex’s fragile situation, uncertainty about domestic
policies, and possible non-compliance with the
USMCA, as well as the 2021 electoral process.
**Another member stated that the decline in risk**
aversion depends on the world economic recovery,
the possible economic stimuli, and the development
of the vaccine. He/she pointed out that delays on
these fronts would raise risk premia and financial
volatility, and would exert pressure on the exchange
rate.

**One member highlighted the challenges that are**
confronted given a large economic contraction, lower
public revenues, spending pressures, as well as a
deterioration of the terms of trade and lower
revenues from abroad which has affected sovereign
credit ratings and their perspectives. Moreover,
public sector borrowing requirements have increased
recently, in an environment in which uncertainty
persists regarding domestic and external financing
sources.

**Another member pointed out that from 2019 to 2020**
the Public Sector Borrowing Requirements are
projected to increase from 2.3 to 4.7% and that their
historical balance will increase from 44.8 to 54.9% as
a percentage of GDP. He/she mentioned that the
fiscal balance could deteriorate further due to
additional spending pressures generated by the
lengthening of the pandemic. **One member noted**
that the outlook for public finances for 2021 is
complicated given the possibility of tax and oil
revenues being lower than projected. He/she added
that the latter, in an environment of depletion of
resources from the stabilization funds and an
unfavorable growth outlook, is one of the main risks
for the sovereign rating and the economy, both in
2021 and in the medium and long terms. In this
context, he/she emphasized the need for a fiscal
reform. **Another member stated that the risks**
associated with the outlook for public finances should
not be overstated. He/she considered that a
manageable deficit, even with small deviations with
respect to the projections for 2021, and low public
debt are consistent with macroeconomic balance.
He/she stated that while assumptions of the
economic package for 2021 may be optimistic, it is
possible to keep the fiscal accounts in order. **One**
member argued that considering the magnitude of
the economic shock, public finances have performed
relatively well. He/she added that the strong
appreciation of the exchange rate from March to date
has its origin in that the macroeconomic
fundamentals of the country have remained solid,


among which the observed commitment to fiscal
discipline must be included.

**Some members expressed concern about Pemex’s**
situation. They added that this constitutes a risk for
the sovereign rating and highlighted the possibility
that the state company may require additional fiscal
support, which could affect public finances. **One**
member noted that in the event of a downgrade in the
sovereign and/or Pemex’s ratings, the fiscal balance
could deteriorate further. **Another member stated**
that the possibility of an additional downgrade in
Pemex’s rating has already been incorporated by the
markets, so this event must be properly assessed.

**Most members stated that the impact of the**
**pandemic continued affecting the financing of**
**firms.** **One member noted that financing conditions**
remain tight, although they have improved compared
to those observed during the beginning of the health
crisis. **Another member pointed out that domestic**
and external financing sources continued to increase
during the third quarter. **Nevertheless, most**
**members highlighted the contraction in bank**
**credit.** **Some members mentioned that this has**
mainly affected small- and medium-sized
enterprises. **One member pointed out that in**
September credit to these firms registered an annual
contraction of -6.3%. He/she added that credit from
commercial banks to firms and households remains
weak, without clear signs of improvement. He/she
stated that this situation is gravely affecting
households. He/she mentioned that financing
through credit cards declined at an annual rate
of -11.5% and that other types of credit, such as
payroll, personal and auto loans have also been
declining. Some members pointed out that the credit
contraction is due to low demand. **One member**
mentioned the lack of firms’ confidence, legal
uncertainty, and an adverse environment for
investment. He/she stated that financial institutions
have a perception of higher credit risk. **Another**
member added that this is also due to banks’ tighter
conditions and the absence of sufficient government
guarantees. One member stated that the contraction
is associated with supply factors and relatively high
active rates. He/she emphasized the tightening of
credit conditions for all sectors, which registered the
most serious deterioration on record in the second
quarter of 2020. He/she argued that this deterioration
is largely explained by the reduction in credit lines
offered. Some members noted that this decrease in
bank credit is not due to a liquidity problem,
considering the liquidity available to banks and the
actions taken by the Central Bank in this matter.

7


-----

**Some members argued that it is imperative for**
commercial banks and the government to stimulate
credit through guarantee programs. **One member**
noted that the availability of credit depends not only
on central bank actions, but on the alternatives
offered by banks. He/she stated that it is imperative
for commercial banks to also do their part in the
process of economic reactivation, and pointed out
that the argument about an insufficient demand for
credit is not credible. **Another member mentioned**
that the economic recovery will be more difficult
without an adequate expansion of bank credit. One
member pointed out that although banks have solid
capital and liquidity levels, the deterioration in their
loan portfolio is still latent. He/she argued that the
National Banking and Securities Commission
(CNBV, for its acronym in Spanish) should
encourage financial intermediaries to restructure
credits of solvent clients that have liquidity problems
and seek to minimize delinquency rates. He/she
stated that the CNBV should expand even more,
although prudently, the existing facilities so that
institutions have additional reserves, increase their
regulatory capital, and reduce their capital
requirements due to credit risk. **Another member**
highlighted that in view of the expiration of the special
accounting criteria, it is important to monitor the
stress indicators in the financial system.

**_Monetary policy_**

**Taking into account the effects on inflation,**
**economic activity and financial markets, as well**
**as** **the** **projections** **for** **inflation** **and** **the**
**convenience of consolidating a downward path**
**for headline and core inflation towards the 3%**
**target, the majority of members agreed to**
**maintain the target for the overnight interbank**
**interest rate at 4.25%. One** member voted for
lowering the policy rate to a level of 4.00%. All
**members agreed that the decision to keep the**
**reference rate unchanged constitutes a pause, in**
**order to confirm a trajectory for inflation that**
**converges** **to** **the** **target.** **Some** members
mentioned that this pause should not be considered
as the end of the monetary relaxation cycle. Looking
**ahead, all pointed out that monetary policy**
**decisions will depend on the information**
**available, particularly on the evolution of the**
**factors that have an incidence on inflation.**

**One member stated that monetary policy faces, on**
the one hand, major supply and demand shocks that
affect economic activity and inflation and, on the
other hand, uncertainty in global financial markets


and fragility in risk appetite and capital flows. He/she
added that in order to have an orderly adjustment of
the national economy and maintain low and stable
inflation, financial markets must function properly.
He/she noted that the effects of monetary policy
throughout the yield curve must be identified, since
the components of aggregate demand respond to the
different segments of the curve. He/she mentioned
that in view of the economic contraction and its
effects on inflation, it is desirable that the entire curve
presents an orderly and sustainable downward
adjustment. He/she added that medium and longterm interest rates include risk premia associated
with various factors and that monetary policy should
seek to ensure that the medium- and long-term
inflationary risk premia are low and contained.
He/she considered necessary for inflation
expectations to be kept around their target in a
sustained manner, which reduces inflationary risk
premia throughout the yield curve. He/she stated that
this is important when evaluating monetary policy
responses among emerging economies, since they
generally need to complement their domestic savings
with external sources of financing, and that their risk
premia are relevant for this purpose. In this regard,
he/she mentioned that a solid and resilient
macroeconomic framework is required, capable of
withstanding adverse scenarios and allowing for
lower financing costs along the yield curve.

He/she also emphasized that in light of the effects of
the pandemic, the yield curve in Mexico has adjusted
downwards in an orderly and sustained manner.
He/she pointed out that when comparing the
behavior of said curve among emerging economies,
it stands out that short and long term interest rates in
Mexico have decreased considerably. He/she
pointed out that while short-term rates are lower in
other emerging economies, in some of them longterm rates have decreased less or even increased.
He/she noted that the challenge of maintaining low
and stable risk premia has been complicated by the
pandemic. He/she considered that given the
challenges and disjunctives that monetary policy has
confronted, in an environment in which headline and
core inflation have been subject to pressures, despite
the substantial weakness of economic activity, a
pause would grant space to confirm the downward
trajectory of headline and core inflation to the 3%
target.

**Another member argued that monetary policy faces**
a complex scenario due to conflicting effects: the
largest fall in GDP in ninety years contrasts with
rising inflation that exceeds forecasts and inflation

8


-----

expectations above the target. He/she added the
presence of various risks that could pressure the
exchange rate and impose greater stress on the
monetary policy stance. He/she stated that in light of
the complex environment, it is time to make a pause
in the cycle of monetary easing and that this is a
consistent, prudent and cautious decision given the
significant global and domestic uncertainty. He/she
considered that such decision will reinforce the
credibility about the central banks’ commitment to its
primary mandate and will send an unequivocal
message of prudence.

The same member pointed out that currently the exante real interest rate is at an accommodative level
and that the interest rate spread with respect to the
Federal Reserve has reached a level below the one
recorded during the 2009 crisis. The aforementioned
in spite of greater domestic risks stemming from a
more deteriorated fiscal position. Regarding the
possibility that a cut to the policy rate is relevant for
the reactivation of credit, he/she emphasized that
recent data suggests that the interest rate channel
has little influence on financing. He/she argued that
actions in the sphere of monetary policy have been
comprehensive and timely, but the impact on
investment, credit and consumption has been limited,
since these rely more on confidence and legal
certainty. He/she added that this argument is
reinforced when considering that the relevant interest
rates for investment and consumption of durable
goods are the medium and long term ones, which are
currently at levels lower than during the recession of
2009. On the other hand, he/she stated that given the
high sensitivity of capital flows in Mexico, it is
imperative to maintain a cautious monitoring and to
calibrate monetary policy, in order to avoid increasing
the country's financial vulnerabilities, in an uncertain
international environment and with a high country
risk. Finally, he/she considered that the monetary
policy statement must communicate that the decision
seeks to guarantee the downward path of inflation to
the target in the horizon in which monetary policy
operates and that the prudent and responsible
implementation of monetary policy is the best way to
ratify the Central Bank’s commitment to price
stability.

**One** member argued that the monetary policy
implemented in recent months has made a significant
reduction in the reference rate compatible with an
approach based on prudence. He/she noted that a
de-anchoring of long-term inflation expectations has
been avoided despite the shocks faced; the interest
rate spread comparable with other emerging


economies has been narrowed or inverted without
exerting excessive pressures on the exchange rate,
and long-term interest rates have remained at levels
below those observed in several economies with
lower reference rates. He/she mentioned that despite
these efforts and the sharp economic contraction,
mainly as a result of the shocks stemming from the
pandemic, the inflationary situation remains difficult.
He/she emphasized that in addition to inflation being
above target, consideration must be given to the
prolonged period in which core inflation has
remained high, the persistence of short- and longterm expectations above the target, the risks to
inflation in the coming months, as well as the fact that
in the face of inflation data frequently exceeding
forecasts during the year, the possibility of inflation
converging to the target within the previously
forecasted period seems to fade. He/she mentioned
that many analysts anticipate that inflation for 2021
and in the long term will be above the target while
also expecting that there will be cuts to the policy
rate, which suggests doubts about the credibility of
the commitment of the Central Bank to the target.
He/she stated that, for all the above reasons, it is
necessary to continue acting with prudence, which
implies keeping the reference rate unchanged.
He/she indicated that this represents the scenario to
which information derived from market-based
instruments assigns the highest probability. Finally,
he/she considered that the duration of this pause will
depend on the behavior of inflation and its
expectations and forecasts, and that in an
environment of so much uncertainty, flexibility in the
implementation of monetary policy will be needed in
order to ensure the convergence of inflation to the
target.

**Another** member argued that, from different
perspectives, monetary easing is still insufficient and
that a pause should in no way be interpreted as the
end of the easing cycle. He/she noted that the exante real interest rate is still high in relation to that
observed during the 2009 crisis, when the slack was
lower than the current one and inflation expectations
were higher. He/she added that said rate is also high
in relation to that observed in the rest of the emerging
economies. He/she mentioned that while in most
economies real rates close to zero or negative were
reached several months ago, in Mexico they are still
in positive territory. He/she noted that monetary
policy still has room to contribute to improve
financing conditions without jeopardizing other
aspects of the economy. He/she highlighted that
interest rates faced by firms tend to decrease with
monetary policy easing. He/she argued that the

9


-----

demand components typically associated with credit,
such as investment, purchases of durable goods and
purchases with credit cards, are those that have
exhibited the weakest recovery. He/she emphasized
that monetary easing should continue when
inflationary pressures begin to ease and as long as
the negative output gap continues. Otherwise, there
may be costly implications during the recovery
process and permanent effects on production and
social welfare levels.

**One** member argued that an even lower rate is
needed to help the recovery process. He/she added
that inflation lies on the foreseen trajectory and that
the output gap will remain very negative for a long
period, which gives room to continue with the current
cycle of easing as most countries have done. He/she
noted that the ex-ante real interest rate is still positive
and that there is a margin before reaching a level of
zero or negative. He/she noted that, given the
difficulty of implementing a greater fiscal stimulus, a
more expansionary monetary policy is needed and
that it should be signaled that it will remain so for a
long time. He/she also emphasized that the monetary
stimulus must continue to be complemented with
measures to increase liquidity, to address the
functioning of the payments system, and to
strengthen the financing channels for micro-, smalland medium-sized firms. With regards to the
absolute policy stance, he/she noted that low
economic activity and reduced risk aversion open
space for further easing, although the temporary
increase in inflation could reduce this margin for a
few months. He/she argued that, in relative terms,
the global monetary easing and the lower risk
aversion allow for maintaining an accommodative
policy stance. He/she stated that the end point of the
easing cycle is uncertain, as it depends on inflation
remaining on the expected path towards the target,
the output gap being negative and the recovery
continuing. He/she underlined that if on this occasion
the monetary policy decision is not to modify the
target rate, this has to be considered as a pause and
not as the end point of the expansionary cycle, in
order to leave the door open to a more expansionary
stance as has been recommended by some
international financial authorities. He/she noted that
Mexico's inflationary gap is positive, in contrast to the
negative gaps in most emerging economies, so
future decisions should incorporate the evolution of
economic indicators. In addition, he/she pointed out
that caution should be maintained in order to avoid
affecting exchange rate stability and the financial
system.


**3. MONETARY POLICY DECISION**

The risks for inflation, economic activity and financial
markets pose major challenges for monetary policy
and for the economy in general. Considering the
mentioned forecasts for inflation and the
convenience of consolidating a downward path for
headline and core inflation towards the 3% target,
with the presence of all its members, Banco de
México’s Governing Board decided by majority to
maintain the target for the overnight interbank
interest rate at 4.25%. One member voted for
lowering the policy rate to a level of 4.00%. This
pause provides the necessary room to confirm that
the trajectory of inflation converges to the target.
Looking ahead, monetary policy implementation will
depend on the evolution of the factors that have an
incidence on headline and core inflation, on their
foreseen trajectories within the forecast horizon, and
on their expectations.

The Governing Board will take the necessary actions
on the basis of incoming information in order for the
policy rate to be consistent with the orderly and
sustained convergence of headline inflation to Banco
de México’s target within the time frame in which
monetary policy operates. Perseverance in
strengthening the macroeconomic fundamentals and
adopting the necessary actions regarding both
monetary and fiscal policies will contribute to a better
adjustment of domestic financial markets and of the
economy as a whole.

**4. VOTING**

Alejandro Díaz de León-Carrillo, Irene EspinosaCantellano, Gerardo Esquivel-Hernández and Javier
Eduardo Guzmán-Calafell voted in favor of
maintaining the target for the overnight interbank
interest rate at 4.25%.

Jonathan Ernest Heath-Constable voted for lowering
the target for the overnight interbank interest rate by
25 basis points to a level of 4.00%.

**5. VIEWPOINTS / DISSENTING VOTES**

**Vote. Jonathan Ernest Heath-Constable**

My vote is for lowering the policy rate by 25 basis
points to 4.0% and continue the downward cycle as
far as possible. The main problem we face is the
significant fall in economic activity, its impact on the
labor market and expectations of a weak, difficult and
prolonged recovery. Given the magnitude of the
economic collapse, we should not overreact to

10


-----

inflation being temporarily one tenth of a percentage
point above the variability range of its target. Given
the difficulty in implementing greater fiscal stimuli,
more is required from monetary policy; an even lower
policy rate is needed to aid in the recovery process.
If not addressed appropriately, the economy might
suffer practically irreversible structural damages. The
greatest possible support is therefore required,
shifting from a current slightly expansionary


monetary policy stance to a highly accommodative
stance, and communicating that it will remain as such
for a long period. Not even a pause in the policy
stance is acceptable when a sensitive decline in
inflation is expected in November as a result of the
fall in energy and in fruit and vegetable prices, and of
the discounts in many goods during the _Buen Fin_
sale.

11


-----

**ANNEX**

The information in this Annex was prepared for this
meeting by the staff of Banco de México’s General
Directorate of Economic Research and General
Directorate of Central Bank Operations. It does not
necessarily reflect the considerations of the
members of the Governing Board as to the monetary
policy decision.

**A.1. External conditions**

**A.1.1. World economic activity**

Available information suggests that the recovery of
world economic activity that began in May with the
gradual reopening of production activities has been
heterogeneous among countries and sectors, and,
recently, has taken place at a slower pace than that
observed between May and June (Chart 1). Thus,
the global economy remains at levels of economic
activity below those prior to the pandemic. The risk
that economic recovery is hindered by new lockdown
measures, such as those implemented as of October
in some European countries in light of the
resurgence of COVID-19 cases in several countries,
also persists. The COVID-19 pandemic and the
measures implemented to contain it have
significantly affected the evolution of inflation
worldwide. Thus, although in advanced countries
and in most emerging market economies downward
inflationary pressures have prevailed over upward
pressures, inflation has shown a mixed behavior
across countries. This has depended on the various
shocks faced by countries and on several
idiosyncratic factors, such as the differentiated
effects on specific sectors, the policy responses, and
the effects on different currencies. In this
environment, in the major advanced economies
inflation remained below their respective central
banks’ targets, while in emerging economies the
behavior of inflation has been more heterogeneous.

In this context, the central banks and fiscal
authorities of systemically important economies
have maintained several stimulus measures to
mitigate the impact of the pandemic on the economy.
In particular, the main central banks kept their
reference interest rates at historically low levels,
continued to use their balance sheets to foster a
proper functioning of financial markets, and
reiterated their commitment to maintaining highly
accommodative monetary policy stances for an
extended period. Nevertheless, since September,
global financial markets have shown higher volatility,
albeit not as high as that observed at the beginning


of the pandemic. The uncertainty related to the
approval of a new fiscal relief package in the United
States and the possible effects of the electoral
process, the resurgence of COVID-19 cases, the
resumption of lockdown measures in several
countries, as well as concerns regarding the
valuation of certain financial assets, and the possible
exit of the United Kingdom from the European Union
without a trade agreement, have contributed to the
greater volatility.

In this environment, the forecasts of analysts and
multilateral organizations continue to anticipate a
strong contraction of the world economy in 2020,
although recently they have been revised to the
upside due to a lower slowdown than what had been
expected for the second quarter, particularly in
advanced economies. Expectations of a gradual
recovery in 2021 were also revised slightly to the
downside due to the lower than expected contraction
in 2020 and the expectation that social distancing will
continue during the next year. These forecasts are
subject to a high degree of uncertainty, given that the
pace of recovery will be influenced by the still
uncertain evolution of the demand components in
several countries and economic sectors.

**Chart 1**

**Global: Purchasing Managers’ Index (PMI)**
**Production Component**

Diffusion index, s. a.

60

55

50

45

40

35

Manufacturing

30 Manufacturing (excl. China)

Services
Services (excl. China)

25

October

20

2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020

s. a. / Seasonally adjusted figures.
Source: Markit.

In the United States, GDP grew at a seasonally
adjusted annualized quarterly rate of 33.1% during
the third quarter, after having contracted 31.4% in
the second (Chart 2). These results indicate that this
indicator still remains below its pre-pandemic level.
This recovery was driven by a strong growth of
private consumption and investment in real estate
and equipment, which were supported by the fiscal
stimuli and favorable financial conditions. In contrast,

12


-----

the items that contributed negatively to GDP include
public spending, as some fiscal stimuli started to
decrease, and net exports, due to the greater
dynamism of imports.

In September, US industrial production contracted at
a monthly rate of 0.6%, remaining still below the
levels prior to the pandemic. This fall reflected a
contraction in electricity generation, which is
explained by a lower demand for air conditioning,
after an unusually warm summer season and, to a
lower degree, a decrease in the manufacturing
sector stemming from a lower production of
computers, electronic equipment, and motor
vehicles. The mining sector increased driven by
greater oil/gas drilling and extraction. In this context,
available indicators to October, such as the
Purchasing Managers’ Index (PMI) of the
manufacturing sector, suggest a moderate recovery
of this sector.

US employment continued to recover in September
and October, largely due to the return to work of
employees that had been temporarily laid off. The
unemployment rate continued to decrease from
8.4% in August to 6.9% in October, although it
remains at levels far above those observed prior to
the pandemic and the number of employees that lost
their jobs involuntarily and are not expecting to
recover it in the short term remains high. As to the
non-farm sector, although between May and October
12.1 million of over 22 million jobs lost during March
and April have been recovered, the pace of recovery
has moderated.

In the euro area, after the strong contraction during
the first and second quarters of 2020, economic
activity increased at an annualized quarterly rate of
61.1% during the third quarter, although it still
remains below pre-pandemic levels. In particular,
retail sales recovered slightly in August, driven by the
greater mobility and consumer confidence, although
recently both factors have decreased due to the
resurgence of COVID-19 cases in some countries.
Leading indicators, such as PMIs, confidence
indexes and other high-frequency indicators, point to
a significant moderation in the pace of recovery of
economic activity, mainly in the services sector. The
unemployment rate increased at a moderate pace,
by rising from 8.1% in July to 8.3% in September.

|Chart 2 United States: Real GDP and its Components Annualized quarterly percentage change and contributions in percentage points, s. a.|Col2|Col3|Col4|Col5|
|---|---|---|---|---|
|Private consumption expenditures Residential investment Change in private inventories Net exports Nonresidential investment Government consumption expenditures Total|||||
|I II III IV 2016|I II III IV 2017|I II III IV 2018|I II III IV 2019|I II III 2020|


s. a. / Seasonally adjusted figures.
Source: Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA),

In the United Kingdom, available indicators suggest
a rebound of economic activity during the third
quarter, driven mainly by the growth of
manufacturing and construction, while the recovery
of the services sector has been more moderate.
Retail sales continued to recover in September,
standing above the levels prior to the pandemic.
Although PMIs continue to lie above 50, they
registered a decline in September and October,
which suggests a moderation in economic activity
during the fourth quarter. It is worth noting that,
despite the progress in the negotiation of the trade
agreement between the United Kingdom and
European Union, uncertainty persists as to the
possibility that said agreement is actually reached
before December 31, 2020.

In Japan, available indicators suggest a gradual
recovery of economic activity during the third quarter
of the year. On the one hand, retail sales exhibited
certain stability, while consumer confidence
increased in recent months, although it still remains
below pre-pandemic levels. On the other hand,
industrial production rebounded in September,
driven by exports and the gradual recovery of
domestic demand. Purchasing Managers’ Indexes
for October continue to exhibit contraction. As for the
labor market, the unemployment rate increased
slightly from 2.9% in July to 3.0% in September.

In emerging economies, economic conditions
continue to vary depending on the spread of the
pandemic, the effectiveness of measures to contain
it, and the economic stimuli implemented. In China,
the economy continued to recover during the third
quarter of the year, with GDP growing at an annual

13


**United States: Real GDP and its Components**

Annualized quarterly percentage change and
contributions in percentage points, s. a.

50

40

30

20

10

0

Private consumption expenditures

-10 Residential investment

Change in private inventories

-20 Net exports

Nonresidential investment

-30 Government consumption expenditures

Total

-40


0


-----

rate of 4.9%, after the 3.2% rate registered in the
second quarter. This has reflected the drive of
investment and exports, which has fostered the
expansion of industrial production. The recovery of
the services and consumption sectors continues to
fall behind. As for Latin American economies,
aggregate demand and production indicators
suggest that economic recovery has taken place at
a slower pace than in other regions and has
moderated in some countries.

Since Mexico’s previous monetary decision, the
international prices of commodities have registered
a mixed behavior. In particular, oil prices have
exhibited volatility since September given the
uncertainty about the approval of a new fiscal
package in the United States, the possible reduction
in fuel demand due to the resurgence of COVID-19
cases in several countries, and the impact on
production of hurricanes in the Gulf of Mexico.
Industrial metal prices have continued to trend
upwards due to the sustained recovery of industrial
production worldwide and the strong demand for
metals from China. Finally, grain prices were driven
up by the strong demand for these goods, as well as
by the unfavorable climate conditions for certain
crops, particularly in the United States.

**A.1.2. Monetary policy and international financial**
**markets**

The pandemic and the measures implemented to
contain it have had a significant impact on the
evolution of inflation worldwide. The weakness of
economic activity exerted, in general, considerable
downward pressures on service prices. The prices of
some goods, such as foods, increased due to a
greater demand and supply-related effects. Thus,
although in both advanced and most emerging
market countries, downward pressures have
prevailed over upward pressures, the effects have
been heterogeneous depending on the magnitude of
the shocks and on idiosyncratic factors such as the
differentiated effects across sectors and the policy
response, including subsidies and tax cuts, among
others. Therefore, in the main advanced economies,
inflation continues to be below their targets (Chart 3).
In this context, despite having increased in general,
inflation expectations drawn from financial
instruments for the main advanced economies
remain at low levels. In emerging economies, the
weakening of economic activity and the fall in the
prices of certain services affected by the pandemic
contributed to a decline in inflation in many of them,
while in other countries there were upward pressures
generated by increases in energy and food


merchandise prices, as well as by the depreciation
of their currencies.

**Chart 3**

**Selected Advanced Economies: Headline**
**Inflation**

Annual percentage change

3.5 United States
Euro area

3.0 Japan

Canada

2.5 United Kingdom

2.0

1.5

1.0

0.5

0.0

September

-0.5 October

-1.0
2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020

Source: Bureau of Labor Statistics, Eurostat, Bank of Japan, Statistics
Canada, Office of National Statistics.

In this context, the main central banks of advanced
economies, in addition to keeping their reference
interest rates at historically low levels and continuing
to use their balance sheets to foster an orderly
functioning of financial markets, reiterated their
commitment to maintain highly accommodative
policy stances for an extended period, given the
considerable effects of the pandemic on aggregate
demand. Expectations drawn from market
instruments continue to anticipate that these central
banks will maintain highly accommodative monetary
policy stances (Chart 4).

**Chart 4**

**Reference Rates and Implied Trajectories in**

**OIS Curves[1/]**

**Percent**

3.0% **― US Federal Reserve 2/**

**― Bank of England**
**― Bank of Japan**

2.5% **― Bank of Canada**

**― European Central Bank deposit rate**
**― OIS implicit trajectory 09 Nov 2020**

2.0% **--- OIS implicit trajectory 18 Sep 2020**

1.5%

1.0%

0.5%

0.0%

-0.5%

End of End of End of

-1.0% 2019 2020 2021

2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022

OIS: Fixed floating interest rate swap where the fixed interest rate is the
effective overnight reference rate.
** In the case of the US observed reference rate, the average interest rate
of the federal funds target range is used (0.0% - 0.25%).
Source: Prepared by Banco de México with Bloomberg data.

14


-----

Among the monetary policy decisions in this period,
the following stand out:

i) In its November meeting, the Federal Reserve left
unchanged its range for the federal funds rate at 0%0.25% and asset purchase program. It reiterated that
it expects that it will be appropriate to maintain this
range until the labor market conditions have reached
levels consistent with its maximum employment
estimate and inflation has increased to 2% and is
heading moderately to exceed the 2% target for
some time. Likewise, prior to its November meeting,
it announced adjustments to the terms of its Main
Street Lending Program, reducing the minimum
amount of loans and adjusting their fees to foster the
provision of smaller loans, thus reorienting support
towards smaller firms. In this context, market
variables incorporate that the Fed will maintain its
reference rate unchanged during 2020 and 2021.

ii) In its October meeting, the European Central Bank (ECB)
left its policy rates unchanged, maintaining its refinancing
rate, key deposit facility rate and key lending facility rate at
0.0, -0.5 and -0.25%, respectively. It reiterated that these
interest rates are expected to remain at or below their
current levels until inflation forecasts converge to a level
sufficiently close but below the 2% inflation target, and that
this convergence has been consistently reflected in core
inflation dynamics. It also kept its asset purchase program
unchanged and stated that, in the current environment
where the balance of risks is biased to the downside, its
Governing Council will evaluate the pandemic dynamics,
the expectations for launching COVID-19 vaccines and the
evolution of the exchange rate. In particular, it pointed out
that the new forecasts that will be available in December
and an assessment of the balance of risks, will allow to
recalibrate its monetary policy instruments as necessary to
support economic recovery and offset the negative impact
of the pandemic on the trajectory of inflation. The ECB
noted that these measures will foster the sustained
convergence of inflation to its target, in line with its
commitment to a symmetric inflation target.

iii) In its October meeting, the Bank of Japan left its short-term
policy interest rate unchanged at -0.1% and its long-term
interest rate (indexed to its 10-year bond) at around 0%,
and reiterated that it will continue its asset purchase
program. It also pointed out that it will continue to support
the financing of firms and financial market stability with the
special program to support financing in response to the
COVID-19 pandemic, a widespread provision of yen
liquidity, and purchases of exchange-traded and property
funds. This institution reiterated that it will not hesitate to
take additional measures if necessary and that it expects
interest rates to remain at or below their current levels.

iv) The Bank of England kept its reference interest rate
unchanged at 0.10% and the amount of its asset
purchase program in its latest meetings.
Nevertheless, in its November meeting it added


another £150 billion to its asset purchase program,
for a total value of £875 billion. It reiterated that it will
continue to closely monitor the situation and pointed
out that, if inflation expectations weaken, the
Monetary Policy Committee will be ready to take any
additional action to comply with its mandate. This
central bank also pointed out that the Committee
does not intend to tighten its monetary policy stance
until there is clear evidence that significant progress
has been made in eliminating the excess slack in the
use of productive capacity and in moving towards its
2% inflation target in a sustainable manner.

v) In its October meeting, the Bank of Canada left its
reference rate unchanged at 0.25%, reiterating that
it will keep its reference interest rate at levels close
to zero until the slack has been reduced, so that the
2% inflation target is reached in a sustained manner,
which it expects to be achieved at least until 2023. It
also announced a recalibration of its asset purchase
program towards purchasing longer-term bonds and
gradually reducing the total amount to at least CAD
4 billion weekly. The Board considered that, with
these adjustments, it is providing at least as much
monetary stimulus as before and reiterated that the
program will continue until economic recovery is
clearly underway.

Since Banco de México’s previous monetary policy
decision, most central banks of emerging economies
left their reference interest rates unchanged, while
some banks maintained various measures to ensure
the supply of liquidity, provide credit, and foster the
well-functioning of financial markets.

In the context of world economic activity described
above, international financial markets exhibited a
volatile behavior since Mexico’s latest monetary
policy decision, although said volatility was more
limited than during March and April. This was due to
several factors, such as the uncertainty associated
with the approval of an additional stimulus package
in the United States and the possible effects of the
US electoral process; an increase in COVID-19
cases in various countries; the announcement of
new social distancing measures; the concerns about
the valuation of some financial assets; and the
possibility that the United Kingdom’s exit agreement
from the European Union is not reached. In
advanced economies, financial assets exhibited
episodes of high volatility. In particular, stock market
indexes registered gains in the last week, driven
mainly by the results of the US electoral process and
progress in the development of a vaccine against
COVID-19. The US dollar depreciated slightly

15


-----

against most developed countries’ currencies.
Finally, interest rates of long-term government bonds
exhibited mixed adjustments by region, with a
continued decrease of rates in the euro area and a
slight steepening of the US yield curve standing out
(Chart 5). Emerging economies registered net
capital inflows, mainly to fixed-income assets. Their
stock markets exhibited episodes of higher volatility
and mixed adjustments by region, while their
currencies exhibited a depreciation bias in general
(Chart 6).

**Chart 5**

**Change in Selected Financial Indicators**

**from September 18 to November 9, 2020**

**Percent, basis points**


**Chart 6**

**Emerging Economies: Financial Assets**
**Performance from September 21 to**

**November 9, 2020**

Percent, basis points


20%

15%


40

30


10%

5%


20

10


0%

-5%


0

-10


-10%

-15%


-20

-30

|<-- Stock markets S&P 500 (U.S.) CAC 40 (France) IBEX (Spain) Nikkei (Japan) FTSE MIB (Italy) EM 1/ FTSE-100 (UK) Eurostoxx (Europe) Shanghai (China) DAX (Germany)|<-- Currencies CNY GBP CAD NZD AUD CHF EUR JPY DXY 2/ EM Currencies 3/|2-year government bond yields --> United Kingdom United States Canada Japan France Germany Spain Italy|10-year government bond yields --> United States United Kingdom Canada Japan Germany France Spain Italy|
|---|---|---|---|


1/ MSCI Emerging Markets Index (includes 24 countries).
2/ DXY: Weighted average of the nominal exchange rate of the six main
world-traded currencies (calculated by Intercontinental Exchange, ICE) with
the following weights: EUR (57.6%), JPY (13.6%), GBP (11.9%), CAD
(9.1%), SEK (4.2%), and CHF (3.6%).
3/ J.P. Morgan Index constructed from a weighted average of the nominal
exchange rate of emerging economies’ currencies with the following
weights: TRY (8.3%), RUB (8.3%), HUF (8.3%), ZAR (8.3%), BRL (11.1%),
MXN (11.1%), CLP (11.1%), CNH (11.1%), INR (11.1%), and SGD (11.1%).
Source: Bloomberg and ICE.


Note: Except for Mexico, interest rates correspond to interest rate swaps
for 2-year/10-year maturities, respectively.
Source: Banco de México with PIP and Bloomberg data.

Looking ahead, new episodes of risk aversion in
financial markets cannot be ruled out, which will
depend largely on the evolution of the pandemic, the
possible adoption of new measures to contain it in
more countries, the sufficiency of fiscal stimuli
implemented to support the recovery, and on the
processes of development and distribution of a
vaccine. Along with the above there is the
persistence of other risk factors, such as the high
levels of private borrowing, the greater number of
bankruptcies in the sectors most affected by the
pandemic, trade tensions, a worsening of
geopolitical and social conflicts in different regions of
the world, a greater uncertainty about the possible
effects of the US electoral process, and the possible
exit of the United Kingdom from the European Union
without a trade agreement, among others.

**A.2. Current situation of the Mexican economy**

**A.2.1. Mexican markets**

Since Banco de Mexico’s previous monetary policy
decision to date, the prices of financial assets in
Mexico exhibited a positive bias, in line with that
observed in other emerging economies (Chart 7).
This occurred in an environment where uncertainty
persists about the effects of the pandemic on the
global economy and the resurgence of COVID-19
cases in some regions, and where caution by
investors towards risky assets spread due to the
uncertainty about the results of the US election.
However, the preliminary results of the electoral

16


-----

process, along with positive news regarding
vaccines and effective treatments against COVID19, provided additional support to emerging
countries’ assets.

The Mexican peso stood out among emerging
economies’ currencies with the best performance,
trading with volatility in a range between 20.32 and
22.46 pesos per US dollar and ending the period with
an appreciation of 4.71% (Chart 8). This occurred in
a context where both spot and forward trading
conditions exhibited a marginal improvement vis-àvis the period of the previous monetary policy
decision, although they remain deteriorated with
respect to the levels prior to the pandemic.

**Chart 7**

**Mexican Markets’ Performance**

Percent, MXN/USD and index


those in the short end of the yield curve and
increases in the longer end, (Chart 9), which led to
an increase of the 3 year-30 year spread to levels not
seen since the beginning of the pandemic. The yield
curve of real-rate instruments also exhibited
dynamics similar to that of nominal rates. In this
context, breakeven inflation and inflation risk premia
implicit in the spreads between nominal and real
market instrument rates exhibited mixed
adjustments since the September monetary policy
decision (Chart 10). It is worth noting that such
dynamics took place in a context where trading
conditions exhibited a marginal deterioration vis-àvis the period of the previous monetary policy
decision.

**Chart 9**

**Nominal Yield Curve of Government Securities**

Percent, basis points

Percentage,basis points


10.0

9.0

8.0

7.0

6.0

5.0

4.0


26.0

25.0

24.0

23.0

22.0

21.0

20.0

19.0

18.0


48,000

46,000

44,000

42,000

40,000

38,000

36,000

34,000

32,000


M Bond


4.5

4.0

3.5

3.0

2.5

2.0

1.5

1.0

0.5

0.0

Inflation indexed bonds


Trading range over the period


Range in year Range since last Banxico monetary policy Sep-21-20 Nov-9-20

decision

Source: Prepared by Banco de México.


Range in year Range since last Banxico monetary policy Sep-21-20 Nov-9-20

decision


**Chart 8**

**Mexican Peso Exchange Rate**

**with Moving Averages**

MXN/USD

25.50

Mexican Peso

25.00
24.50 Moving Average 100 Day
24.00 Moving Average 50 Day
23.50
23.00
22.50
22.00
21.50
21.00
20.50
20.00
19.50
19.00
18.50
18.00
17.50
17.00

Source: Prepared by Banco de México.

Interest rates of government securities exhibited
moderate adjustments that were differentiated by
term. In this regard, reductions were observed for


Source: PIP.

**Chart 10**

**Breakeven Inflation and Inflation Risk implicit in**
**Government Securities’ Interest Rate Curves**

Basis points


Source: PIP.

As to the measures announced by Banco de México
in April, the first transaction of the temporary

17


-----

collateralized financing facility took place on October
21. This facility has been instrumented on three
occasions and reports that 3.99 billion pesos of the
total amount of 50 billion pesos available have been
used.

As to expectations regarding the path of the
monetary policy target rate, information implied by
the Interbank Equilibrium Interest Rate (TIIE, for its
acronym in Spanish) swap curve discounts with a
39% probability a 25-basis point cut for the monetary
policy decision of November (Chart 11). Private
sector forecasters surveyed by Citibanamex are also
expecting a 25-basis point cut. For the end of 2020,
market variables anticipate a target level of 4.07%,
while the median of surveyed forecasters expects a
level of 4.00%. Finally, for the end of 2021, market
variables are anticipating a target level of 4.05%,
while the median of private sector forecasters
surveyed anticipates a level of 4.00%.

**Chart 11**

**Banxico’s Overnight Interbank Rate Implied in**

**TIIE IRS Curve**

Percent

8.50
8.25
8.00
7.75
7.50
7.25
7.00
6.75
6.50
6.25
6.00
5.75
5.50 Banxico overnight rate
5.25 (policy rate)
5.00
4.75 Last figure (09/11/2020)
4.50
4.25 Last monetary policy decision
4.00 (24/09/2020)
3.75
3.50

J   M M   S   N   F   M   J   O   D   M   J   A   N

2019                   2020                  2021

Source: Prepared by Banco de México with Bloomberg data.

**A.2.2. Economic activity in Mexico**

According to the GDP flash estimate published by
INEGI, after having contracted sharply during the
second quarter, Mexico's economic activity
recovered slightly in the third quarter, although it
remained below the levels prior to the health
emergency, in an environment of uncertainty and
downside risks (Chart 12). This behavior was driven
by the relatively strong recovery of external demand
since the end of the previous quarter and the more
moderate reactivation of domestic demand,
associated with the easing of measures


s. a. / Seasonally adjusted figures.
1/ The figure for the third quarter of 2020 refers to the quarterly GDP flash
estimate published by INEGI.
Source: Mexico’s System of National Accounts (SCNM, for its Spanish
acronym), INEGI.

**Chart 13**

**Total Manufacturing Exports**

Indexes 2013 = 100, s. a.

150

Total

140 Rest of the world

130 United States

120

110

100

90

80

70

60

September

50

J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S
2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020

s. a. / Seasonally adjusted series and trend series based on data in nominal
US dollars. The former is represented by a solid line and the latter by a
dotted line.
Source: Prepared by Banco de México with data from the Tax
Administration Service (SAT, for its Spanish acronym), the Ministry of the
Economy (SE, for its acronym in Spanish), Banco de México, the National
Institute of Statistics and Geography (INEGI, for its Spanish acronym),
Mexico’s Merchandise Trade Balance, and the National System of
Statistical and Geographical Information (SNIEG, for its acronym in
Spanish).

18


implemented since the end of May in response to the
health contingency.

As for external demand, after having been strongly
impacted by the pandemic between March and May,
exports started to recover as of June, reflecting the
rebound of certain economic activities previously
considered as non-essential by the health authorities
and the gradual reactivation of external demand.
This recovery resulted from both the dynamism of
automotive exports, as well as the rest of
manufacturing exports, particularly those to the
United States (Chart 13).

**Chart 12**

**Gross Domestic Product**

Quarterly percentage change, s. a.

16

12

8

4

0

-4

-8

-12

-16


-20


Q-III 1/
I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV I II III
2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020


-----

According to its monthly indicator, in July and August
private consumption continued to recover
moderately, although it still remains below the levels
of February and decelerated at the margin. This
result reflected the increases in consumption of both
goods and services. Timely indicators suggest that
private consumption has continued to recover during
the rest of the third quarter and the beginning of the
fourth. In particular, National Association of SelfService and Department Stores (ANTAD, for its
acronym in Spanish) sales reached in September
levels similar to those observed before the health
crisis, while sales of light vehicles also grew
significantly during the July – October period. In July
and August, gross fixed investment also continued to
recover, although it remains at levels well below
those at the beginning of the health crisis. Within this
indicator, machinery and equipment continued to
recover, although it exhibited a sharp deceleration in
August, while construction remains at particularly
low levels despite the rebound in August. Timely
indicators related to this component, such as capital
imports, suggest that investment would have
continued to recover moderately at the end of the
third quarter.

As for production, throughout the third quarter,
secondary activities reversed partially the strong
contraction observed during the second quarter,
although they lost some dynamism in September
(Chart 14). In particular, manufacturing recovered for
the fourth consecutive month, growing at a slightly
faster rate at the margin, while mining continued to
exhibit lackluster growth (Chart 15). In contrast,
construction decreased considerably in September,
partially reversing the rebound shown in the previous
month. Tertiary activities recovered at a more
moderate pace and in a heterogeneous manner
among its sectors. Increases were observed in
accommodation and food services; wholesale trade;
education and health; and transportation,
warehousing and information. In contrast, decreases
were observed in arts, entertainment, recreation and
other services; finance and insurance; real estate,
rental and leasing; public administration; retail trade;
administrative and support services; and in
management of companies and enterprises.


s. a. / Seasonally adjusted and trend series. The former is represented by
a solid line and the latter by a dotted line.
Source: Mexico’s National Accounts System (SCNM, for its acronym in
Spanish), INEGI.

**Chart 15**

**Industrial Activity [1/]**

Indexes 2013 = 100, s. a.

130

120

110

100

90

80 Total

Mining (22.3%)

70 Manufacturing (49.7%)

Construction (23.3%)

60

Utilities (4.7%)
September

50

J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S
2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020

s. a. / Seasonally adjusted and trend series. The former is represented by
a solid line and the latter by a dotted line.
1/ Figures in parentheses correspond to their share in the total in 2013.
Source: Mexico’s National Accounts System (SCNM, for its acronym in),
INEGI.

As to the economy’s cyclical position, due to the
gradual reactivation of production activities and
greater population mobility, the considerable
widening of slack observed in April and May has
been partially reversed since June, although it is still
foreseen to remain at ample levels (Chart 16).
According to the results of INEGI's latest National
Survey on Occupation and Employment (ENOE, for
its Spanish acronym), several labor market
indicators continued to improve moderately in
September. In particular, labor participation
increased with respect to August, while the
underemployment rate continued to decrease as
compared to the previous month, which may be

19


**Chart 14**

**Economic Activity Indicators**

Indexes 2013 = 100, s. a.

120

115

110

105

100

95

Total

90 Secondary activities

Tertiary activities

85 Primary activities

80

75 July

August

70

J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J A
2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020


140

130

120

110

100

90

80

70

60

50

40


-----

associated partly with an increase in hours worked
and the return to work of certain temporary
employees. The national unemployment rate also
decreased as compared to August, although it
remains at levels above those prior to the health
contingency (Chart 17). The creation of IMSSinsured jobs has rebounded slightly after the impact
of the pandemic, although at a moderate pace.
Finally, as a reflection of the recovery of production
and hours worked, unit labor costs in the
manufacturing sector accumulated four monthly
consecutive reductions in August, although they still
continue to be above pre-pandemic levels (Chart
18).

**Chart 16**

**Output Gap Estimates [1/]**

**Excluding Oil Industry [4/ ]**

Potential output percentages, s. a.

8

4

0

-4

-8

-12

-16

-20 Global Economic Activity Indicator 2/

Gross Domestic Product 2/

-24 95% Confidence Interval 3/

Q-III

September

-28

J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S
2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020

s. a. / Calculations based on seasonally adjusted figures.
1/ Output gap estimated with a tail-corrected Hodrick-Prescott filter; see
Banco de México (2009), “Inflation Report (April-June 2009)", p.74.
2/ GDP figure as of the second quarter of 2020; IGAE figure as of June
2020.
3/ Output gap confidence interval calculated with a method of unobserved
components.
4/ Excludes both oil and gas extraction, support activities for mining, and
petroleum and coal products' manufacturing.
Source: Prepared by Banco de México with INEGI data.


**Chart 17**

**National Unemployment Rate**

Percent of EAP, n. s. a.

6.0

5.5

5.0

4.5

4.0

3.5

3.0

September

2.5
J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J
2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020

n. s. a. / Not seasonally adjusted (original series).
Source: Prepared by Banco de México with data from ENOE up to March
2020 and from the ETOE (from April to June 2020) and ENOE new edition
(ENOE[N]) from July to September 2020..

**Chart 18**

**Productivity and Unit Labor Costs in the**
**Manufacturing Sector [1/]**

Indexes 2013 = 100, s. a.

170

Unit labor costs

160

Productivity

150

140

130

120

110

100

90

August

80

J J J J J J J J J J J J J J J J J J J J J J J J J J A
2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020

s. a. / Seasonally adjusted and trend series. The former is represented by
a solid line and the latter by a dotted line.
1/ Productivity based on hours worked.
Source: Prepared by Banco de México with seasonally adjusted data of the
Monthly Manufacturing Industry Survey and industrial activity indicators of
Mexico’s National Accounts System (Sistema de Cuentas Nacionales de
_México, SCN), INEGI._

20


-----

In September, domestic financing to firms contracted
at an annual rate for the fourth consecutive month,
thus increasing the loss of dynamism that has been
observed since May. This was mainly due to the
reduction in bank lending to large firms, which have
had a more moderate demand for this type of
financing vis-à-vis at the beginning of the pandemic.
In the domestic corporate debt market, the rebound
of debt issuance continued in September, after low
levels of activity during the second quarter. Bank
lending to smaller firms contracted further at an
annual rate. As for credit to households, housing
portfolio issuance increased, although it remains
below that at the beginning of the pandemic.
Consumer credit continued to contract, although an
increase of credit cards and durable goods
consumption was observed at the margin. Interest
rates of bank credit to private firms decreased in
September, in line with the reduction in banks'
overnight funding rate, while the margins of
intermediation of interest rates of lending to firms
remained relatively stable. In August, interest rates
of mortgages continued to decrease for the seventh
consecutive month, while those of credit cards
showed levels similar to those of June. As for
portfolio quality, corporate and mortgage loan
delinquency rates remained low, while those for
consumption credit have been decreasing since
July, although they are still at high levels.

In September, the additional measures implemented
by Banco de México to promote the sound
development of the financial system were extended
to February 28, 2021. As for the facility to provide
resources to banking institutions to channel credit to
micro, small- and medium-sized firms and
individuals affected by the pandemic, up to October
fourteen credit institutions had signed agreements to
use this facility.


**A.2.3. Development of inflation and inflation**
**outlook**

Annual headline inflation rose from 4.01 to 4.09%
between September and October 2020 (Chart 19
and Table 1). The adjustment at the margin reflected
an increase in non-core inflation, with a rise in the
annual rate of change of fruit and vegetable prices
standing out.

**Chart 19**

**Consumer Price Index**

Annual percentage change

13

12 CPI

Core

11

Non-core

10

9

8

7

6

5

4

3

2

1

0

-1 October

-2

-3

J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S
2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020

Source: Banco de México e INEGI.

In September and October, annual core inflation was
3.99 and 3.98%, respectively. The effects associated
with the COVID-19 pandemic have influenced it in
such a way that it has undergone a recomposition,
characterized by upward pressures in the prices of
merchandise and downward pressures in service
prices. In those months, annual merchandise
inflation was 5.40 and 5.44%, respectively (Chart 20
and Table 1). Within it, after having increased
significantly, the annual variations of food
merchandise prices remained stable during the
reference period, while those of non-food
merchandise prices increased slightly (Chart 21).
For its part, the annual inflation of service prices
stood at 2.45 to 2.40% during the same periods. In
particular, the rates of change of housing and
education prices decreased, while those of other
services, such as air transportation and tourism
increased.

Annual non-core inflation rose from 4.10 to 4.42%
between September and October (Chart 22 and
Table 1), a result which was associated largely to the
higher inflation of agricultural and livestock product
prices, which increased from 8.16 to 9.61%, with the
high rates of change of fruit and vegetable prices
standing out. The annual inflation of energy prices,
on the other hand, were at rates of -0.39 and -0.71%
in those months.

21

|CPI|Col2|Col3|Col4|Col5|
|---|---|---|---|---|
|Core|||||
|Non-core|||||
||||||
||||||
||||||
||||||
||||||
||||||
||||||
||||||
||||||
||||||
||||||
|October|||||
||||||


-----

**Chart 20**

**Merchandise and Services Core Price Sub-index**

Annual percentage change

7

Merchandise

6 Services

5

4

3

2

1

October

0

J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S
2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020

Source: Prepared by Banco de México with data from INEGI.

**Chart 21**

**Merchandise Core Price Sub-index**

Annual percentage change

8

7

6

5

4

3

2

1

0

-1 Food, beverages and tobacco Non-food merchandise

October

-2

J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S
2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020

Source: Prepared by Banco de México with data from INEGI.


**Chart 22**

**Non-core Price Sub-index**

Annual percentage change

20

15

10

5

0

-5 Non-core

Agricultural and livestock products

Energy and government-authorized prices

-10

-15 October

J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S
2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020

Source: Prepared by Banco de México with data from INEGI.

As for inflation expectations drawn from Banco de
México’s Survey of Private Sector Forecasters,
between August and October the median for
headline inflation for the end of 2020 rose from 3.82
to 3.95%, while that of core inflation continued at
3.92%. The medians of for medium- and long-term
expectations for both headline and core inflation
remained at around 3.50%. Finally, breakeven
inflation and inflation risk increased since the last
monetary policy decision, in an environment of
volatility.

The evolution of inflation is subject to short- and
medium-term risks. To the downside: i) a greaterthan-expected effect due to the negative output gap;
ii) lower inflationary pressures worldwide; and, iii)
greater social distancing measures that lower the
demand for goods and services. To the upside: i)
episodes of foreign exchange depreciation; ii)
persistence of core inflation at high levels; and, iii)
logistical problems and higher costs associated with
the health measures. The balance of risks for the
projected trajectory of inflation described above is
thus uncertain.

22


-----

**Table 1**

**Consumer Price Index and Components**

Annual percentage change

**Item** **August 2020** **September 2020** **October 2020**

**CPI** **4.05** **4.01** **4.09**

**Core** **3.97** **3.99** **3.98**

**Merchandise** **5.36** **5.40** **5.44**
Food, beverages and tobacco 7.04 6.99 6.93
Non-food merchandise 3.58 3.71 3.85

**Services** **2.46** **2.45** **2.40**
Housing 2.28 2.20 2.12
Education (tuitions) 3.11 2.16 2.11
Other services 2.47 2.75 2.71

**Non-core** **4.30** **4.10** **4.42**

**Agricultural and livestock products** **8.09** **8.16** **9.61**

Fruits and vegetables 13.12 12.76 16.24

Livestock products 4.10 4.49 4.29

**Energy and government-authorized prices** **1.50** **1.11** **0.68**

Energy products 0.27 -0.39 -0.71

Government-authorized prices 4.25 4.47 3.88

Source::INEGI.


23


-----

-----

