Not to be released until 8:50 a.m.
Japan Standard Time on Monday,
February 23, 2015.

February 23, 2015

Bank of Japan

# Minutes of the
 Monetary Policy Meeting

## on January 20 and 21, 2015

(English translation prepared by the Bank's staff based on the Japanese original)


-----

Please contact the Bank of Japan at the address below in advance to request permission

when reproducing or copying the content of this document for commercial purposes.

Secretariat of the Policy Board, Bank of Japan

P.O. Box 30, Nihonbashi, Tokyo 103-8660, Japan

Please credit the source when quoting, reproducing, or copying the content of this

document.


-----

A Monetary Policy Meeting of the Bank of Japan Policy Board was held in the

Head Office of the Bank of Japan in Tokyo on Tuesday, January 20, 2015, from 2:00 p.m. to

3:57 p.m., and on Wednesday, January 21, from 9:00 a.m. to 12:24 p.m.[1]

**Policy Board Members Present**

**Mr. H. Kuroda, Chairman, Governor of the Bank of Japan**

**Mr. K. Iwata, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Japan**

**Mr. H. Nakaso, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Japan**

**Mr. R. Miyao**

**Mr. Y. Morimoto**

**Ms. S. Shirai**

**Mr. K. Ishida**

**Mr. T. Sato**

**Mr. T. Kiuchi**

Government Representatives Present

Mr. I. Miyashita, State Minister of Finance, Ministry of Finance[2]

Mr. H. Sakota, Deputy Vice Minister for Policy Planning and Coordination, Ministry of

Finance[3]

Mr. M. Maekawa, Director-General, Economic and Fiscal Management, Cabinet Office

Reporting Staff

Mr. M. Amamiya, Executive Director

Mr. K. Momma, Executive Director (Assistant Governor)

Mr. S. Kuwabara, Executive Director

Mr. S. Uchida, Director-General, Monetary Affairs Department

1 The minutes of this meeting were approved by the Policy Board at the Monetary Policy Meeting
held on February 17 and 18, 2015 as "a document describing an outline of the discussion at the
meeting" stipulated in Article 20, paragraph 1 of the Bank of Japan Act of 1997. Those present are
referred to by their titles at the time of the meeting.
2 Mr. I. Miyashita was present on January 21.
3 Mr. H. Sakota was present on January 20.

1


-----

Mr. H. Koguchi, Deputy Director-General, Monetary Affairs Department[4]

Mr. K. Masaki, Head of Policy Planning Division, Monetary Affairs Department

Mr. H. Yamaoka, Director-General, Financial Markets Department

Mr. E. Maeda, Director-General, Research and Statistics Department

Mr. S. Kameda, Head of Economic Research Division, Research and Statistics

Department

Mr. S. Nagai, Director-General, International Department

Secretariat of the Monetary Policy Meeting

Mr. N. Yoshioka, Director-General, Secretariat of the Policy Board

Mr. N. Fukunaga, Director, Deputy Head of Planning and Coordination Division,

Secretariat of the Policy Board

Mr. H. Kamiguchi, Head of Policy Infrastructure Division, Monetary Affairs

Department[4 ]

Mr. Y. Komaki, Senior Economist, Monetary Affairs Department

Mr. S. Watanabe, Senior Economist, Monetary Affairs Department

4 Messrs. H. Koguchi and H. Kamiguchi were present on January 21.

2


-----

**I. Summary of Staff Reports on Economic and Financial Developments[5]**

**A. Money Market Operations in the Intermeeting Period**

The Bank, in accordance with the guideline decided at the previous meeting on

December 18 and 19, 2014, had been providing funds through purchases of Japanese

government bonds (JGBs) and other measures.[6] In this situation, the amount outstanding

of the monetary base had been in the range of 272-277 trillion yen.

**B. Recent Developments in Financial Markets**

In the money market, interest rates on both overnight and term instruments

continued to be at low levels. The uncollateralized overnight call rate and general

collateral (GC) repo rates had generally been at levels below 0.1 percent, the interest rate

applied to the Bank's complementary deposit facility. As for interest rates on term

instruments, yields on treasury discount bills (T-Bills) had temporarily risen into positive

territory but had recently been negative again.

In the bond market, the declining trend in long-term interest rates worldwide had

become more apparent since the previous meeting, and in this situation, Japan's interest

rates across the entire yield curve had declined further. Specifically, yields in the long
and super long-term zones had followed a downward trend, on the back of the decline in

U.S. and European long-term interest rates that mainly reflected a decline in crude oil prices,

and yields on 10-year JGBs had recently been at around 0.2 percent. Yields on the shorter

end had been slightly negative and those in the medium-term zone had declined to around 0

percent. The Nikkei 225 Stock Average had temporarily risen to the range of

17,500-18,000 yen against the background of increases in overseas stock prices. It had

fallen back thereafter, mainly reflecting the yen's appreciation and the decrease in U.S.

stock prices due to the decline in crude oil prices, and had recently been moving in the

range of 17,000-17,500 yen. In the foreign exchange market, the yen had temporarily

depreciated against the U.S. dollar to the range of 120-121 yen, mainly reflecting firm

economic indicators in the United States. The yen then appreciated against the U.S. dollar,

mainly reflecting the decline in U.S. stock prices. The euro had depreciated against the

5 Reports were made based on information available at the time of the meeting.
6 The guideline was as follows:

The Bank will conduct money market operations so that the monetary base will increase at

an annual pace of about 80 trillion yen.

3


-----

dollar, primarily due to anticipation of additional monetary easing by the European Central

Bank. Meanwhile, the Swiss franc had appreciated substantially, reflecting the decision by

the Swiss National Bank (SNB) to discontinue the minimum exchange rate for the Swiss

franc against the euro.

**C. Overseas Economic and Financial Developments**

Overseas economies -- mainly advanced economies -- had been recovering, albeit

with a lackluster performance still seen in part.

The U.S. economy continued to recover steadily, led by private demand. The

pace of increase in private consumption had accelerated somewhat on the back of a firm

increase in employment together with the effects of low crude oil prices. Housing

investment had also followed a moderate pick-up trend. Exports continued on their

increasing trend. Reflecting these developments in demand, business sentiment and

production activity had been firm, and business fixed investment continued to recover. As

for prices, the year-on-year rate of increase in the consumer price index (CPI) for all items

less food and energy, or the core CPI, had been more or less flat while that for all items had

dropped noticeably, mainly due to the decline in energy prices.

The recovery in the European economy had been losing momentum recently.

Private consumption continued to recover moderately on the back of an improving trend in

compensation of employees. However, the pace of the pick-up in exports had been

sluggish and production was roughly flat. Business sentiment had generally turned

cautious, and movements toward a pick-up in business fixed investment had come to a

pause. As for prices, the year-on-year rate of increase in the Harmonized Index of

Consumer Prices (HICP) excluding energy and unprocessed food continued to be more or

less flat, albeit at a depressed level, while that in the HICP for all items had turned negative,

due to the effects of the decline in energy prices. Meanwhile, economic activity in the

United Kingdom continued to recover, led mainly by domestic demand.

With regard to emerging economies, the Chinese economy generally maintained

its stable growth, due mainly to an improvement in external demand and the stimulus

measures by the government, although there remained downward pressure associated with

structural reforms. Exports continued to increase, particularly to the United States and

Asia. Stable growth in private consumption continued against the background of a

4


-----

favorable employment and income situation. On the other hand, the slowing trend in the

pace of growth in fixed asset investment continued on the whole, since the paces of increase

in investment in real estate and manufacturing had slowed, although public investment

remained firm. The pace of growth in production had been slowing moderately.

Meanwhile, the NIEs had been improving on the whole as domestic demand continued on a

pick-up trend, although the pace of pick-up in exports had been decelerating recently. In

India, the economy had started to pick up, reflecting a continued improving trend in

sentiment on the back of expectations for structural reforms and of a decline in inflation

rates. On the other hand, despite a continued improving trend in exports, the ASEAN

economies as a whole had been lacking growth momentum since improvement in private

consumption had been slow in some economies. Economic activity in Brazil continued to

decelerate, and that in Russia had become increasingly stagnant, particularly in domestic

demand, reflecting a tightening of financial conditions due to the raising of policy interest

rates and to capital outflow.

As for prices of emerging economies, inflation rates in many economies had

decreased, mainly because of the decline in energy prices. On the other hand, inflation

rates had been rising in some Asian economies due to the effects of a reduction in fuel

subsidies; rates had also been rising in countries such as Brazil and Russia, due to the

effects of the depreciation of their currencies and to the increase in food prices.

Regarding global financial markets, volatility had heightened in stock markets and

long-term interest rates in advanced economies had declined, mainly against the

background of the substantial decline in crude oil prices. Meanwhile, in the foreign

exchange market, the U.S. dollar had appreciated, reflecting market participants' awareness

of the differences in perceived business conditions and the direction of monetary policy

between the United States and other countries. Currencies in emerging economies had

been weak on the whole, as seen in the noticeable fall in currencies in oil- and

commodity-exporting economies, such as Russia. In international commodity markets,

crude oil prices continued to decline substantially, reflecting a heightened sense of excess

supply and increased U.S. inventories.

5


-----

**D. Economic and Financial Developments in Japan**

1. Economic developments

Exports had shown signs of picking up. Real exports, after turning slightly

positive in the July-September quarter of 2014 on a quarter-on-quarter basis, had risen

noticeably in the October-November period relative to the July-September quarter.

Exports were expected to increase moderately, mainly against the background of the

recovery in overseas economies.

Public investment had more or less leveled off at a high level. It was expected to

continue to stay at around this level for the time being and thereafter enter a moderate

declining trend.

Business fixed investment had been on a moderate increasing trend as corporate

profits had improved. The aggregate supply of capital goods on a basis excluding

transport equipment had been on a moderate uptrend, with the fluctuations smoothed out; it

had been more or less flat in the July-September quarter of 2014 but had risen in the

October-November period relative to the July-September quarter. Business fixed

investment was projected to continue a moderate increasing trend as corporate profits

followed their improving trend.

As for the employment and income situation, labor market conditions continued to

improve steadily, as evidenced by the continued improving trend in the active job

openings-to-applicants ratio. Regarding wages, nominal wages per employee had been

rising moderately, albeit with fluctuations, as non-scheduled cash earnings and special cash

earnings had increased and as scheduled cash earnings had been picking up. Reflecting

these developments in employment and wages, employee income had risen moderately.

Private consumption remained resilient as a trend with the employment and

income situation improving steadily, and the effects of the decline in demand following the

front-loaded increase prior to the consumption tax hike had been waning on the whole.

Sales at retail stores in real terms had started to increase in the July-September quarter of

2014, after a substantial fall in the April-June quarter, and continued to move upward in the

October-November period relative to the July-September quarter. Sales at department

stores and supermarkets continued to pick up, with the fluctuations caused by adverse

weather conditions smoothed out. As for durable consumer goods, which had exhibited

lingering effects of the decline in demand following the front-loaded increase, these effects

6


-----

had been waning, as the number of new passenger-car registrations had shown movements

toward a pick-up, and sales of household electrical appliances continued to pick up at a

moderate pace. Services consumption, such as that related to travel, remained steady.

Indicators related to consumer confidence -- which had continued to become cautious -- had

slightly improved recently, mainly reflecting an increase in winter bonus payments for 2014

and a decline in the prices of petroleum products. Private consumption was expected to

remain resilient with the employment and income situation continuing to improve steadily,

and the effects of the decline in demand following the front-loaded increase were expected

to dissipate gradually.

Housing investment, which had continued to decline following the front-loaded

increase, had recently started to bottom out. It was projected to regain its resilience

gradually with the employment and income situation continuing to improve steadily,

supported as well by accommodative financial conditions.

Industrial production had bottomed out, due in part to the progress in inventory

adjustments. It had fallen back noticeably in the April-June quarter of 2014 on a

quarter-on-quarter basis from the front-loaded increase in demand and continued to

decrease in the July-September quarter, but had turned upward in the October-November

period relative to the July-September quarter, by 1.6 percent. Industrial production was

expected to resume its moderate increase with final demand continuing to rise and inventory

adjustments progressing further.

As for prices, excluding the direct effects of the consumption tax hike, the

producer price index (PPI) was declining relative to three months earlier, reflecting the

significant fall in international commodity prices. The year-on-year rate of increase in the

CPI (all items less fresh food) was in the range of 0.5-1.0 percent. With regard to the

outlook, the PPI was expected to continue declining for the time being, reflecting

movements in international commodity prices, and the year-on-year rate of increase in the

CPI was likely to slow for the time being, reflecting the decline in energy prices.

2. Financial environment

Financial conditions were accommodative.

The monetary base had increased significantly as asset purchases by the Bank had

progressed, and the year-on-year rate of growth had been in the range of 35-40 percent.

7


-----

Firms' funding costs had been hovering at low levels. With regard to credit

supply, firms continued to see financial institutions' lending attitudes as being on an

improving trend. Issuing conditions for CP and corporate bonds continued to be favorable.

Firms' credit demand had been increasing moderately, mainly for working capital and funds

related to mergers and acquisitions. Against this backdrop, the year-on-year rate of

increase in the amount outstanding of bank lending had been in the range of 2.5-3.0 percent.

Firms' financial positions had been favorable. The year-on-year rate of growth in the

money stock had been at around 3.5 percent, mainly due to the increase in bank lending.

Meanwhile, inflation expectations appeared to be rising on the whole from a somewhat

longer-term perspective.

**II. Summary of Discussions by the Policy Board on Economic and Financial**

**Developments**

**A. Economic Developments**

Members shared the recognition that global financial markets had shown

nervousness, partly due to the decision by the SNB to discontinue the minimum exchange

rate for the Swiss franc against the euro, in addition to the substantial decline in crude oil

prices and heightened uncertainty over political developments in Greece. Some members

said that, as the time for a hike in the policy rate in the United States was expected to be

approaching, attention should be paid to the effects this would have on the global flow of

funds.

Members agreed that the decline in crude oil prices generally had positive effects

on the global economy as a whole, particularly on advanced economies. Some members

expressed the view that, as the decline in crude oil prices caused income transfers from

oil-producing countries to oil-consuming countries, which had a higher spending propensity,

the net effect of the decline would be positive in terms of the global economy as a whole.

On this basis, some members pointed to the following risks entailed by the decline that

warranted attention: (1) destabilization of financial markets, mainly through the fall in

currencies of commodity-exporting economies and a deterioration in the creditworthiness of

energy-related firms; and (2) downward pressure exerted on the economy through a

decrease in fixed investment by energy-related firms and a reduction in their number of

employees. One of these members noted that, if the recent decline in crude oil prices was

8


-----

attributable to demand-side factors, the declines in crude oil prices and long-term interest

rates might be suggesting a change in the prospects for global economic recovery.

Meanwhile, a different member, noting that there were signs that crude oil prices had most

recently stopped declining, expressed the view that the downward revision to the outlook

for the supply of crude oil in the Americas might be affecting supply and demand

conditions.

Members shared the recognition that overseas economies -- mainly advanced

economies -- had been recovering, albeit with a lackluster performance still seen in part.

As for the outlook, they concurred that overseas economies -- particularly advanced

economies -- would continue to recover moderately.

With regard to developments in overseas economies by region, members shared

the recognition that the U.S. economy continued to recover steadily, led by private demand.

One member said that the pace of increase in private consumption had accelerated

somewhat on the back of an increase in employment and the decline in gasoline prices, and

that this had been exerting positive effects on corporate activity. As for the outlook,

members concurred that the economy was likely to continue to see a solid recovery as

firmness in the household sector would continue to spread to the corporate sector.

Members shared the recognition that the recovery in the euro area economy had

been losing momentum recently. As for the outlook, they concurred that the economy

would likely maintain its recovery as a trend -- albeit at a moderate pace -- supported

mainly by the resilience in private consumption and a moderate pick-up in exports, although

the recovery would likely be sluggish for the time being due in part to the continued

cautiousness in business and household sentiment. Some members pointed out that the

year-on-year rate of increase in the HICP for all items had turned negative, due to the

decline in energy prices, and expressed the view that the possibility of low inflation rates

becoming entrenched warranted attention. One member expressed the intent to closely

monitor the effects on the euro area economy of the Greek general election and the policy

conduct thereafter.

Members agreed that the Chinese economy generally maintained its stable growth

due mainly to an improvement in external demand and the stimulus measures by the

government, although there remained downward pressure associated with structural reforms.

A few members pointed out that signs of a pick-up had recently been observed in the real

9


-----

estate market. As for the outlook, members shared the view that the economy would likely

continue to see generally stable growth, albeit at a somewhat slower pace, as authorities

carried out stimulus measures while progressing with structural reforms.

Regarding emerging economies, members shared the recognition that, while there

were countries and regions, mainly in Asia, where economic activity had been picking up,

economic activity, particularly in Brazil and Russia, remained stagnant. They continued

that emerging economies as a whole remained lackluster in terms of growth. Members

concurred that emerging economies were likely to gradually increase their growth rates as

positive effects of recovery in advanced economies -- particularly in the United States -
spread, and as this process triggered a pick-up in domestic demand, although differences

remained across countries and regions.

Based on the above deliberations on economic and financial conditions abroad,

members discussed the state of Japan's economy.

With regard to economic activity, members shared the recognition that, in a

situation where a virtuous cycle from income to spending continued to operate steadily in

both the household and corporate sectors, the economy continued to recover moderately as

a trend, and effects such as those of the decline in demand following the front-loaded

increase prior to the consumption tax hike had been waning on the whole. With regard to

the outlook for the economy, they concurred that it was likely to continue its moderate

recovery trend, and that the effects such as those of the decline in demand following the

front-loaded increase prior to the consumption tax hike were likely to dissipate.

Members shared the recognition that Japan's exports had shown signs of picking

up and were likely to increase moderately, mainly against the background of the recovery in

overseas economies and the yen's depreciation to date. One member pointed out that the

number of foreign visitors to Japan and their consumption in the country had been

increasing, mainly reflecting the yen's depreciation and the easing of visa issuance

requirements.

Members shared the recognition that business fixed investment had been on a

moderate increasing trend as corporate profits had improved. They agreed that it was

projected to continue on such a trend, mainly on the back of improvement in corporate

profits and a tightening in labor market conditions. Some members pointed to the fact that

some manufacturing firms had started to shift their production sites back to Japan, against

10


-----

the background of the correction in the yen's appreciation to date. They then expressed the

view that a positive contribution to the domestic economy -- such as an increase in business

fixed investment, production, and exports -- could be expected.

As for the employment and income situation, members shared the recognition that,

with labor market conditions continuing to improve steadily, employee income had risen

moderately and was likely to continue to do so. Some members expressed the view that

wage increases, including in base pay, were expected in the wage negotiations in spring

2015 as labor market conditions and corporate profits continued to improve.

Members agreed that private consumption remained resilient as a trend with the

employment and income situation improving steadily, and the effects of the decline in

demand following the front-loaded increase prior to the consumption tax hike had been

waning on the whole. Many members -- pointing out that many sales statistics had

maintained their uptrend -- expressed the view that the effects of the decline in demand

following the front-loaded increase had been waning for durable consumer goods, which

had exhibited a lingering decline in demand, as automobile sales had shown movements

toward a pick-up, and sales of household electrical appliances continued to pick up at a

moderate pace. Some members noted that relatively weak developments had been

observed in indicators of consumer sentiment, but these indicators had recently shown signs

of bottoming out. Members concurred that private consumption was likely to remain

resilient with employee income continuing to rise moderately, and the effects of the decline

in demand following the front-loaded increase were likely to dissipate gradually. Some

members noted that the recent decline in crude oil prices would push up private

consumption by raising households' real purchasing power.

Members agreed that housing investment, which had continued to decline

following the front-loaded increase, had recently started to bottom out and was projected to

regain its resilience gradually.

Members concurred that industrial production had bottomed out, due in part to the

progress in inventory adjustments, and was likely to resume its moderate increase. A few

members pointed out that the production forecast index and interviews with firms suggested

that production was expected to increase moderately.

As for prices, members concurred that, excluding the direct effects of the

consumption tax hike, the year-on-year rate of increase in the CPI (all items less fresh food)

11


-----

was in the range of 0.5-1.0 percent and was likely to slow for the time being, reflecting the

decline in energy prices.

**B. Financial Developments**

Members concurred that financial conditions in Japan were accommodative.

They shared the view that the monetary base had increased significantly, reflecting the

progress in asset purchases by the Bank, and that firms' funding costs had been hovering at

low levels. Members agreed that firms' financial positions had been favorable, as firms

continued to see financial institutions' lending attitudes as being on an improving trend and

issuing conditions for CP and corporate bonds continued to be favorable. They shared the

view that firms' credit demand had been increasing moderately, and that the amount

outstanding of bank lending, including that to small firms, had been increasing moderately.

**C. Interim Assessment**

Given the above assessment, members discussed the Bank's interim assessment of

the October 2014 Outlook for Economic Activity and Prices (hereafter the Outlook Report).

Members pointed out that crude oil prices had recently been changing significantly, and that

the outlook for the CPI would depend largely on an assumption about crude oil prices.

They then concurred that, taking this into account, it was appropriate at this interim

assessment that members share a common assumption about crude oil prices, on which the

interim assessment would be based. Specifically, referring to recent developments in

crude oil prices and such prices in futures markets, members made an assumption that

Dubai crude oil prices would rise moderately from the recent 55 U.S. dollars per barrel to

about 70 dollars per barrel toward the end of the projection period -- namely, through fiscal

2016. Most members said that it was meaningful to release an estimate of the contribution

of energy items to the year-on-year rate of increase in the CPI (all items less fresh food)

under this assumption, and shared the recognition that this contribution was estimated to be

mostly in the range of minus 0.7 to minus 0.8 percentage point for fiscal 2015, and mostly

in the range of plus 0.1 to plus 0.2 percentage point for fiscal 2016. One member said that

the Bank should provide a thorough explanation so that the public would not misunderstand

that the figure derived by subtracting the contribution of energy items from the year-on-year

12


-----

rate of increase in the CPI (all items less fresh food) was the benchmark for the outlook for

prices.

Based on this assumption about crude oil prices, members agreed on a baseline

scenario of the outlook for Japan's economic activity that the forecasts of economic growth

would likely be lower for fiscal 2014 compared with those presented in the October 2014

Outlook Report. As the main factor behind this, they highlighted the somewhat weak

developments in private consumption in the first half of fiscal 2014. As for fiscal 2015

and 2016, on the other hand, members shared the view that -- mainly reflecting the decline

in crude oil prices, depreciation of the yen, effects of the government's economic measures,

and postponement of the scheduled second consumption tax hike -- the forecasts of

economic growth would likely be higher than those presented in October and the economy

was likely to grow at a pace clearly above its potential.

Members agreed on a baseline scenario of the outlook for Japan's prices that the

forecasts for the year-on-year rate of increase in the CPI (all items less fresh food) would

likely be lower toward fiscal 2015 compared with those presented in the October 2014

Outlook Report, due to the significant decline in crude oil prices. However, many

members expressed the view that the outlook for the underlying trend in prices -- which was

determined by the output gap and medium- to long-term inflation expectations -- was

unchanged, and this underlying trend would likely improve steadily. These members

pointed out that the effects of the decline in crude oil prices would eventually dissipate on a

year-on-year basis, and said that, as this happened, the year-on-year rate of increase in the

CPI (all items less fresh food) would accelerate. Many members expressed the opinion

that the rate was likely to reach around 2 percent -- the price stability target -- in or around

fiscal 2015, on the assumption that crude oil prices would rise moderately from around the

recent level. These members added that the outlook for crude oil prices was highly

uncertain, and depending on developments in these prices, the precise timing for reaching 2

percent could be either earlier or later to some extent. They commented that the forecasts

for the year-on-year rate of increase in the CPI for fiscal 2016 would likely be more or less

unchanged from those presented in October.

Counter to this, one member expressed the recognition that it was rather unlikely

that the 2 percent target would be achieved in a sustainable manner, given that the

year-on-year rate of increase in the CPI (all items less food and energy) had recently been in

13


-----

the range of 0.0-0.5 percent despite the yen's depreciation. This member then presented an

outlook that the growth rates and the rates of increase in prices up through fiscal 2016

would likely be substantially below the median of the Policy Board members' forecasts. A

different member expressed the view that, compared with the forecasts presented in the

October 2014 Outlook Report, those for prices would be lower throughout the projection

period -- namely, through fiscal 2016 -- mainly due to the decline in crude oil prices and a

weakening of the upward momentum of medium- to long-term inflation expectations.

This member continued that the year-on-year rate of increase in the CPI (all items less fresh

food) would only rise closer to 2 percent over the projection period. Another member

expressed the view that forecasts for prices were lower than the median of the Policy Board

members' forecasts, and that it was rather unlikely that the year-on-year rate of increase in

the CPI would reach 2 percent in or around fiscal 2015.

Members shared the recognition that risks to the outlook included developments in

the emerging and commodity-exporting economies, the prospects regarding the debt

problem and the risk of low inflation rates being protracted in Europe, and the pace of

recovery in the U.S. economy.

**III. Summary of Staff Reports on the Loan Support Program and Other Measures**

As the Loan Support Program and other measures were due to expire shortly, the

staff provided the following explanation regarding the outline and usages of the measures

under the current framework.

Financial institutions -- mainly major banks -- had continued to make active use of

the fund-provisioning measure to stimulate bank lending (hereafter the Stimulating Bank

Lending Facility) since the enhancement decided at the meeting on February 17 and 18,

2014, and the amount outstanding of the Bank's fund-provisioning was currently around 19

trillion yen. As for the fund-provisioning measure to support strengthening the

foundations for economic growth (hereafter the Growth-Supporting Funding Facility), the

amount outstanding of the Bank's fund-provisioning under the main rules was around 4.3

trillion yen, while the maximum amount was 7 trillion yen. Use of this facility close to the

maximum amount that could be provided to each financial institution -- namely, 1 trillion

yen -- had been observed. Meanwhile, there had been requests to use these facilities from

financial cooperatives that were not eligible counterparties. Of the maximum amount of

14


-----

the Bank's fund-provisioning -- that is, 1 trillion yen -- under the funds-supplying operation

to support financial institutions in disaster areas, about 325 billion yen had been used.

**IV. Summary of Discussions on Monetary Policy for the Immediate Future**

**A. Monetary Policy for the Immediate Future**

Based on the above assessment of economic and financial developments, members

discussed monetary policy for the immediate future.

Many members shared the assessment that quantitative and qualitative monetary

easing (QQE) continued to exert its intended effects after the Bank had decided to expand

QQE at the Monetary Policy Meeting held on October 31, 2014. Many members noted

that the decision made at the meeting was to pre-empt manifestation of the risk that

conversion of the deflationary mindset would be delayed. They continued that, thereafter,

despite a further drop in crude oil prices and a slowdown in the year-on-year rate of increase

in the CPI, medium- to long-term inflation expectations had been firmly maintained.

With regard to the assessment of price developments for the Bank's conduct of

monetary policy, members concurred that the price stability target should be achieved in a

stable manner and that the underlying trend in prices was important in conducting monetary

policy. On this basis, they shared the view that it was appropriate to indicate the

contribution of energy items to the CPI considering the following: (1) the price stability

target was set based on the CPI for all items; (2) the forecasts presented in the Outlook

Report had been made using the CPI for all items less fresh food, which represented the

underlying trend in prices relatively well; and (3) crude oil prices had recently been

changing significantly. Many members said that, in assessing the underlying trend in

prices, there was no change in the view that it was important to examine a range of price

indicators, and that a comprehensive assessment would be made by also taking into account

the output gap and medium- to long-term inflation expectations, as well as the underlying

economic developments. Furthermore, these members noted that, when examining

developments in inflation expectations, it was important to assess not only market indicators

such as the break-even inflation rates and the results of surveys conducted on economists,

firms, and households, but also firms' and households' views on prices as well as changes in

behavior based on such views -- for example, changes in firms' price-setting behavior and in

wage negotiations.

15


-----

With respect to recent developments in inflation expectations, many members

expressed the recognition that there had been steady progress in the conversion of the

deflationary mindset despite the further drop in crude oil prices and the decline in the actual

inflation rate. A few members said that there had been steady progress in the conversion

of firms' and households' deflationary mindset as evidenced by the fact that (1) the Japanese

Trade Union Confederation (Rengo) had decided the guidelines for wage negotiations in

spring 2015, which called for a base pay increase of more than 2 percent; and (2) corporate

managers had also indicated a positive stance toward wage increases. Some members

pointed out that, although market indicators of medium- to long-term inflation expectations

had been declining, surveys conducted on households, firms, and economists suggested that

such expectations had generally been maintained. On this point, one of these members

added that the results of surveys conducted on small firms better reflected the views of

individual firms, as it was often the case that responses to such surveys were based on the

views of their corporate managers. Meanwhile, one member said that, even if wage

increases were realized as a result of wage negotiations in spring 2015, one should not go so

far as to have hopes that such increases would significantly affect economic and price

developments.

With regard to the relationship between the decline in crude oil prices and the

conduct of monetary policy, members shared the following view: (1) from a somewhat

longer-term perspective, the decline would have positive effects on economic activity and

exert upward pressure on prices, and downward pressure, stemming from the decline, on the

year-on-year rate of increase in prices -- the so-called base effect -- would eventually

dissipate; (2) if the short-term downward pressure on prices did not influence the underlying

trend in prices through a change in inflation expectations, the actual inflation rate would rise

as the base effect dissipated; and (3) in terms of the conduct of monetary policy, the Bank's

policy decisions would be made by examining changes in the underlying trend in prices,

which was determined by factors such as inflation expectations and the output gap. On

this point, a few members said that the Bank should provide a more thorough explanation

that the expansion of QQE in October 2014 had been implemented not to directly respond

to the decline in crude oil prices but rather to respond to concern over the effects on

inflation expectations of the slowdown in the actual inflation rate -- associated mainly with

16


-----

the decline in crude oil prices -- that is, concern over the risk that conversion of the

deflationary mindset would be delayed.

Based on the above discussions, regarding the guideline for money market

operations for the intermeeting period ahead, most members expressed the view that it was

appropriate to maintain the current guideline that the Bank would conduct money market

operations so that the monetary base would increase at an annual pace of about 80 trillion

yen.

With regard to the asset purchases, most members expressed the recognition that it

also was appropriate for the Bank to continue with the current guideline. Specifically,

these members confirmed the following. First, the Bank would purchase JGBs so that

their amount outstanding would increase at an annual pace of about 80 trillion yen. With a

view to encouraging a decline in interest rates across the entire yield curve, the Bank would

conduct purchases in a flexible manner in accordance with financial market conditions.

The average remaining maturity of the Bank's JGB purchases would be about 7-10 years.

Second, it would purchase exchange-traded funds (ETFs) and Japan real estate investment

trusts (J-REITs) so that their amounts outstanding would increase at annual paces of about 3

trillion yen and about 90 billion yen, respectively. And third, for CP and corporate bonds,

the Bank would maintain their amounts outstanding at about 2.2 trillion yen and about 3.2

trillion yen, respectively.

With respect to the Bank's thinking behind its future conduct of monetary policy,

many members shared the recognition that the Bank would continue with QQE, aiming to

achieve the price stability target of 2 percent, as long as it was necessary for maintaining

this target in a stable manner. These members continued that, in doing so, it would

examine both upside and downside risks to economic activity and prices, and make

adjustments as appropriate. Meanwhile, some members -- noting that interest rates had

recently been declining further under QQE -- said that, when examining risks, it was

necessary to closely monitor factors such as the effects this would have on financial

institutions' business conditions and the risk of a buildup of financial imbalances. A few

of these members noted that the feasibility of continuing asset purchases into the future

warranted attention, even though it seemed technically possible to continue such purchases

for some time.

17


-----

One member expressed the view that, if a rise were to occur in markets'

anticipation that QQE would continue for a protracted period or extreme additional

measures would be implemented in a situation where it was unlikely that the price stability

target would be achieved in about two years, this could lead to economic instability in the

medium to long term, such as through a buildup of financial imbalances. On this basis,

this member argued that (1) the Bank should change the guidelines for money market

operations and asset purchases back to those employed before the expansion of QQE; and

(2) with regard to the future conduct of monetary policy, the Bank should reconsider the

time frame for achieving the price stability target and change the expression representing

the Bank's commitment by stating that the time frame for continuing QQE should be

restricted to about two years, and that thereafter the Bank would review the monetary easing

measures in a flexible manner.

**B. Treatment of the Loan Support Program and Other Measures**

Regarding the treatment of the Loan Support Program and other measures,

members shared the recognition that financial institutions had continued to make active use

of the Stimulating Bank Lending Facility and the Growth-Supporting Funding Facility since

the enhancement decided in February 2014, and that these facilities were playing a

significant role in encouraging private financial institutions' efforts to strengthen the

foundations for economic growth and to increase their lending. On this basis, members

concurred that it was appropriate to extend and enhance the Loan Support Program and

other measures, given, for example, the demand from financial institutions. Some

members said that, in expanding the range of eligible financial institutions for the Loan

Support Program, it was important to establish a framework, such as for assuring the

appropriate use of funds.

Based on this discussion, members agreed to make the following amendments to

the Stimulating Bank Lending Facility, the Growth-Supporting Funding Facility, the

funds-supplying operation to support financial institutions in disaster areas, and the

temporary rules regarding the eligibility standards for debt of companies in disaster areas.

First, the Bank would extend these measures by one year. Second, with regard to the main

rules for the Growth-Supporting Funding Facility, the Bank would increase the maximum

amount of funds that it could provide to each financial institution from 1 trillion yen to 2

18


-----

trillion yen, and also increase the maximum amount outstanding of its fund-provisioning as

a whole from 7 trillion yen to 10 trillion yen. And third, as for the Stimulating Bank

Lending Facility and the Growth-Supporting Funding Facility, the Bank would introduce a

new framework for enabling financial institutions that did not have a current account at the

Bank to use these facilities through their central organizations. Members concurred that

this would be made public as part of the Statement on Monetary Policy.

**V. Remarks by Government Representatives**

The representative from the Ministry of Finance made the following remarks.

(1) In the government's economic outlook for fiscal 2015 -- approved by the Cabinet on

January 12, 2015 -- the government projected that the real GDP growth rates for fiscal

2014 and 2015 would be around minus 0.5 percent and around plus 1.5 percent,

respectively, and that in fiscal 2015 the Japanese economy would recover, supported by

firm private demand, amid continued improvement in the employment and income

situation and further developments in the virtuous cycle of the economy.

(2) On December 27, 2014, the Cabinet had decided the Immediate Economic Measures for

Extending Virtuous Cycles to the Local Economies. The intention of these economic

measures was to ensure that the virtuous cycle of the economy got on the right track,

while seeking to realize both economic revitalization and fiscal consolidation, and that

the fruits of Abenomics spread throughout local economies. Based on these economic

measures, the Cabinet had decided the supplementary budget for fiscal 2014 at a scale

of about 3.1 trillion yen on January 9, 2015, and the budget for fiscal 2015 and an

outline for tax reform in fiscal 2015 on January 14. Regarding the budget for fiscal

2015, the government would (1) vigorously address issues in Japan -- for example,

vitalizing local economies, enhancing the social security system such as in terms of

support for childcare, and prioritizing measures with regard to public works aimed at

disaster prevention and reduction and at addressing the aging infrastructure -- and (2)

seek to thoroughly prioritize and streamline expenditures, including a review of the

natural increase in social security. The total size of the budget would be 96.342 trillion

yen, and the government would reduce the amount of newly issued government bonds

to 36.863 trillion yen for fiscal 2015, which represented a decrease of 4.387 trillion yen

from the amount in the initial budget for fiscal 2014. Based on this budget for fiscal

19


-----

2015, the government expected that the target of halving its primary balance deficit

relative to GDP could be achieved. As for the fiscal 2015 tax reform, the government

would take taxation measures, such as those toward (1) overcoming deflation and

economic revitalization -- for example, growth-oriented corporate tax reform; (2)

vitalizing local economies; and (3) realizing both economic revitalization and fiscal

soundness, such as measures to respond to the change in the timing of raising the

consumption tax rate. Through these measures, it would aim to achieve both

economic revitalization and fiscal consolidation.

(3) The government expected the Bank to continue to steadily pursue QQE and achieve the

price stability target of 2 percent at the earliest possible time.

The representative from the Cabinet Office made the following remarks.

(1) The Japanese economy was on a moderate recovery, while weakness could be seen

mainly in private consumption. In the government's economic outlook for fiscal 2015,

approved by the Cabinet on January 12, 2015, the government projected that the

economy would recover, supported by firm private demand, amid further developments

in the virtuous cycle of the economy, brought about mainly by pursuing various policies

and through government-labor-management initiatives. Based on this, the government

projected that the real and nominal GDP growth rates for fiscal 2015 would be around

1.5 percent and around 2.7 percent, respectively.

(2) With regard to prices, the government projected that, despite effects of the decline in

crude oil prices, the annual CPI inflation rate for fiscal 2015 would be approximately

1.4 percent, due in part to the effects of QQE, and that the GDP deflator would rise,

partly reflecting an improvement in the terms of trade; the government expected that the

Japanese economy would make steady progress toward overcoming deflation. As a

substantial decline in crude oil prices would exert different effects on the CPI for all

items, that for all items less food and energy, or the core-core CPI, and the GDP deflator,

the government deemed it important to make a comprehensive assessment of price

developments.

(3) The Cabinet had decided the Immediate Economic Measures for Extending Virtuous

Cycles to the Local Economies on December 27, 2014, and the supplementary budget

for fiscal 2014 on January 9, 2015. The government would seek to draw up these

20


-----

measures swiftly. The Cabinet had also decided the long-term vision as well as the

comprehensive strategy for overcoming population decline and vitalizing local

economy in Japan.

(4) On January 20, 2015, the Japan Business Federation (Keidanren) had released the

Report of the Committee on Management and Labor Policy, which indicated the basic

stance of corporate managers in the wage negotiations this spring. The report stated

that corporate managers were strongly encouraged to take a positive stance toward

raising wages, and the government had strong expectations that, as a result of

discussions between labor and management, wage increases would firmly take hold

again in 2015.

(5) The government expected the Bank to steadily work to achieve the price stability target

of 2 percent, while taking into account developments in economic activity and prices.

**VI. Votes**

**A. Vote on the Guideline for Money Market Operations**

Based on the above discussions, to reflect the majority view of the members, the

chairman formulated the following proposal and put it to a vote.

The Policy Board decided the proposal by a majority vote.

**The Chairman's Policy Proposal on the Guideline for Money Market Operations:**

1. The guideline for money market operations for the intermeeting period ahead will be as

follows.

The Bank of Japan will conduct money market operations so that the

monetary base will increase at an annual pace of about 80 trillion yen.

2. A public statement will be decided separately.

Votes for the proposal: Mr. H. Kuroda, Mr. K. Iwata, Mr. H. Nakaso, Mr. R. Miyao,

Mr. Y. Morimoto, Ms. S. Shirai, Mr. K. Ishida, and Mr. T. Sato.

Votes against the proposal: Mr. T. Kiuchi.

21


-----

**B. Vote on the Guideline for Asset Purchases**

To reflect the majority view of the members, the chairman formulated the

following proposal to continue with the guideline for asset purchases and put it to a vote:

(1) to purchase JGBs so that their amount outstanding would increase at an annual pace of

about 80 trillion yen, to conduct purchases in a flexible manner in accordance with financial

market conditions -- with a view to encouraging a decline in interest rates across the entire

yield curve -- and to make the average remaining maturity of the Bank's JGB purchases

about 7-10 years; (2) to purchase ETFs and J-REITs so that their amounts outstanding

would increase at annual paces of about 3 trillion yen and about 90 billion yen, respectively;

and (3) to maintain the amounts outstanding of CP and corporate bonds at about 2.2 trillion

yen and about 3.2 trillion yen, respectively.

The Policy Board decided the proposal by a majority vote.

Votes for the proposal: Mr. H. Kuroda, Mr. K. Iwata, Mr. H. Nakaso, Mr. R. Miyao,

Mr. Y. Morimoto, Ms. S. Shirai, Mr. K. Ishida, and Mr. T. Sato.

Votes against the proposal: Mr. T. Kiuchi.

**VII. Discussion on the Statement on Monetary Policy**

On the basis of the above discussions, members discussed the Statement on

Monetary Policy, and formed a majority view. Mr. T. Kiuchi, however, formulated a

proposal, and thus two proposals were submitted.

**A. Mr. T. Kiuchi's Policy Proposal**

With regard to the draft of the statement that formed a majority view, Mr. T.

Kiuchi proposed changing the current expression of the Bank's future monetary policy

stance that "the Bank will continue with QQE, aiming to achieve the price stability target of

2 percent, as long as it is necessary for maintaining that target in a stable manner. It will

examine both upside and downside risks to economic activity and prices, and make

adjustments as appropriate" to a new expression that "the Bank will aim to achieve the price

stability target of 2 percent in the medium to long term. On this basis, it will designate

QQE as an intensive measure with a time frame of about two years, and thereafter will

22


-----

review the monetary easing measures in a flexible manner." The proposal was then put to

a vote.

The proposal was defeated by a majority vote.

Votes for the proposal: Mr. T. Kiuchi.

Votes against the proposal: Mr. H. Kuroda, Mr. K. Iwata, Mr. H. Nakaso, Mr. R.

Miyao, Mr. Y. Morimoto, Ms. S. Shirai, Mr. K. Ishida, and Mr. T. Sato.

**B. The Chairman's Policy Proposal**

The chairman formulated the Statement on Monetary Policy, and put it to a vote.

The Policy Board decided the text by a unanimous vote. It was confirmed that the

statement would be released immediately after the meeting (see Attachment).

**VIII. Approval of the Minutes of the Monetary Policy Meeting**

The Policy Board approved unanimously the minutes of the Monetary Policy

Meeting of December 18 and 19, 2014 for release on January 26, 2015.

23


-----

Attachment

January 21, 2015

Bank of Japan

**Statement on Monetary Policy**

1. At the Monetary Policy Meeting held today, the Policy Board of the Bank of Japan decided,

by an 8-1 majority vote, to set the following guideline for money market operations for the

intermeeting period:[[Note 1]]

The Bank of Japan will conduct money market operations so that the monetary base will

increase at an annual pace of about 80 trillion yen.

2. With regard to the asset purchases, the Bank decided, by an 8-1 majority vote, to continue

with the following guidelines:[[Note 2]]

a) The Bank will purchase Japanese government bonds (JGBs) so that their amount

outstanding will increase at an annual pace of about 80 trillion yen. With a view to

encouraging a decline in interest rates across the entire yield curve, the Bank will conduct

purchases in a flexible manner in accordance with financial market conditions. The

average remaining maturity of the Bank's JGB purchases will be about 7-10 years.

b) The Bank will purchase exchange-traded funds (ETFs) and Japan real estate investment

trusts (J-REITs) so that their amounts outstanding will increase at annual paces of about 3

trillion yen and about 90 billion yen respectively.

c) As for CP and corporate bonds, the Bank will maintain their amounts outstanding at about

2.2 trillion yen and about 3.2 trillion yen respectively.

3. The Policy Board also decided, by a unanimous vote, to make the following amendments to

the Fund-Provisioning Measure to Stimulate Bank Lending (hereafter "Stimulating Bank

Lending Facility"), the Fund-Provisioning Measure to Support Strengthening the Foundations

for Economic Growth (hereafter "Growth-Supporting Funding Facility"), the

Funds-Supplying Operation to Support Financial Institutions in Disaster Areas affected by the

Great East Japan Earthquake, and the Temporary Rules regarding the Eligibility Standards for

Debt of Companies in Disaster Areas, all of which were due to expire shortly:[7]

7 Amendments to relevant principal terms and conditions will be decided at a future Monetary Policy Meeting.

24


-----

a) The Bank will extend these measures by one year.

b) With regard to the main rules for the Growth-Supporting Funding Facility, the Bank will

increase the maximum amount of funds that it can provide to each financial institution

from 1 trillion yen to 2 trillion yen, and also increase the maximum amount outstanding

of its fund-provisioning as a whole from 7 trillion yen to 10 trillion yen.

c) As for the Stimulating Bank Lending Facility and the Growth-Supporting Funding

Facility, the Bank will introduce a new framework for enabling financial institutions,

which do not have a current account at the Bank, to use these facilities through their

central organizations.

4. Japan's economy has continued to recover moderately as a trend, and effects such as those of

the decline in demand following the front-loaded increase prior to the consumption tax hike

have been waning on the whole. Overseas economies -- mainly advanced economies -
have been recovering, albeit with a lackluster performance still seen in part. In this situation,

exports have shown signs of picking up. Business fixed investment has been on a moderate

increasing trend as corporate profits have improved. Public investment has more or less

leveled off at a high level. Private consumption has remained resilient as a trend with the

employment and income situation improving steadily, and the effects of the decline in

demand following the front-loaded increase have been waning on the whole. Housing

investment, which continued to decline following the front-loaded increase, has recently

started to bottom out. Against the backdrop of these developments in demand both at home

and abroad, industrial production has bottomed out, due in part to the progress in inventory

adjustments. Meanwhile, financial conditions are accommodative. On the price front, the

year-on-year rate of increase in the consumer price index (CPI, all items less fresh food),

excluding the direct effects of the consumption tax hike, is in the range of 0.5-1.0 percent.

Inflation expectations appear to be rising on the whole from a somewhat longer-term

perspective.

5. With regard to the outlook, Japan's economy is expected to continue its moderate recovery

trend, and the effects such as those of the decline in demand following the front-loaded

increase prior to the consumption tax hike are expected to dissipate. The year-on-year rate

of increase in the CPI is likely to slow for the time being, reflecting the decline in energy

prices.

25


-----

6. Compared with the forecasts presented in the October 2014 _Outlook for Economic Activity_

_and Prices, the growth rate will likely be lower for fiscal 2014, but will likely be higher for_

fiscal 2015 and 2016. With regard to the CPI, the outlook for the underlying trend remains

unchanged, but the year-on-year rate of increase will likely be lower toward fiscal 2015, due

to the significant decline in crude oil prices. The rate of increase for fiscal 2016 will likely

be more or less unchanged from the October forecast.[8]

7. Risks to the outlook include developments in the emerging and commodity-exporting

economies, the prospects regarding the debt problem and the risk of low inflation rates being

protracted in Europe, and the pace of recovery in the U.S. economy.

8. Quantitative and qualitative monetary easing (QQE) has been exerting its intended effects,

and the Bank will continue with the QQE, aiming to achieve the price stability target of 2

percent, as long as it is necessary for maintaining that target in a stable manner. It will

examine both upside and downside risks to economic activity and prices, and make

adjustments as appropriate.[[Note 3]]

[Note 1] Voting for the action: Mr. H. Kuroda, Mr. K. Iwata, Mr. H. Nakaso, Mr. R. Miyao, Mr. Y. Morimoto,

Ms. S. Shirai, Mr. K. Ishida, and Mr. T. Sato. Voting against the action: Mr. T. Kiuchi. The
member voting against the action considered that the guideline for money market operations before
the decision regarding the "Expansion of the Quantitative and Qualitative Monetary Easing" on
October 31, 2014 was appropriate.

[Note 2] Voting for the action: Mr. H. Kuroda, Mr. K. Iwata, Mr. H. Nakaso, Mr. R. Miyao, Mr. Y. Morimoto,

Ms. S. Shirai, Mr. K. Ishida, and Mr. T. Sato. Voting against the action: Mr. T. Kiuchi. The
member voting against the action considered that the guideline for asset purchases before the
decision regarding the "Expansion of the Quantitative and Qualitative Monetary Easing" on October
31, 2014 was appropriate.

[Note 3] Mr. T. Kiuchi proposed that the Bank will aim to achieve the price stability target of 2 percent in the

medium to long term and designate the QQE as an intensive measure with a time frame of about two
years. The proposal was defeated by an 8-1 majority vote. Voting for the proposal: Mr. T. Kiuchi.
Voting against the proposal: Mr. H. Kuroda, Mr. K. Iwata, Mr. H. Nakaso, Mr. R. Miyao,
Mr. Y. Morimoto, Ms. S. Shirai, Mr. K. Ishida, and Mr. T. Sato.

8 In this interim assessment, given the significant change in crude oil prices, the Policy Board members

made their forecasts based on the following assumption about crude oil prices. Dubai crude oil prices
are expected to rise moderately from the recent 55 U.S. dollars per barrel to about 70 dollars per barrel
toward the end of the projection period. In this case, the contribution of energy items to the CPI (all
items less fresh food) is estimated to be mostly in the range of minus 0.7 to minus 0.8 percentage point
for fiscal 2015, and mostly in the range of plus 0.1 to plus 0.2 percentage point for fiscal 2016.

26


-----

**Forecasts of the Majority of Policy Board Members**

CPI (all items less
Real GDP

fresh food)

-0.6 to -0.4 +2.9 to +3.2
Fiscal 2014

[-0.5] [+2.9]

+0.2 to +0.7 +3.1 to +3.4
Forecasts made in October 2014

[+0.5] [+3.2]

+1.8 to +2.3 +0.4 to +1.3
Fiscal 2015

[+2.1] [+1.0]

+1.2 to +1.7 +1.8 to +2.6
Forecasts made in October 2014

[+1.5] [+2.4]

+1.5 to +1.7 +1.5 to +2.3
Fiscal 2016

[+1.6] [+2.2]

+1.0 to +1.4 +1.9 to +3.0
Forecasts made in October 2014

[+1.2] [+2.8]

Notes: 1. Figures in brackets indicate the median of the Policy Board members' forecasts (point estimates).


(Appendix 1)

y/y % chg.

|Col1|Col2|Col3|y/y % chg.|Col5|
|---|---|---|---|---|
|||Real GDP|CPI (all items less Excluding the effects fresh food) of the consumption tax hikes||
|||||Excluding the effects of the consumption tax hikes|
|Fiscal 2014 Forecasts made in October 2014||-0.6 to -0.4 [-0.5]|+2.9 to +3.2 [+2.9]|+0.9 to +1.2 [+0.9]|
||Forecasts made in October 2014|+0.2 to +0.7 [+0.5]|+3.1 to +3.4 [+3.2]|+1.1 to +1.4 [+1.2]|
|Fiscal 2015 Forecasts made in October 2014||+1.8 to +2.3 [+2.1]|+0.4 to +1.3 [+1.0]||
||Forecasts made in October 2014|+1.2 to +1.7 [+1.5]|+1.8 to +2.6 [+2.4]|+1.1 to +1.9 [+1.7]|
|Fiscal 2016 Forecasts made in October 2014||+1.5 to +1.7 [+1.6]|+1.5 to +2.3 [+2.2]||
||Forecasts made in October 2014|+1.0 to +1.4 [+1.2]|+1.9 to +3.0 [+2.8]|+1.2 to +2.3 [+2.1]|


2. The forecasts of the majority of the Policy Board members are constructed as follows: each Policy Board member's

forecast takes the form of a point estimate -- namely, the figure to which he or she attaches the highest probability of
realization. These forecasts are then shown as a range, with the highest figure and the lowest figure excluded. The
range does not indicate the forecast errors.

3. Individual Policy Board members make their forecasts assuming the effects of past policy decisions and with reference

to views incorporated in financial markets regarding future policy.

4. Dubai crude oil prices are expected to rise moderately from the recent 55 U.S. dollars per barrel to about 70 dollars per

barrel toward the end of the projection period. In this case, the contribution of energy items to the CPI (all items less
fresh food) is estimated to be mostly in the range of minus 0.7 to minus 0.8 percentage point for fiscal 2015, and mostly
in the range of plus 0.1 to plus 0.2 percentage point for fiscal 2016.

5. The consumption tax hike in April 2014 -- to 8 percent -- and the one scheduled for April 2017 -- to 10 percent -- are

incorporated in the forecasts. In terms of the outlook for the CPI, individual Policy Board members make their forecasts
based on figures excluding the direct effects of the consumption tax hikes.

6. The forecasts for the CPI that incorporate the direct effects of the consumption tax hikes are constructed as follows.

First, the contribution to prices from each tax hike is mechanically computed on the assumption that the tax increase
will be fully passed on for all taxable items. The CPI will be pushed up by 2.0 percentage points for fiscal 2014.
Second, this figure is added to the forecasts made by the Policy Board members.

The forecasts as of October 2014 assumed that the consumption tax -- after having risen to 8 percent in April 2014

-- would rise to 10 percent in October 2015. The contribution to prices from each tax hike was 2.0 percentage points for
fiscal 2014 and 0.7 percentage point for both fiscal 2015 and fiscal 2016. These figures were added to the forecasts
made by the Policy Board members.

7. The ranges shown below include the forecasts of all Policy Board members.

y/y % chg.

Excluding the effects

CPI (all items less
Real GDP of the consumption

fresh food)

tax hikes

Fiscal 2014 -0.7 to -0.3 +2.9 to +3.3 +0.9 to +1.3

Forecasts made in October 2014 +0.1 to +1.0 +3.0 to +3.4 +1.0 to +1.4

Fiscal 2015 +1.3 to +2.3 +0.3 to +1.4

Forecasts made in October 2014 +0.8 to +1.8 +1.6 to +2.7 +0.9 to +2.0

Fiscal 2016 +0.7 to +2.0 +0.9 to +2.3

Forecasts made in October 2014 +0.6 to +1.6 +1.6 to +3.0 +0.9 to +2.3

27

|Col1|Col2|Col3|y/y % chg.|Col5|
|---|---|---|---|---|
|||Real GDP|Excluding the effects CPI (all items less of the consumption fresh food) tax hikes||
|||||Excluding the effects of the consumption tax hikes|
|Fiscal 2014 Forecasts made in October 2014||-0.7 to -0.3|+2.9 to +3.3|+0.9 to +1.3|
||Forecasts made in October 2014|+0.1 to +1.0|+3.0 to +3.4|+1.0 to +1.4|
|Fiscal 2015 Forecasts made in October 2014||+1.3 to +2.3|+0.3 to +1.4||
||Forecasts made in October 2014|+0.8 to +1.8|+1.6 to +2.7|+0.9 to +2.0|
|Fiscal 2016 Forecasts made in October 2014||+0.7 to +2.0|+0.9 to +2.3||
||Forecasts made in October 2014|+0.6 to +1.6|+1.6 to +3.0|+0.9 to +2.3|


-----

(Appendix 2)


**Forecast Distribution Charts of Policy Board Members**

(1) Real GDP

y/y % chg.

4.5

4.0

3.5

3.0

2.5

2.0

1.5

1.0

0.5

0.0

Actual

-0.5

-1.0

-1.5

-2.0

-2.5

-3.0

-3.5

-4.0

FY 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015

(2) CPI (All Items Less Fresh Food)

y/y % chg.

3.0

2.5

2.0

1.5

1.0

0.5

Actual

0.0

-0.5

-1.0

-1.5

-2.0

FY 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015

Notes: 1. The Forecast Distribution Charts are based on the aggregated probability distributions (i.e. the Risk Balance Charts)

compiled from the distributions of individual policy board members, and constructed as follows. First, the upper and

lower 10 percentiles of the aggregated distributions are trimmed. Second, the various percentiles of the aggregated
distributions are color-coded as below.


Upper 30% to 40%
Upper 40% to lower 40%

and lower 30% to 40%


Upper 20% to 30%

and lower 20% to 30%


Upper 10% to 20%

and lower 10% to 20%


2. For the process of compilation of the Risk Balance Charts, see the box on page 9 of the April 2008 Outlook

_for Economic Activity and Prices ._

3. The circles in the bar charts indicate the median of the Policy Board members' forecasts (point estimates). The

vertical lines in the bar charts indicate the range of the forecasts of the majority of Policy Board members.

4. The forecast for the CPI excludes the direct effects of the scheduled consumption tax hikes.

28


-----

