Not to be released until 8:50 a.m.
Japan Standard Time on Monday,
April 14, 2008.

April 14, 2008

Bank of Japan

# Minutes of the Monetary Policy Meeting
## on March 6 and 7, 2008

(English translation prepared by the Bank's staff based on the Japanese original)


-----

Please contact the Bank of Japan at the address below in advance to request permission

when reproducing or copying the content of this document for commercial purposes.

Secretariat of the Policy Board, Bank of Japan

C.P.O. Box 203, Tokyo 100-8630, Japan

Please credit the source when quoting, reproducing, or copying the content of this

document.


-----

-----

Mr. T. Sekine, Senior Economist, Monetary Affairs Department

Mr. H. Nakaso, Director-General, Financial Markets Department

Mr. K. Momma, Director-General, Research and Statistics Department

Mr. E. Maeda, Associate Director-General, Research and Statistics Department

Mr. T. Idesawa, Director-General, International Department

Secretariat of the Monetary Policy Meeting

Mr. K. Osugi, Director-General, Secretariat of the Policy Board

Mr. K. Shigyoh, Director, Deputy Head of Secretarial Services for the Board, Secretariat

of the Policy Board

Mr. S. Yamaguchi, Senior Economist, Monetary Affairs Department

Mr. K. Suzuki, Senior Economist, Monetary Affairs Department

2


-----

-----

The economy of the euro area continued to grow, although the pace of growth was

slowing moderately. Business fixed investment was on an upward trend. Meanwhile,

export growth seemed to be losing momentum. Housing investment continued to

decelerate, and due to the rise in energy and food prices and to uncertainty about the

outlook for the economy, private consumption was somewhat weak. As for prices, the

year-on-year rate of increase in the Harmonized Index of Consumer Prices (HICP)

continued to be relatively high, reflecting the rise in energy and food prices. The U.K.

economy continued to grow, albeit with a moderate slowing of the pace of growth.

In China, both domestic and external demand continued to expand strongly.

India's economy continued to show relatively high growth, although it was slowing

moderately. The NIEs and ASEAN economies continued to expand at a moderate pace on

the whole.

In global financial markets, a fall in prices of securitized products and a decrease

in their market liquidity had continued amid persisting market concerns about the effects of

possible further losses that financial institutions might incur and of downgrading of

monoline insurers. Credit spreads such as corporate bond spreads and credit default swap

(CDS) premiums had continued to widen. In the U.S. and European financial markets,

stock prices fell slightly and long-term interest rates decreased, compared with the time of

the previous meeting. In emerging economies, stock prices had fallen somewhat, and

yield differentials between their sovereign bonds and U.S. Treasuries had expanded slightly,

mainly due to the decline in U.S. interest rates.

**D. Economic and Financial Developments in Japan**

1. Economic developments

Exports had continued to increase against the background of the expansion of

overseas economies. They rose substantially in January 2008 compared with the average

level of the October-December quarter, after exhibiting high growth throughout the second

half of 2007. Exports were expected to continue to rise, as overseas economies were likely

to expand although at a slower pace.

As for domestic private demand, business fixed investment had continued to trend

upward, as corporate profits had remained high although they were leveling off. Business

fixed investment was expected to continue to trend upward since the increasing trend of

4


-----

domestic and external demand and the generally high level of corporate profits were likely

to be maintained.

Private consumption had been firm. With regard to durable consumer goods,

sales of electrical appliances had continued to increase. The number of new passenger-car

registrations had been picking up moderately since the summer of 2007, supported mainly

by the successive introduction of new models. Sales at department stores and

supermarkets, which primarily sold nondurable and semi-durable consumer goods, had been

more or less unchanged on the whole. As for services consumption, outlays for travel had

generally been firm, and sales in the food service industry had also been firm on the whole

although they had lost momentum compared with some time ago. Consumer sentiment

had become generally cautious, due mainly to rises in prices of petroleum products and food

products and the weakness in stock prices. Private consumption was expected to follow a

gradual uptrend, reflecting the gradual increase in household income.

Housing investment had remained at a low level, although there had been signs of

recovery. The number of housing starts, a leading indicator of housing investment, was

starting to clearly show a recovery. Housing investment was expected to recover

gradually, although, with the effects of the revision of the Building Standard Law persisting,

it was likely to remain sluggish for the time being.

Production had been more or less flat lately, partly in reaction to the relatively

large increase in the second half of 2007. In light of developments in demand both at

home and abroad, production was expected to remain more or less flat in the short run and

increase thereafter. Inventories had been more or less in balance with shipments.

As for employment and income, household income had continued rising

moderately, supported by the increase in the number of employees. Nominal wages per

worker, however, had remained somewhat weak. The gradual increase in household

income was likely to continue against the background that firms continued to feel a shortage

of labor and corporate profits were expected to remain generally high.

On the price front, international commodity prices continued to increase. Crude

oil prices had continued to be strong, partly due to the speculative inflow of funds. Prices

of crops such as wheat had also continued to increase. Prices of nonferrous metals had

been softening since the fall of 2007, partly due to concerns about a further slowdown in the

U.S. economy, but they had recently rebounded. The three-month rate of change in the

5


-----

domestic corporate goods price index (CGPI) had been positive, mainly due to the rise in

international commodity prices, and the CGPI was likely to continue increasing for the time

being. The year-on-year rate of change in the CPI (excluding fresh food) had been rising

since around the end of 2007, and was projected to follow a positive trend due to the rise in

prices of petroleum products and food products in the short run and the positive output gap

in the longer run.

2. Financial environment

The environment for corporate finance was accommodative. Credit demand in

the private sector had been more or less flat. The issuing environment for CP and

corporate bonds had been favorable as a whole, although issuance spreads on those issued

by firms with low credit ratings had expanded slightly. The lending attitudes of private

banks had continued to be accommodative, and the amount outstanding of lending by

private banks had been increasing moderately. The amount outstanding of CP and

corporate bonds issued had been above the previous year's level. Funding costs for firms

had been more or less unchanged. The year-on-year rate of growth in the money stock

(M2+CDs) was around 2 percent.

**II. Summary of Discussions by the Policy Board on Economic and Financial**

**Developments**

**A. Economic Developments**

On the current state of Japan's economy, members agreed on the following

assessment: the economy was expanding moderately as a trend, although the pace of growth

was slowing mainly due to the drop in housing investment and the effects of high energy

and materials prices; the virtuous circle of growth in production, income, and spending

remained basically intact, and the economy was likely to continue expanding moderately,

although the pace of growth was likely to slow for the time being; however, due attention

should continue to be paid to factors such as uncertainty regarding future developments in

overseas economies and global financial markets, and to the effects of high energy and

materials prices.

Members agreed that, although overseas economies continued to expand, albeit at

a slower pace, downside risks, particularly to the U.S. economy, had increased against the

6


-----

background of the continuing instability of global financial markets.

Members said that adjustments in global financial markets had persisted and at the

same time had intensified, reflecting uncertainties regarding future developments in the

global economy in addition to market participants' concerns about further losses incurred by

financial institutions and the creditworthiness of U.S. monoline insurers. Many members

said that credit spreads such as corporate bond spreads and CDS premiums were widening

further, and stock prices were fluctuating widely. Some of these members added that the

adjustments stemming from the U.S. subprime mortgage problem had gradually spread to a

broader range of products, including securitized products backed by commercial real estate

loans and municipal bonds. One member commented that developments in money

markets, which had remained stable since the end of 2007, warranted attention as interest

rates on term instruments had recently begun rising again due to the widening of credit

spreads. Based on the discussion, members agreed that they needed to continue to closely

monitor developments in financial markets, which might be affected by financial statements

of and capital reinforcement by U.S. and European financial institutions.

With regard to the U.S. economy, members concurred that a slowdown in the

economy had become more evident. Many members said that adjustments in the housing

market were still continuing as seen in the fact that the decline in home prices had

accelerated amid the continued decline in housing starts and sales. Members agreed that

private consumption had recently been more or less flat, while business fixed investment

remained on a gradual uptrend. Some members said that deterioration in business and

consumer sentiment had become more evident. Many members were concerned that

financial institutions might incur further losses and consequent tightening of their lending

standards might exert downward pressure on the U.S. economy. One of these members

commented that there were growing concerns regarding the outlook for investment in

commercial real estate, one of the driving forces of business fixed investment. Based on

the above discussion, members shared the view that downside risks to the U.S. economy

were growing. Meanwhile, some members added that the year-on-year rate of increase in

both the CPI for all items and the core CPI had stayed elevated, and there remained

inflationary risks.

With regard to European economies, members shared the view that the economy

of the euro area continued to grow, although the pace of growth was slowing moderately.

7


-----

Some members said that attention should be paid to the downside risks, particularly the

effects of the disruptions in global financial markets and the consequent tightening of

financial institutions' lending standards.

On Asian economies, members concurred that China and India continued to show

high growth, and that the NIEs and ASEAN economies continued to expand at a moderate

pace on the whole. One member expressed the view that, although it was certain that the

deterioration in the U.S. economy would affect the global economy negatively, there would

be a significant time lag before the effects materialized and the negative impact would not

be great given that emerging economies were enjoying high growth led mainly by domestic

demand.

Regarding global price developments, some members were of the opinion that

there were upside risks worldwide given the surge in international commodity prices,

particularly crude oil prices, caused mainly by vigorous demand from emerging economies

and a speculative inflow of funds to the commodity markets. One of these members

pointed out that there were growing concerns over inflation in U.S. and European financial

markets.

Members concurred that Japan's exports had continued to increase, as overseas

economies were expanding although at a slower pace, and they were likely to continue to

increase. Some members noted that, although exports to the United States were

decelerating, those to Europe, Asia, and the Middle East had remained strong. One of

these members added that the uptrend in Japan's exports was likely to continue, although

the pace of growth was likely to slow somewhat due to the global economic slowdown.

As for domestic private demand, members agreed that business fixed investment

had continued to trend upward, as corporate profits had remained high although they were

leveling off. They also shared the view that business fixed investment was likely to

continue to trend upward since the increasing trend of domestic and external demand and

the generally high level of corporate profits were likely to be maintained. Many members,

however, commented that the growth of profits of firms, particularly small firms, was

slowing reflecting the rise in materials prices and the appreciation of the yen, and it seemed

that their stance on fixed investment had become cautious. A few members said that firms'

profits and their stance on fixed investment for fiscal 2008 should be carefully monitored by,

for example, examining the upcoming March _Tankan (Short-Term Economic Survey of_

8


-----

Enterprises in Japan).

Members concurred that private consumption had been firm and was likely to

follow a gradual uptrend, reflecting the gradual increase in household income. A few

members noted that consumer sentiment had become cautious given the ongoing rise in the

prices of daily necessities, such as petroleum products and food products. One member

said that indicators relating to private consumption had been firm so far even though

consumer sentiment had become cautious, and expressed the view that this was attributable

partly to the fact that the employment situation remained favorable.

As for employment and income, members agreed that household income had

continued rising moderately, supported by the increase in the number of employees. They

also concurred that the gradual increase in household income was likely to continue against

the background that firms continued to feel a shortage of labor and corporate profits were

expected to remain generally high. Some members said that the year-on-year rate of

change in regular payments had been positive, as the effects of retirement of baby boomers

had almost dissipated. One of these members added that a marked increase in wages

nevertheless remained unlikely, since small and medium-sized firms were taking great care

to prevent labor costs from increasing.

Members agreed that housing investment had remained at a low level, although

there had been signs of recovery such as the improvement in the number of housing starts.

They were of the opinion that housing investment was likely to be sluggish for the time

being but recover gradually thereafter. Some members, however, said that, as there was

some weakness in sales of housing, particularly condominiums, partly due to a rise in prices

of building materials and sluggishness in the improvement in housing affordability, the

future pace and extent of recovery in housing investment were uncertain.

Members agreed that production had been more or less flat lately, partly in

reaction to the relatively large increase in the second half of 2007. Some members noted

that this was due mainly to the fact that the high level of production of IT-related goods,

which had continued since the completion of inventory adjustments, was coming to an end,

as was the accelerated production of automobiles to make up for the disruption caused by

the earthquake in Niigata Prefecture. A few members said that inventories had been more

or less in balance with shipments, and it seemed that the upward trend in production was

being basically maintained. One of these members added that exports were likely to

9


-----

continue to increase, and this strongly supported the view that the upward trend in

production would continue. One member expressed the opinion that a significant

production adjustment was unlikely, judging from anecdotal information from firms. A

different member commented that it was too early to conclude that the recent developments

in production suggested a change in its trend, but careful attention should continue to be

paid to the global economic slowdown and its effects on domestic production.

Members discussed the effects on Japan's overall economy of the deterioration in

the terms of trade resulting from the rise in energy and materials prices. A few members

said that, by depressing corporate profits and wages, it had reduced the economy's capacity

to generate income. One of these members added that this was already evidenced in a

lower growth rate of real gross domestic income. One member commented that, although

deterioration in the terms of trade indeed caused an outflow of a country's income to

overseas economies, it should also be noted that it generally led to an increase in its exports

as well as a decrease in its imports, and in turn an increase in its real domestic output. A

different member noted that at present there were some positive factors that could absorb

the negative effect of the deterioration in the terms of trade: the high corporate profits of

Japanese firms and an expected increase in demand for Japanese products, especially from

oil-producing economies, reflecting the growing global economy. The member expressed

the opinion that the impact on the overall economy depended ultimately on the extent to

which these positive factors could absorb the negative effect of the deterioration in the

terms of trade.

As for prices, members said that the three-month rate of change in the CGPI had

been positive, mainly due to the rise in international commodity prices, and the CGPI was

likely to continue increasing for the time being.

Members concurred that the year-on-year rate of change in the CPI (excluding

fresh food) was likely to follow a positive trend due to the rise in prices of petroleum

products and food products in the short run and the positive output gap in the longer run.

One member said that the year-on-year rate of increase in the CPI (excluding fresh food)

was likely to continue to rise for the time being. A different member was of the view that,

although the appreciation of the yen would exert downward pressure on prices of imports,

its effect on domestic prices would be limited, given that many firms had been unable to

sufficiently pass on higher costs caused by the rise in prices of imported materials to sales

10


-----

prices.

**B. Financial Developments**

On financial developments in Japan, members concurred that the financial

environment remained accommodative. They also agreed that the issuing environment for

CP and corporate bonds had been favorable as a whole, although issuance spreads on those

issued by firms with low credit ratings had expanded slightly, and that the lending attitudes

of financial institutions had continued to be accommodative. A few members commented

that the effects of disruptions in global financial markets on the domestic financial

environment remained limited so far, but attention should be paid to slight deterioration

observed in credit conditions of small firms, financial institutions' lending attitudes with

regard to provision of loans to small firms, and the issuing environment for corporate bonds

with low credit ratings.

**III. Summary of Discussions on Monetary Policy for the Immediate Future**

On the guideline for money market operations for the intermeeting period ahead,

members agreed that, given the economic and financial situation, it would be appropriate to

maintain the current guideline that the Bank would encourage the uncollateralized overnight

call rate to remain at around 0.5 percent. They shared the following view: (1) the virtuous

circle of growth in production, income, and spending basically remained in place, and

Japan's economy was likely to continue expanding moderately with price stability; (2)

however, there remained considerable uncertainty regarding future developments in

overseas economies, global financial markets, and international commodity prices; (3) the

pace of growth of Japan's economy was slowing recently due to the effects of high energy

and materials prices in addition to the drop in housing investment; and (4) in this situation,

it was appropriate to carefully examine economic and financial developments at home and

abroad to grasp the situation more accurately. A few members said that the Bank should

continue to conduct money market operations flexibly and in a timely manner through the

fiscal year-end, giving due consideration to the situation of financial markets and individual

financial institutions, both at home and abroad.

Members concurred that their basic thinking on the monetary policy stance for the

future remained unchanged. They agreed that, as risk factors had been increasing both at

11


-----

home and abroad, the Bank should, in a forward-looking manner, assess the likelihood of

the projected future paths of the economy and prices, as well as both upside and downside

risks, and make policy decisions based on the assessment. One member said that the

sustainability of the virtuous circle of growth in production, income, and spending should

be closely examined, given that firms had recently become noticeably cautious. A

different member assessed the outlook for economic activity and prices as well as risks

from the "two perspectives," and expressed the following view: the scenario that Japan's

economy would return to a path of moderate expansion after a slowdown in the short run

remained unchanged; however, in addition to uncertainty regarding future developments in

the U.S. economy and global financial markets, the possibility that high energy and

materials prices might negatively affect small firms' performance and consumer sentiment

in Japan, another risk factor, was becoming stronger. Based on this view, the member

continued that, while maintaining the basic thinking regarding the conduct of monetary

policy, the Bank should flexibly take the policy action that was considered most appropriate

to the situation, based on a thorough assessment of the likelihood of the projected future

paths of the economy and prices, as well as both upside and downside risks. Another

member expressed the view that, although the current general direction of adjustment in the

policy interest rate was considered to be appropriate, in the future if the situation called for

an easing, the Bank should flexibly take an appropriate action.

**IV. Remarks by Government Representatives**

The representative from the Ministry of Finance made the following remarks.

(1) The government would like to acknowledge Governor Fukui and the two Deputy

Governors, whose term of office would expire on March 19, 2008, for the efforts they

had made since taking office in March 2003. They and the staff had been committed

to sound economic development through the maintenance of price stability. The

government would like to express its appreciation of their efforts over the past five

years.

(2) Japan's economic recovery had been at a more moderate pace recently, reflecting the

fact that housing construction remained at a low level, albeit with some recovery, and

corporate profits appeared to have stopped improving. Domestic corporate goods

prices had been rising due to increased materials prices. The trend of consumer prices

12


-----

had been only slightly upward although prices, particularly those of petroleum products,

had been rising recently.

(3) Given the current developments in economic activity and prices, the government would

like the Bank to continue to support the economy from the financial side so as to ensure

the sustainability of the ongoing economic recovery.

(4) Developments in the U.S. subprime mortgage problem, in crude oil prices, and in the

global economy, particularly the U.S. economy, should continue to be watched closely.

On February 20, 2008, the government released "Measures for Small- and

Medium-Sized Enterprises towards the End of the Fiscal Year." It included measures

to address issues faced by small firms, which had been significantly affected by the

surge in crude oil prices and the revision of the Building Standard Law. Particular

attention should be paid to developments in small firms. The government would like

the Bank to carefully monitor both the effects of developments in these areas on Japan's

economy and developments in financial markets, and continue to react appropriately to

changes in trends. The Ministry of Finance would also give due consideration to

developments in the economy and financial markets, both at home and abroad.

(5) Furthermore, the government would like the Bank to clearly explain to market

participants and the public its view regarding the current situation and future course of

Japan's economy and its thinking on the future conduct of monetary policy.

The representative from the Cabinet Office made the following remarks.

(1) Japan's economic recovery had been at a more moderate pace recently, as the slowdown

in export growth amid the continued sluggishness in private consumption and housing

construction had been depressing the growth in production. In addition, there were

overseas developments that could be risk factors to Japan's economy such as the

slowdown in the U.S. economy and the swings in global financial markets, both of

which had stemmed from the U.S. subprime mortgage problem. The weaknesses

observed in the domestic economy and the overseas developments were increasing the

downside risks to Japan's economy, and therefore future developments in Japan's

economy warranted even more careful attention. The trend of consumer prices had

been only slightly upward although prices, particularly those of petroleum products, had

been rising. The year-on-year pace of decrease in unit labor costs and the GDP

13


-----

deflator accelerated in the October-December quarter of 2007, suggesting that inflation

pressures stemming from domestic factors remained weak. In view of the severe

business environment surrounding small firms amid increasing downside risks to the

economy, the government released "Measures for Small- and Medium-Sized Enterprises

towards the End of the Fiscal Year." The government would continue to pay close

attention to developments in crude oil prices, the U.S. economy, and foreign exchange

rates.

(2) In order to ensure sustainable economic growth led by private demand and achieve a

stable inflation rate that would be compatible with that growth, it was important for the

government and the Bank to implement their policies based on the shared basic

perspective on macroeconomic management.

(3) The government would like to request the Bank to implement effective monetary policy

that was consistent with the government's policy efforts and outlook for the economy,

and to firmly support the economy from the financial side, paying due attention to

economic and price developments in view of downside risks to the outlook for

economic activity and prices.

**V. Votes**

Based on the above discussions, members agreed that it was appropriate to

maintain the current guideline for money market operations, which encouraged the

uncollateralized overnight call rate to remain at around 0.5 percent.

To reflect this view, the chairman formulated the following proposal and put it to

the vote.

**The Chairman's Policy Proposal on the Guideline for Money Market Operations:**

The guideline for money market operations for the intermeeting period ahead will

be as follows, and will be made public by the attached statement (see Attachment).

The Bank of Japan will encourage the uncollateralized overnight call rate

to remain at around 0.5 percent.

Votes for the proposal: Mr. T. Fukui, Mr. T. Muto, Mr. K. Iwata, Ms. M. Suda, Mr.

14


-----

-----

Attachment

March 7, 2008

Bank of Japan

At the Monetary Policy Meeting held today, the Bank of Japan decided, by a

unanimous vote,[[Note]] to set the following guideline for money market operations for the

intermeeting period:

The Bank of Japan will encourage the uncollateralized overnight call rate

to remain at around 0.5 percent.

[Note] Voting for the action: Mr. T. Fukui, Mr. T. Muto, Mr. K. Iwata, Ms. M. Suda, Mr. A. Mizuno,
Mr. K. G. Nishimura, Mr. T. Noda, Mr. S. Nakamura, and Mr. H. Kamezaki.
Voting against the action: None.

16


-----

