Not to be released until 8:50 a.m.
Japan Standard Time on Friday,
July 18, 2008.

July 18, 2008

Bank of Japan

# Minutes of the Monetary Policy Meeting
## on June 12 and 13, 2008

(English translation prepared by the Bank's staff based on the Japanese original)


-----

Please contact the Bank of Japan at the address below in advance to request permission

when reproducing or copying the content of this document for commercial purposes.

Secretariat of the Policy Board, Bank of Japan

P.O. Box 30, Nihonbashi, Tokyo 103-8660, Japan

Please credit the source when quoting, reproducing, or copying the content of this

document.


-----

A Monetary Policy Meeting of the Bank of Japan Policy Board was held in the

Head Office of the Bank of Japan in Tokyo on Thursday, June 12, 2008, from 2:00 p.m. to

4:45 p.m., and on Friday, June 13, from 9:00 a.m. to 12:19 p.m.[1]

**Policy Board Members Present**

**Mr. M. Shirakawa, Chairman, Governor of the Bank of Japan**

**Mr. K. G. Nishimura, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Japan**

**Ms. M. Suda**

**Mr. A. Mizuno**

**Mr. T. Noda**

**Mr. S. Nakamura**

**Mr. H. Kamezaki**

Government Representatives Present

Mr. H. Moriyama, Senior Vice Minister of Finance, Ministry of Finance[2]

Mr. M. Suzuki, Deputy Vice Minister for Policy Planning and Coordination, Ministry

of Finance[3]

Mr. J. Hamano, Vice Minister for Policy Coordination, Cabinet Office

Reporting Staff

Mr. H. Yamaguchi, Executive Director

Mr. A. Horii, Executive Director (Assistant Governor)

Mr. K. Ido, Executive Director

Mr. K. Yamamoto, Executive Director

Mr. M. Amamiya, Director-General, Monetary Affairs Department

Mr. S. Uchida, Associate Director-General, Monetary Affairs Department

Mr. T. Sekine, Senior Economist, Monetary Affairs Department

1 The minutes of this meeting were approved by the Policy Board at the Monetary Policy Meeting
held on July 14 and 15, 2008 as "a document describing an outline of the discussion at the meeting"
stipulated in Article 20, paragraph 1 of the Bank of Japan Act of 1997. Those present are referred
to by their titles at the time of the meeting.
2 Mr. H. Moriyama was present on June 13.
3 Mr. M. Suzuki was present on June 12.

1


-----

Mr. H. Nakaso, Director-General, Financial Markets Department

Mr. K. Momma, Director-General, Research and Statistics Department

Mr. E. Maeda, Associate Director-General, Research and Statistics Department

Mr. T. Idesawa, Director-General, International Department

Secretariat of the Monetary Policy Meeting

Mr. K. Osugi, Director-General, Secretariat of the Policy Board

Mr. K. Shigyoh, Director, Deputy Head of Secretarial Services for the Board, Secretariat

of the Policy Board

Mr. S. Yamaguchi, Senior Economist, Monetary Affairs Department

Mr. A. Otani, Senior Economist, Monetary Affairs Department

2


-----

**I. Summary of Staff Reports on Economic and Financial Developments[4]**

**A. Money Market Operations in the Intermeeting Period**

The Bank conducted money market operations in accordance with the guideline

decided at the previous meeting on May 19 and 20, 2008.[5] As a result, the uncollateralized

overnight call rate had been at around 0.5 percent.

**B. Recent Developments in Financial Markets**

In the money market, Euroyen rates and interest rates on term instruments, such as

yields on financing bills (FBs) and treasury bills (TBs), had been more or less flat on the

whole. Interest rates on Euroyen futures, particularly those with distant contract months,

had increased further, albeit with some fluctuations.

Japanese stock prices continued to follow U.S. and European stock prices, but

recently they had been relatively firm compared with weakening U.S. and European prices.

The Nikkei 225 Stock Average had been moving at around 14,000 yen recently.

Long-term interest rates had risen further, reflecting those in the United States and

Europe and position adjustments by some financial institutions. They had recently been in

the 1.8-1.9 percent range.

The yen continued to depreciate against the U.S. dollar at a moderate pace, albeit

with some fluctuations, and had recently been traded in the range of 107-108 yen against

the dollar.

**C. Overseas Economic and Financial Developments**

Growth in the U.S. economy had remained sluggish. In the housing market,

significant adjustments were still continuing. Private consumption had continued to be

more or less unchanged, and business fixed investment had decelerated noticeably.

Industrial production and the number of employees had also been on a declining trend. As

for prices, the year-on-year rate of increase in consumer prices had been elevated, not only

in terms of the consumer price index (CPI) for all items but also the CPI for all items less

4 Reports were made based on information available at the time of the meeting.
5 The guideline was as follows:
The Bank of Japan will encourage the uncollateralized overnight call rate to remain at
around 0.5 percent.

3


-----

energy and food, or the core CPI, which registered a year-on-year rate of increase of 2.0-2.5

percent.

The economy of the euro area continued to grow, although the pace of growth was

slowing moderately. Business fixed investment remained on an upward trend. Exports

had been on a moderate uptrend, but survey results suggested that their growth was likely to

slow. In addition, housing investment had been on a declining trend, and the pace of

growth in private consumption had slowed. As for prices, the year-on-year rate of increase

in the Harmonized Index of Consumer Prices (HICP) had risen further, reflecting the rise in

energy and food prices. The U.K. economy had been decelerating mainly due to

significant adjustments in the housing market.

In China, both domestic and external demand continued to expand strongly.

India's economy continued to show relatively high growth, although it was slowing

moderately. The NIEs and ASEAN economies as a whole continued to expand at a

moderate pace, but exports continued to decelerate and some signs of a slowdown in

domestic demand had been observed recently. As for prices, the year-on-year rate of

increase in the CPI for all items had risen in many Asian economies due to the rise in

energy and food prices.

In global financial markets, instability continued due mainly to market concerns

about further losses that U.S. and European financial institutions might incur and about the

possibility of a further worsening of economic and price developments. In the U.S. and

European financial markets, stock prices had declined and long-term interest rates had

increased. Stock prices in emerging economies had also declined, due mainly to the rise in

inflation.

**D. Economic and Financial Developments in Japan**

1. Economic developments

Exports had continued to increase, although the pace of increase had slowed

somewhat lately. They were expected to continue to rise, as overseas economies were

likely to expand although at a slower pace.

As for domestic private demand, the pace of increase in business fixed investment

had become slower in a situation where corporate profits had been decreasing recently

mainly due to the deterioration in the terms of trade. Machinery orders, a leading indicator

4


-----

of machinery investment, had been more or less flat at a high level.

Private consumption had been firm. With regard to durable consumer goods, the

number of new passenger-car registrations had been essentially level, albeit with some

fluctuations, after picking up in the second half of 2007 supported mainly by the

introduction of new models. Sales of electrical appliances had continued to increase

steadily, assisted by strong sales of digital appliances such as flat-panel televisions. As for

nondurable and semi-durable consumer goods, sales at department stores had been slightly

weak, notably in apparel and general merchandise. Sales at supermarkets and convenience

stores, which consisted mainly of foodstuffs, had been more or less flat. As for services

consumption, outlays for travel had been firm, while sales in the food service industry had

been leveling off. Consumer sentiment had become more cautious as a result of

widespread rises in prices of petroleum products and food products. Private consumption

was expected to remain firm, reflecting the gradual increase in household income.

Housing investment had been recovering moderately. The number of housing

starts, a leading indicator of housing investment, continued to pick up until January 2008,

but the recovery then came to a halt. The slowdown in the pace of recovery seemed to be

mainly due to the softness in sales of condominiums and further increases in prices of

structural steel. The process of recovery in housing investment was expected to gradually

come to an end.

Production had been more or less flat and, in light of developments in demand

both at home and abroad, was expected to remain so in the short run and increase thereafter.

Inventories had been more or less in balance with shipments.

As for employment and income, in a situation where firms were strongly feeling a

shortage of labor, household income had continued rising moderately. The year-on-year

rate of change in nominal wages per worker had been positive lately. The gradual increase

in household income was likely to continue as it was expected that the labor shortage would

persist and production would start increasing gradually after being flat in the short run.

On the price front, international commodity prices had been rising. Crude oil

prices had continued to rise, reaching record highs, and prices of nonferrous metals and

crops had also been generally high. The three-month rate of change in the domestic

corporate goods price index (CGPI) was likely to continue increasing for the time being,

mainly due to the rise in international commodity prices. The year-on-year rate of change

5


-----

in the CPI (excluding fresh food) was around 1 percent. It was projected to continue to be

positive due to the rise in prices of petroleum products and food products in a situation

where aggregate supply and demand in the economy were more or less balanced.

2. Financial environment

The environment for corporate finance was accommodative. Credit demand in

the private sector had been increasing moderately. The issuing environment for CP and

corporate bonds had been favorable as a whole, although issuance spreads on those issued

by firms with low credit ratings had remained relatively high. The lending attitudes of

private banks had continued to be generally accommodative, and the amount outstanding of

lending by private banks had been increasing. The amount outstanding of CP and

corporate bonds issued had been above the previous year's level. Funding costs for firms

had been more or less unchanged. The financial positions of firms had continued to be

favorable as a whole, although those of small firms had deteriorated somewhat. The

year-on-year rate of growth in the money stock (M2) was around 2 percent.

**II. Summary of Discussions by the Policy Board on Economic and Financial**

**Developments**

**A. Economic Developments**

Members agreed on the following assessment of the current state of Japan's

economy: economic growth was slowing, mainly due to the effects of high energy and

materials prices; the economy was likely to grow at a slower pace for the time being and

follow a moderate growth path thereafter; however, due attention should continue to be paid

to uncertainty regarding future developments in overseas economies and global financial

markets and to the effects of high energy and materials prices.

Members agreed that, although overseas economies taken as a whole continued to

expand, downside risks remained elevated, mainly reflecting the disruptions in global

financial markets and sluggish growth in the U.S. economy.

Members shared the view that instability continued in global financial markets due

mainly to market concerns about further losses that U.S. and European financial institutions

might incur and about future developments in the U.S. economy and also due to rising

inflation worldwide. Some members said that credit spreads such as credit default swap

6


-----

(CDS) premiums had been widening again mainly due to announcements of losses at and

downgradings of U.S. and European financial institutions. One of these members added

that the degree of progress made in capital reinforcement by U.S. and European financial

institutions would be important. Some members said that strains in money markets still

continued despite measures taken by central banks to enhance liquidity provision.

Members shared the view that growth in the U.S. economy had remained sluggish

and that there was considerable uncertainty regarding when and how the negative feedback

loop between financial markets, asset prices, and economic activity would diminish.

Members agreed that adjustments in the housing market were still continuing as seen in a

faster pace of decline in home prices, and there were no signs of the housing market

bottoming out. Many members said that although retail sales had picked up recently

owing to tax rebates, they could not confirm improvement in the underlying trend of private

consumption given that the employment situation continued to deteriorate and consumer

sentiment had become more cautious.

With regard to European economies, members shared the view that the economy

of the euro area continued to grow, although the pace of growth was slowing moderately.

One member, however, noted that exports to the extra-euro area had been decelerating, and

a few members remarked that private consumption in the euro area had been relatively

weak recently. On Asian economies, members concurred that China and India continued

to show high growth, and that the NIEs and ASEAN economies as a whole continued to

expand at a moderate pace although the pace of growth in exports had started to slow and

there had been signs of a slowdown in domestic demand reflecting the rise in energy and

food prices.

Regarding global price developments, members agreed that inflation risks had

increased further worldwide given the high international commodity prices, particularly

crude oil prices. One member expressed the view that the rise in energy and materials

prices was basically caused by demand, particularly from emerging economies, exceeding

the supply under resource constraints. The member continued that global inflation

pressure would further increase unless those economies took appropriate policy measures.

A few members said that the pace of increase in interest rates might be lagging behind the

increase in global inflation. One of these members expressed the view that a factor behind

this was the fact that interest rate cuts in the United States had affected monetary policy in

7


-----

economies with currencies pegged de facto to the U.S. dollar. Some members expressed

the view that the market mechanism had been distorted by measures taken by emerging

economies such as provision of subsidies to control energy and crop prices. Meanwhile,

some members said that, in individual economies, developments in wages would be the key

to whether the rise in energy and materials prices led to second-round effects of inflation.

These members continued that the increasing upward pressure on wages in the euro area

and emerging economies should be watched closely.

Members concurred that Japan's exports had continued to increase to a broad range

of regions, although the pace of increase had slowed somewhat lately, and they were likely

to continue to increase. Some members expressed the view that the significant decline in

real exports in April from the previous month was likely to be a swing caused by technical

factors such as foreign exchange conversion and seasonal adjustments. One member said

that although there was no need to change the basic assessment that Japan's exports were

likely to continue to increase to a broad range of regions, the pace of increase was likely to

slow. Members concurred that, as there were downside risks to the outlook for the global

economy, developments in Japan's exports continued to require careful monitoring.

As for domestic private demand, members agreed that the pace of increase in

business fixed investment had become slower in a situation where corporate profits had

been decreasing recently due mainly to the rise in energy and materials prices. Many

members said that as could be seen in the Financial Statements Statistics of Corporations by

_Industry, Quarterly for the January-March quarter, which showed lower sales and profits_

than a year earlier, the effects of the deterioration in the terms of trade were becoming

apparent and the momentum of growth in business fixed investment had weakened. Some

of these members added that they would examine firms' attitude toward fixed investment -
particularly that of small firms, whose profit conditions were severe -- based on incoming

data including the June 2008 _Tankan (Short-Term Economic Survey of Enterprises in_

Japan) to be released at the beginning of July.

Members concurred that private consumption had been firm and was likely to

remain so, reflecting the gradual increase in household income. One member noted that

the recent increase in prices had reduced households' real purchasing power. A different

member said that as it had also depressed consumer sentiment and the decrease in corporate

profits might adversely affect the employment and income situation, future developments in

8


-----

private consumption should be watched closely.

As for employment and income, members agreed that household income had

continued rising moderately. One member expressed the view that, although labor market

conditions had recently softened slightly, the continued increase in the number of

employees had been supporting the growth of private consumption. A different member

said that the pace of increase in the number of employees in the Labour Force Survey had

been slowing recently, and thus this as well as the ratio of job offers to applicants, which

had declined, continued to warrant close monitoring.

Members agreed that, although housing investment had been recovering

moderately, the process of recovery was likely to gradually come to an end. One member

said that the effects on the recovery in housing investment of financial institutions' more

cautious lending standards for real estate firms and the increase in inventories of unsold

condominiums warranted attention. A different member noted that the rise in prices of

building materials had worsened the profitability of real estate firms, especially those

outside the major metropolitan areas.

Members agreed that production had been more or less flat lately, and was likely

to remain so in the short run and increase thereafter. One member, however, said that,

although inventories as a whole had been more or less in balance with shipments, it was

cause for concern that inventories of electronic parts and devices had increased somewhat

and there were signs of some sluggishness in final demand. A different member, while

expressing the view that it was unlikely for the time being that production as a whole would

decrease, said that production had been more affected at small firms than at large firms by

the deterioration in the terms of trade, as suggested by the recent decline in their labor input.

As for prices, members said that the three-month rate of change in the CGPI had

been positive, mainly due to the rise in international commodity prices, and the CGPI was

likely to continue increasing for the time being.

Members concurred that in April the year-on-year rate of increase in the CPI

(excluding fresh food) decreased due to the temporary expiration of the law levying the

provisional tax on, for example, gasoline, but the rate of increase was likely to rise again in

May due to the reinstatement of the law and the rise in prices of petroleum products and

food products. Members exchanged views regarding the effects on general prices of the

rise in energy and materials prices. A few members said that wages had not risen

9


-----

markedly in Japan and to date there had been no sign of second-round inflation effects from

the rise in prices of petroleum products and food products. One member noted that

inflation pressure from the demand side had not been strong and so far only prices of certain

items, notably energy and food products, had been rising. Some members, on the other

hand, expressed the view that firms had gradually become more inclined to pass on higher

costs to sales prices, since consumers were becoming accustomed to price increases.

Based on these assessments of the situation, members agreed that developments in prices

and also in consumers' inflation expectations and firms' price-setting behavior should be

watched even more closely, amid the continuing surge in international commodity prices.

**B. Financial Developments**

Members concurred that financial conditions in Japan remained accommodative.

They also agreed that the issuing environment for CP and corporate bonds had been

favorable as a whole, although issuance spreads on those issued by firms with low credit

ratings had remained relatively high, and that the lending attitudes of financial institutions

had been generally accommodative.

**III. Summary of Discussions on Monetary Policy for the Immediate Future**

On the guideline for money market operations for the intermeeting period ahead,

members agreed that, given the economic and financial situation, it would be appropriate to

maintain the current guideline that the Bank would encourage the uncollateralized overnight

call rate to remain at around 0.5 percent. They shared the following view: (1) Japan's

economy was likely to grow at a slower pace for the time being, due to the effects of high

energy and materials prices, and follow a moderate growth path thereafter; (2) however,

attention should continue to be paid to uncertainty regarding future developments in

overseas economies and global financial markets and to the effects of high energy and

materials prices; (3) as for prices, developments in prices and also in consumers' inflation

expectations and firms' price-setting behavior should be watched even more closely; and (4)

in this situation, it was appropriate to closely examine economic indicators and other

relevant information and also market conditions both at home and abroad to grasp the

situation more accurately.

Members concurred that the following thinking on the monetary policy stance for

10


-----

the future remained unchanged: the Bank would carefully assess the future outlook for

economic activity and prices, closely considering the likelihood of its projections

materializing as well as factors posing upside or downside risks, and would implement

appropriate policies in an accordingly flexible manner.

A few members said that the effects of the substantial increase in international

commodity prices on individual economies differed depending on their situation, and the

direction of their monetary policy might also differ accordingly. As for Japan's economy,

some members expressed the view that, amid the continuing surge in international

commodity prices, both downside risks to economic growth and upside risks to inflation

had been increasing. A few members said that in the current situation of Japan's economy,

unlike in the case of some economies with vigorous demand and strong upward pressure on

wages, the Bank should focus more on downside risks to economic growth than on upside

risks to inflation.

A few members expressed the view that since monetary policy worked with a

considerable lag, the Bank, as a central bank, should pay greater attention to changes in the

underlying trend of prices than to short-term price developments, and therefore a change in

people's inflation expectations for the medium to long term would be one of the important

points to consider when deciding monetary policy. One member said that inflation had

been rising worldwide and Japan was no exception to this trend, and therefore the Bank

should take a gradual and preemptive approach to forestall an increase in inflation

expectations once it became assured to some degree that Japan's economy was following a

path of sustainable growth with price stability.

**IV. Remarks by Government Representatives**

The representative from the Ministry of Finance made the following remarks.

(1) There appeared to be a pause in Japan's economic recovery recently, as evidenced by the

fact that corporate profits had been somewhat weak and export growth had slowed.

Domestic corporate goods prices had been rising due to increased materials prices.

Consumer prices excluding prices of petroleum products and some other components

had risen only slightly.

(2) Given the current developments in economic activity and prices, the government would

like the Bank to continue to support the economy from the financial side so as to ensure

11


-----

the sustainability of the economic recovery.

(3) Developments in the U.S. subprime mortgage problem, in crude oil prices, and in the

global economy, particularly the U.S. economy, should continue to be watched closely.

The government would like the Bank to carefully monitor both the effects of

developments in these areas on Japan's economy and developments in financial markets,

and continue to react appropriately to changes in trends. The Ministry of Finance

would also give due consideration to developments in the economy and financial

markets, both at home and abroad.

(4) Furthermore, the government would like the Bank to clearly explain to market

participants and the public its view regarding the current situation and future course of

Japan's economy and its thinking on the future conduct of monetary policy.

The representative from the Cabinet Office made the following remarks.

(1) There appeared to be a pause in Japan's economic recovery recently, as evidenced by

the fact that private consumption and business fixed investment had been flat.

Although Japan's economy was expected to resume its moderate recovery, future

developments warranted careful attention since the downside risks to the economy were

increasing. Price developments should continue to be watched closely.

(2) The Council on Economic and Fiscal Policy had set out its "Economic Growth

Strategy," which had the aim of bringing the economy out of the current difficult

situation and achieving sustainable economic growth. Based on the strategy described

therein, the government would formulate "Basic Policies 2008," which would include a

path for economic and fiscal reforms aimed at strengthening the growth potential of the

economy and realizing for Japan's people a prosperous life free from anxiety.

(3) In order to ensure sustainable economic growth led by private demand and achieve a

stable inflation rate that would be compatible with that growth, it was important for the

government and the Bank to implement their policies based on the shared basic

perspective on macroeconomic management.

(4) The government would like to request the Bank to implement effective monetary policy

that was consistent with the government's policy efforts and its outlook for the economy,

and to firmly support the economy from the financial side, paying due attention to

economic and price developments in view of downside risks to the outlook for the

12


-----

economy and prices.

**V. Votes**

Based on the above discussions, members agreed that it was appropriate to

maintain the current guideline for money market operations, which encouraged the

uncollateralized overnight call rate to remain at around 0.5 percent.

To reflect this view, the chairman formulated the following proposal and put it to

the vote.

**The Chairman's Policy Proposal on the Guideline for Money Market Operations:**

The guideline for money market operations for the intermeeting period ahead will

be as follows, and will be made public by the attached statement (see Attachment 1).

The Bank of Japan will encourage the uncollateralized overnight call rate

to remain at around 0.5 percent.

Votes for the proposal: Mr. M. Shirakawa, Mr. K. G. Nishimura, Ms. M. Suda, Mr.

A. Mizuno, Mr. T. Noda, Mr. S. Nakamura, and Mr. H. Kamezaki.

Votes against the proposal: None.

**VI. Discussion on the Bank's View of Recent Economic and Financial Developments**

Members discussed "The Bank's View" in the Monthly Report of Recent Economic

_and Financial Developments (consisting of "The Bank's View" and "The Background"), and_

put it to the vote.

The Policy Board decided, by a unanimous vote, the text of "The Bank's View."

It was confirmed that "The Bank's View" would be published on June 13, 2008 and the

whole report on June 16, 2008.[6]

**VII. Approval of the Minutes of the Monetary Policy Meeting**

The Policy Board approved unanimously the minutes of the Monetary Policy

Meetings of April 30, 2008 and May 19 and 20 for release on June 18, 2008.

6 The English version of the whole report was published on June 17, 2008.

13


-----

**VIII. Approval of the Scheduled Dates of the Monetary Policy Meetings in July**

**2008-June 2009**

At the end of the meeting, the Policy Board approved the dates of the Monetary

Policy Meetings to be held in the period July 2008-June 2009 for immediate release (see

Attachment 2).

14


-----

Attachment 1

June 13, 2008

Bank of Japan

At the Monetary Policy Meeting held today, the Bank of Japan decided, by a

unanimous vote,[[Note]] to set the following guideline for money market operations for the

intermeeting period:

The Bank of Japan will encourage the uncollateralized overnight call rate

to remain at around 0.5 percent.

[Note] Voting for the action: Mr. M. Shirakawa, Mr. K. G. Nishimura, Ms. M. Suda, Mr. A. Mizuno,
Mr. T. Noda, Mr. S. Nakamura, and Mr. H. Kamezaki.
Voting against the action: None.

15


-----

Attachment 2

June 13, 2008

Bank of Japan

**Scheduled Dates of Monetary Policy Meetings in July 2008-June 2009**


Publication of
Date of MPM Monthly Report
(The Bank's View)


Publication of
Outlook Report
(The Bank's View)


Publication of
MPM Minutes


July 2008 14 (Mon.), 15 (Tue.) 15 (Tue.) -- Aug. 22 (Fri.)

Aug. 18 (Mon.), 19 (Tue.) 19 (Tue.) -- Sep. 22 (Mon.)

Sep. 16 (Tue.), 17 (Wed.) 17 (Wed.) -- Oct. 10 (Fri.)

Oct. 6 (Mon.), 7 (Tue.) 7 (Tue.) -- Nov. 6 (Thur.)

31 (Fri.) -- 31 (Fri.) Nov. 27 (Thur.)

Nov. 20 (Thur.), 21 (Fri.) 21 (Fri.) -- Dec. 25 (Thur.)

Dec. 18 (Thur.), 19 (Fri.) 19 (Fri.) -- Jan. 27 (Tue.)

Jan. 2009 21 (Wed.), 22 (Thur.) 22 (Thur.) -- Feb. 24 (Tue.)

Feb. 18 (Wed.), 19 (Thur.) 19 (Thur.) -- Mar. 23 (Mon.)

Mar. 16 (Mon.), 17 (Tue.) 17 (Tue.) -- Apr. 10 (Fri.)

Apr. 6 (Mon.), 7 (Tue.) 7 (Tue.) -- May 7 (Thur.)

28 (Tue.) -- 28 (Tue.) May 27 (Wed.)

May 21 (Thur.), 22 (Fri.) 22 (Fri.) -- June 19 (Fri.)

June 15 (Mon.), 16 (Tue.) 16 (Tue.) -- To be announced

Note: The time of release will be, in principle, as follows.
_Monthly Report of Recent Economic and Financial Developments (Monthly Report):_
"The Bank's View" in the Monthly Report will be released at 3:00 p.m., and the full text at 2:00 p.m.
on the next business day (the English translation will be published at 4:30 p.m. on the second
business day after the publication of "The Bank's View").
_Outlook for Economic Activity and Prices (Outlook Report):_
"The Bank's View" in the Outlook Report will be released at 3:00 p.m., and the full text at 2:00 p.m.
on the next business day.
MPM Minutes will be released at 8:50 a.m.

16


-----

