Not to be released until 8:50 a.m.
Japan Standard Time on Wednesday,
June 18, 2008.

June 18, 2008

Bank of Japan

# Minutes of the Monetary Policy Meeting
## on May 19 and 20, 2008

(English translation prepared by the Bank's staff based on the Japanese original)


-----

Please contact the Bank of Japan at the address below in advance to request permission

when reproducing or copying the content of this document for commercial purposes.

Secretariat of the Policy Board, Bank of Japan

P.O. Box 30, Nihonbashi, Tokyo 103-8660, Japan

Please credit the source when quoting, reproducing, or copying the content of this

document.


-----

A Monetary Policy Meeting of the Bank of Japan Policy Board was held in the

Head Office of the Bank of Japan in Tokyo on Monday, May 19, 2008, from 2:00 p.m. to

4:17 p.m., and on Tuesday, May 20, from 9:00 a.m. to 12:00 p.m.[1]

**Policy Board Members Present**

**Mr. M. Shirakawa, Chairman, Governor of the Bank of Japan**

**Mr. K. G. Nishimura, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Japan**

**Ms. M. Suda**

**Mr. A. Mizuno**

**Mr. T. Noda**

**Mr. S. Nakamura**

**Mr. H. Kamezaki**

Government Representatives Present

Mr. H. Moriyama, Senior Vice Minister of Finance, Ministry of Finance[2]

Mr. M. Suzuki, Deputy Vice Minister for Policy Planning and Coordination, Ministry

of Finance[3]

Mr. J. Hamano, Vice Minister for Policy Coordination, Cabinet Office

Reporting Staff

Mr. H. Yamaguchi, Executive Director

Mr. A. Horii, Executive Director (Assistant Governor)

Mr. K. Ido, Executive Director

Mr. K. Yamamoto, Executive Director

Mr. M. Amamiya, Director-General, Monetary Affairs Department

Mr. S. Uchida, Associate Director-General, Monetary Affairs Department

Mr. T. Sekine, Senior Economist, Monetary Affairs Department

1 The minutes of this meeting were approved by the Policy Board at the Monetary Policy Meeting
held on June 12 and 13, 2008 as "a document describing an outline of the discussion at the meeting"
stipulated in Article 20, paragraph 1 of the Bank of Japan Act of 1997. Those present are referred
to by their titles at the time of the meeting.
2 Mr. H. Moriyama was present on May 20.
3 Mr. M. Suzuki was present on May 19.

1


-----

Mr. H. Nakaso, Director-General, Financial Markets Department

Mr. K. Momma, Director-General, Research and Statistics Department

Mr. E. Maeda, Associate Director-General, Research and Statistics Department

Mr. T. Idesawa, Director-General, International Department

Secretariat of the Monetary Policy Meeting

Mr. K. Osugi, Director-General, Secretariat of the Policy Board

Mr. K. Shigyoh, Director, Deputy Head of Secretarial Services for the Board, Secretariat

of the Policy Board

Mr. K. Nakamura, Senior Economist, Monetary Affairs Department

Mr. K. Suzuki, Senior Economist, Monetary Affairs Department

2


-----

**I. Summary of Staff Reports on Economic and Financial Developments[4]**

**A. Money Market Operations in the Intermeeting Period**

The Bank conducted money market operations in accordance with the guideline

decided at the previous meeting on April 30, 2008.[5] As a result, the uncollateralized

overnight call rate had been at around 0.5 percent.

**B. Recent Developments in Financial Markets**

In the money market, Euroyen rates and interest rates on term instruments, such as

yields on financing bills (FBs) and treasury bills (TBs), had been more or less flat on the

whole. Interest rates on Euroyen futures had also been more or less unchanged, albeit with

some fluctuations.

Japanese stock prices had trended upward following U.S. and European stock

prices, albeit with some fluctuations. The Nikkei 225 Stock Average had been moving in

the range of 14,000-14,500 yen recently.

Long-term interest rates continued to fluctuate widely following those in the

United States and Europe. They had recently been at around 1.6-1.7 percent.

The yen remained more or less unchanged against the U.S. dollar, and had recently

been traded in the range of 104-105 yen against the dollar.

**C. Overseas Economic and Financial Developments**

Growth in the U.S. economy had remained sluggish. Adjustments in the housing

market had persisted, private consumption had continued to be more or less unchanged, and

a slowdown in business fixed investment had become more evident. Industrial production

and the number of employees had also been on a declining trend. In this situation,

financial institutions had been applying tighter lending standards to a broad range of

borrowers. As for prices, the year-on-year rate of increase in consumer prices had been

elevated, not only in terms of the consumer price index (CPI) for all items but also the CPI

for all items less energy and food, or the core CPI, which registered a year-on-year rate of

4 Reports were made based on information available at the time of the meeting.
5 The guideline was as follows:
The Bank of Japan will encourage the uncollateralized overnight call rate to remain at
around 0.5 percent.

3


-----

increase of 2.0-2.5 percent.

The economy of the euro area continued to grow, although the pace of growth was

slowing moderately. Housing investment had decreased slightly, and the pace of growth in

private consumption had slowed due to the rise in energy and food prices and to uncertainty

about the outlook for the economy. Meanwhile, business fixed investment was on an

upward trend. Exports, the growth of which lost momentum temporarily, had resumed

their increasing trend. However, survey results suggested that their growth was likely to

slow. As for prices, the year-on-year rate of increase in the Harmonized Index of

Consumer Prices (HICP) continued to be relatively high, reflecting the rise in energy and

food prices. The U.K. economy continued to grow, albeit with a moderate slowing of the

pace of growth.

In China, both domestic and external demand continued to expand strongly.

India's economy continued to show relatively high growth, although it was slowing

moderately. The NIEs and ASEAN economies as a whole continued to expand at a

moderate pace since domestic demand remained firm, although a slowdown in exports was

becoming evident. As for prices, the year-on-year rate of increase in the CPI for all items

had risen in many Asian economies due to the rise in energy and food prices.

In global financial markets, instability continued as seen in the persisting strains in

money markets, although overly pessimistic views about global financial markets had

subsided compared with some time ago. In the U.S. and European financial markets, stock

prices and long-term interest rates rose, albeit with large fluctuations. In emerging

economies, developments in stock prices followed those in the United States and Europe,

and yield differentials between their sovereign bonds and U.S. Treasuries narrowed

temporarily reflecting developments in U.S. interest rates but expanded thereafter.

**D. Economic and Financial Developments in Japan**

1. Economic developments

Exports had continued to increase against the background of the expansion of

overseas economies, posting a solid increase in the January-March quarter from the

previous quarter. They were expected to continue to rise, as overseas economies were

likely to expand although at a slower pace.

As for domestic private demand, the pace of increase in business fixed investment

4


-----

had become slower in a situation where corporate profits had been leveling off, albeit at a

high level. Firms' forecasts of machinery orders, a leading indicator of machinery

investment, for the April-June quarter showed a significant drop from the previous quarter.

Historically, actual machinery orders tended to be stronger than the forecasts, but due

attention should be paid to developments in machinery orders this year in view of the recent

environment for corporate profits.

Private consumption had been firm. With regard to durable consumer goods, the

number of new passenger-car registrations had been more or less unchanged lately, after

picking up in the second half of 2007 supported mainly by the introduction of new models.

Sales of electrical appliances had continued to increase. As for nondurable and

semi-durable consumer goods, sales at department stores had been somewhat weak, notably

in apparel and general merchandise. Sales at supermarkets and convenience stores,

including those of foods, had been more or less flat. As for services consumption, outlays

for travel had been firm, while sales in the food service industry had been leveling off.

Consumer sentiment had been generally cautious, due mainly to rises in prices of petroleum

products and food products. Private consumption was expected to remain firm, reflecting

the gradual increase in household income.

Housing investment had been recovering moderately. The number of housing

starts, a leading indicator of housing investment, continued to pick up until January 2008,

but since then it had leveled off. The slowdown in the pace of recovery seemed to be

mainly due to the softness in sales of condominiums and further increases in prices of

structural steel. Housing investment was expected to be on a recovery trend, but the pace

was likely to be modest.

Production had been more or less flat. In light of developments in demand both

at home and abroad, production was expected to remain more or less flat in the short run

and increase thereafter. Inventories had been more or less in balance with shipments.

As for employment and income, in a situation where firms were strongly feeling a

shortage of labor, household income had continued rising moderately. The year-on-year

rate of change in nominal wages per worker had been positive lately. The gradual increase

in household income was likely to continue against the background of the persisting labor

shortage and the generally high, although slightly reduced, corporate profits.

On the price front, international commodity prices showed the following

5


-----

developments: crude oil prices had continued to rise; prices of nonferrous metals had also

been high; and prices of crops had shown mixed developments, with wheat prices falling

back and corn prices rising. The three-month rate of change in the domestic corporate

goods price index (CGPI) had been positive, mainly due to the rise in international

commodity prices, and the CGPI was likely to continue increasing for the time being. The

year-on-year rate of change in the CPI (excluding fresh food) had been rising since around

the end of 2007 and had been around 1 percent lately. It was projected to continue to be

positive due to the rise in prices of petroleum products and food products in a situation

where aggregate supply and demand in the economy were more or less balanced.

2. Financial environment

The environment for corporate finance was accommodative. Credit demand in

the private sector had been more or less flat. The issuing environment for CP and

corporate bonds had been favorable as a whole, although issuance spreads on those issued

by firms with low credit ratings had expanded. The lending attitudes of private banks had

continued to be generally accommodative, and the amount outstanding of lending by private

banks had been increasing moderately. The amount outstanding of CP and corporate

bonds issued had been above the previous year's level. Funding costs for firms had been

more or less unchanged. The financial positions of firms had continued to be favorable as

a whole, although those of small and medium-sized firms had deteriorated somewhat. The

year-on-year rate of growth in the money stock (M2+CDs) was around 2 percent.

**II. Summary of Discussions by the Policy Board on Economic and Financial**

**Developments**

**A. Economic Developments**

Members agreed on the following assessment of the current state of Japan's

economy: economic growth was slowing, mainly due to the effects of high energy and

materials prices; the economy was likely to grow at a slower pace for the time being and

follow a moderate growth path thereafter; however, due attention should continue to be paid

to factors such as uncertainty regarding future developments in overseas economies and

global financial markets, and to the effects of high energy and materials prices.

Members agreed that, although overseas economies taken as a whole continued to

6


-----

expand, downside risks remained elevated as the disruptions in global financial markets had

continued and growth in the U.S. economy had been sluggish.

Members shared the view that, although overly pessimistic views about global

financial markets, which had been prevalent among market participants through the middle

of March, had subsided, instability continued in global financial markets as seen in the

persisting strains in money markets and the tightening lending standards of financial

institutions. Some members said that the strains in money markets persisted, although

measures taken by central banks to enhance liquidity provision to them had been effective

to some extent as seen in, for example, a slight narrowing of Treasury-Eurodollar (TED)

spreads compared with some time ago. Regarding corporate finance, some members noted

that credit spreads remained at high levels. Many members said that attention should be

paid to the effects on economic activity of the further tightening of financial institutions'

lending standards.

With regard to the U.S. economy, members shared the view that there was

considerable uncertainty regarding when and how the negative feedback loop between

financial markets, asset prices, and economic activity would diminish. Some members

said that home prices continued to fall and adjustments in the housing market were still

continuing. A few members remarked that private consumption had been more or less

unchanged as a whole, given that retail sales had been relatively firm while sales of

automobiles had been sluggish partly due to the surge in gasoline prices. A few other

members said that the risk that the U.S. economy would weaken significantly had decreased

somewhat as corporate results turned out to be stronger than expected, except in the

financial and construction industries.

With regard to European economies, members shared the view that the economy

of the euro area continued to grow, although the pace of growth was slowing moderately.

On Asian economies, members concurred that China and India continued to show high

growth, and that the NIEs and ASEAN economies as a whole continued to expand at a

moderate pace although the pace of growth in exports had started to slow. A few members

said that close attention should be paid to the adverse effects of the recent earthquake in

China on economic and price developments there, although there was only limited

information at the moment.

Regarding global price developments, members agreed that inflation risks had

7


-----

been heightening worldwide given the high international commodity prices, particularly

crude oil prices. Many members said that the recent rise in the prices of primary

commodities was not only due to increased demand brought about by growth in emerging

economies, but also to various other factors such as supply constraints, heightened

geopolitical risks, accommodative financial conditions, and a "flight to simplicity." A few

members commented that it would be inappropriate to focus only on the outflow of income

that the current surge in primary commodity prices had caused -- a supply shock -- since it

had occurred in parallel with an increase in Japan's exports to emerging economies and

countries exporting natural resources.

Members concurred that Japan's exports had continued to increase to a broad range

of regions, as overseas economies were expanding although at a slower pace, and they were

likely to continue to increase. One member, however, said that some firms were raising

their export prices reflecting the rise in materials prices and the appreciation of the yen, and

the member would closely monitor how this, coupled with the slowdown in overseas

economies, affected developments in exports.

As for domestic private demand, members agreed that the pace of increase in

business fixed investment had become slower in a situation where corporate profits had

been leveling off due mainly to the rise in energy and materials prices. Some members

noted that the economy's capacity to generate income had been reduced by the deterioration

in the terms of trade, as evidenced by the GDP statistics for the January-March quarter, in

which the year-on-year rate of change in gross domestic income had become negative.

They continued that careful attention should be paid to the possibility that this might reduce

domestic private demand. A few members commented that the growth of profits of firms,

particularly small firms, was slowing reflecting the rise in materials prices and the

appreciation of the yen, and it seemed that their stance on fixed investment and employment

had become cautious. Members concurred that business fixed investment was likely to

remain firm but increase at a slower pace. With regard to firms' forecasts of machinery

orders for the April-June quarter, many members commented that the sharpness of the drop

-- although historically actual machinery orders tended to be stronger than the forecasts -
might suggest that it was partly attributable to the leveling-off of corporate profits. These

members said that they would closely monitor developments in business fixed investment,

including the extent to which business fixed investment plans were revised in the upcoming

8


-----

June 2008 Tankan (Short-Term Economic Survey of Enterprises in Japan).

Members concurred that private consumption had been firm and was likely to

remain so, reflecting the gradual increase in household income. Some members said,

however, that since private consumption in the GDP statistics for the January-March quarter

might have been stronger than the underlying trend of private consumption because of the

effect of the leap day and consumer sentiment remained relatively weak, attention should be

paid to future developments in private consumption.

As for employment and income, members agreed that household income had

continued rising moderately. Some members said that the year-on-year rate of change in

regular payments had recently been positive. A few members, however, were of the

opinion that the growth in summer bonus payments was likely to be relatively small

reflecting the leveling-off of corporate profits. Regarding the number of employees, many

members said that the number of regular employees in the Monthly Labour Survey, which

fluctuated relatively little from month to month, had been increasing by around 2 percent

year on year, while the _Labour Force Survey, which covered a wider range of workers,_

showed some weakness, and they expressed the view that marginal demand for labor might

have slackened, especially among small firms.

Members agreed that housing investment had been recovering moderately. They

were of the opinion that it was likely to be on a recovery trend, but the pace was likely to be

modest. One member said that there was some weakness in demand for housing,

particularly condominiums, partly due to the earlier rise in prices.

Members agreed that production had been more or less flat lately, and was likely

to remain so in the short run and increase thereafter.

As for prices, members said that the three-month rate of change in the CGPI had

been positive, mainly due to the rise in international commodity prices, and the CGPI was

likely to continue increasing for the time being.

Members concurred that the year-on-year rate of change in the CPI (excluding

fresh food) was likely to continue to be positive due to the rise in prices of petroleum

products and food products in a situation where aggregate supply and demand in the

economy were more or less balanced. Some members said that attention should be paid to

the effects of the ongoing rise in the prices of daily necessities on consumers' inflation

expectations and firms' price-setting behavior. Some other members commented that,

9


-----

although the year-on-year rate of increase in the CPI for April was expected to be lower

than that for March because of the expiration on April 1, 2008 of the law levying the

provisional tax on, for example, gasoline, firms continued to pass on higher costs to

gasoline and food product prices, and thus the underlying upward momentum of the CPI

remained unchanged.

**B. Financial Developments**

Members concurred that financial conditions in Japan remained accommodative.

They also agreed that the issuing environment for CP and corporate bonds had been

favorable as a whole, although issuance spreads on those issued by firms with low credit

ratings had expanded, and that the lending attitudes of financial institutions had been

generally accommodative. Members also shared the view that the Japanese money market

continued to be quite stable compared with its U.S. and European counterparts. Some

members said, however, that the Japanese bond market had recently been unstable.

**III. Summary of Discussions on Monetary Policy for the Immediate Future**

On the guideline for money market operations for the intermeeting period ahead,

members agreed that, given the economic and financial situation, it would be appropriate to

maintain the current guideline that the Bank would encourage the uncollateralized overnight

call rate to remain at around 0.5 percent. They shared the following view: (1) Japan's

economy was likely to grow at a slower pace for the time being, due to the effects of high

energy and materials prices, and follow a moderate growth path thereafter; (2) however,

there remained considerable downside risks including uncertainty regarding future

developments in overseas economies and global financial markets; and (3) in this situation,

it was appropriate to carefully examine economic and financial developments at home and

abroad to grasp the situation more accurately.

Members concurred that the following thinking on the monetary policy stance for

the future presented in the April 2008 Outlook for Economic Activity and Prices (hereafter

the Outlook Report) remained unchanged: the Bank would carefully assess the future

outlook for economic activity and prices, closely considering the likelihood of its

projections materializing as well as factors posing upside or downside risks, and would

implement its policies in an accordingly flexible manner. A few members said that,

10


-----

although there were considerable downside risks to the economy, the Bank should explain

to the public that in making policy decisions it always paid close attention to both economic

and price developments.

With regard to the inflation caused by the rise in energy and materials prices,

members discussed its background and policy action to be taken by the Bank. One

member said that the recent rise in the prices of primary commodities had caused both

supply and demand shocks to Japan's economy and that it was notable that these shocks

were persistent. This member also remarked that, in textbook theory, the Bank would not

need to take policy action to absorb the first-round effects of supply shocks unless they

caused second-round effects through a change in inflation expectations. This member

continued that the effects of the current supply and demand shocks were so persistent and

complex that deciding what policy action to take was becoming more difficult. Some

members pointed to economic fundamentals, namely, high growth in emerging economies,

as a background to the recent rise in the prices of primary commodities, and said that this

had caused both an increase in exports -- a demand shock -- and a rise in import prices -- a

supply shock -- to Japan's economy. These members also commented that close attention

should be paid to how these shocks affected the overall supply-demand balance. One

member said that a rise in the prices of primary commodities caused a change in relative

prices and a consequent adjustment in resource allocation, but could also lead to a

substantial change in the level of general prices depending on consumers' inflation

expectations and firms' price-setting behavior. This member continued that the Bank

therefore should implement monetary policy paying attention to these developments.

Members discussed what type of price indicator should be monitored most closely

amid this environment surrounding prices. One member said that, in a situation such as

the present one, where energy and materials prices had been increasing persistently, due

attention should be paid to the possibility that the core CPI, which excluded these prices and

was a frequently used price indicator in the United States, might not be indicating the

underlying trend of prices. A different member pointed out the importance of having

criteria to determine what type of price indicator was useful to discern the medium- to

long-term trend of the headline CPI. As useful price indicators for this purpose, another

member mentioned the CPI excluding fresh food and the trimmed mean of the CPI. One

member said that the CGPI remained an important indicator in a situation such as the

11


-----

present one, where higher energy and materials prices had been passed on to prices

downstream. Based on the discussion, members concurred that it would be appropriate to

aim at achieving sustainable economic growth with price stability in the medium to long

term by discerning the trend of consumer prices through careful monitoring of various price

indicators.

Many members said that the Risk Balance Charts in the April 2008 Outlook

Report acted as an effective tool for communicating with market participants, because each

of the Risk Balance Charts visually showed the aggregated probability distribution of both

upside and downside risks to the outlook for economic activity and prices. A few

members commented that, under certain circumstances, the Risk Balance Charts might

cause misunderstanding about members' thinking, and thus it remained important that the

Bank disseminate, together with the charts, the content of members' qualitative discussions

published in the Outlook Report. A few members noted that central banks worldwide

frequently reviewed their communication tools, and said that the Bank should always strive

to ensure that it employed effective ones. Many members said that the Bank should decide

whether it would continue to release the Risk Balance Charts after carefully assessing the

market's reaction.

**IV. Remarks by Government Representatives**

The representative from the Ministry of Finance made the following remarks.

(1) There appeared to be a pause in Japan's economic recovery recently, as evidenced by the

fact that corporate profits had been somewhat weak and production had been flat.

Domestic corporate goods prices had been rising due to increased materials prices.

Consumer prices excluding prices of petroleum products and some other components

had risen only slightly.

(2) Given the current developments in economic activity and prices, the government would

like the Bank to continue to support the economy from the financial side so as to ensure

the sustainability of the economic recovery.

(3) Developments in the U.S. subprime mortgage problem, in crude oil prices, and in the

global economy, particularly the U.S. economy, should continue to be watched closely.

The government would like the Bank to carefully monitor both the effects of

developments in these areas on Japan's economy and developments in financial markets,

12


-----

and continue to react appropriately to changes in trends. The Ministry of Finance

would also give due consideration to developments in the economy and financial

markets, both at home and abroad.

(4) Furthermore, the government would like the Bank to clearly explain to market

participants and the public its view regarding the current situation and future course of

Japan's economy and its thinking on the future conduct of monetary policy.

The representative from the Cabinet Office made the following remarks.

(1) There appeared to be a pause in Japan's economic recovery recently, as evidenced by

the fact that private consumption, business fixed investment, and production had

continued to be flat. Although Japan's economy was expected to resume its moderate

recovery, future developments warranted careful attention since the downside risks to

the economy were increasing. Price developments should continue to be watched

closely.

(2) In order to ensure sustainable economic growth led by private demand and achieve a

stable inflation rate that would be compatible with that growth, it was important for the

government and the Bank to implement their policies based on the shared basic

perspective on macroeconomic management.

(3) In view of present economic conditions and the rise in downside risks, the government

had been implementing policy measures described in "Earlier Implementation Measures

towards the Strengthened Growth." The government would like to request the Bank to

implement effective monetary policy that was consistent with the government's policy

efforts and its outlook for the economy, and to firmly support the economy from the

financial side, paying due attention to downside risks to the outlook for the economy

and prices.

**V. Votes**

Based on the above discussions, members agreed that it was appropriate to

maintain the current guideline for money market operations, which encouraged the

uncollateralized overnight call rate to remain at around 0.5 percent.

To reflect this view, the chairman formulated the following proposal and put it to

the vote.

13


-----

**The Chairman's Policy Proposal on the Guideline for Money Market Operations:**

The guideline for money market operations for the intermeeting period ahead will

be as follows, and will be made public by the attached statement (see Attachment).

The Bank of Japan will encourage the uncollateralized overnight call rate

to remain at around 0.5 percent.

Votes for the proposal: Mr. M. Shirakawa, Mr. K. G. Nishimura, Ms. M. Suda, Mr.

A. Mizuno, Mr. T. Noda, Mr. S. Nakamura, and Mr. H. Kamezaki.

Votes against the proposal: None.

**VI. Discussion on the Bank's View of Recent Economic and Financial Developments**

Members discussed "The Bank's View" in the Monthly Report of Recent Economic

_and Financial Developments (consisting of "The Bank's View" and "The Background"), and_

put it to the vote.

The Policy Board decided, by a unanimous vote, the text of "The Bank's View."

It was confirmed that "The Bank's View" would be published on May 20, 2008 and the

whole report on May 21, 2008.[6]

**VII. Approval of the Minutes of the Monetary Policy Meeting**

The Policy Board approved unanimously the minutes of the Monetary Policy

Meeting of April 8 and 9, 2008 for release on May 23, 2008.

6 The English version of the whole report was published on May 22, 2008.

14


-----

Attachment

May 20, 2008

Bank of Japan

At the Monetary Policy Meeting held today, the Bank of Japan decided, by a

unanimous vote,[[Note]] to set the following guideline for money market operations for the

intermeeting period:

The Bank of Japan will encourage the uncollateralized overnight call rate

to remain at around 0.5 percent.

[Note] Voting for the action: Mr. M. Shirakawa, Mr. K. G. Nishimura, Ms. M. Suda, Mr. A. Mizuno,
Mr. T. Noda, Mr. S. Nakamura, and Mr. H. Kamezaki.
Voting against the action: None.

15


-----

