Not to be released until 8:50 a.m.
Japan Standard Time on Thursday,
November 27, 2008.

November 27, 2008

Bank of Japan

# Minutes of the Monetary Policy Meeting
## on October 31, 2008

(English translation prepared by the Bank's staff based on the Japanese original)


-----

Please contact the Bank of Japan at the address below in advance to request permission

when reproducing or copying the content of this document for commercial purposes.

Secretariat of the Policy Board, Bank of Japan

P.O. Box 30, Nihonbashi, Tokyo 103-8660, Japan

Please credit the source when quoting, reproducing, or copying the content of this

document.


-----

A Monetary Policy Meeting of the Bank of Japan Policy Board was held in the

Head Office of the Bank of Japan in Tokyo on Friday, October 31, 2008, from 8:30 a.m. to

1:53 p.m.[1]

**Policy Board Members Present**

**Mr. M. Shirakawa, Chairman, Governor of the Bank of Japan**

**Mr. H. Yamaguchi, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Japan**

**Mr. K. G. Nishimura, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Japan**

**Ms. M. Suda**

**Mr. A. Mizuno**

**Mr. T. Noda**

**Mr. S. Nakamura**

**Mr. H. Kamezaki**

Government Representatives Present

Mr. W. Takeshita, Senior Vice Minister of Finance, Ministry of Finance

Mr. Y. Miyazawa, Senior Vice Minister, Cabinet Office

Reporting Staff

Mr. A. Horii, Executive Director (Assistant Governor)

Mr. K. Ido, Executive Director

Mr. K. Yamamoto, Executive Director

Mr. M. Amamiya, Director-General, Monetary Affairs Department

Mr. M. Ayuse, Associate Director-General, Monetary Affairs Department[2]

Mr. T. Sekine, Associate Director-General, Monetary Affairs Department

Mr. T. Kato, Senior Economist, Monetary Affairs Department

Mr. H. Nakaso, Director-General, Financial Markets Department

Mr. K. Momma, Director-General, Research and Statistics Department

1 The minutes of this meeting were approved by the Policy Board at the Monetary Policy Meeting
held on November 20 and 21, 2008 as "a document describing an outline of the discussion at the
meeting" stipulated in Article 20, paragraph 1 of the Bank of Japan Act of 1997. Those present are
referred to by their titles at the time of the meeting.
2 Mr. M. Ayuse was present from 8:30 a.m. to 8:53 a.m.

1


-----

Mr. E. Maeda, Associate Director-General, Research and Statistics Department[3]

Mr. T. Nunami, Director-General, International Department

Secretariat of the Monetary Policy Meeting

Mr. K. Osugi, Director-General, Secretariat of the Policy Board

Mr. K. Shigyoh, Director, Deputy Head of Secretarial Services for the Board, Secretariat

of the Policy Board

Mr. T. Sakamoto, Director, Head, Monetary Operations Planning, Monetary Affairs

Department[4]

Mr. K. Nakamura, Senior Economist, Monetary Affairs Department

Mr. R. Hattori, Senior Economist, Monetary Affairs Department

3 Mr. E. Maeda was present from 9:16 a.m. to 1:53 p.m.
4 Mr. T. Sakamoto was present from 8:30 a.m. to 8:53 a.m.

2


-----

**I. Staff Proposal Relating to Review of the Bank's Reserve System**

Based on the announcement released on October 8, 2008, the staff had been

reviewing the Bank's reserve system as a step to further enhance the effectiveness of money

market operations in order to ensure stability in financial markets in Japan. Given the

results of the review, the staff concluded that, in the Bank's continuing flexible provision of

sufficient liquidity, it would be appropriate for the Bank to introduce a temporary measure

under which the Bank paid interest on excess reserve balances, in order to prevent the

uncollateralized overnight call rate from falling well below its targeted level and to facilitate

money market operations. The staff therefore proposed that the Bank establish the

Principal Terms and Conditions of Complementary Deposit Facility as a Temporary

Measure to Facilitate Supplying of Funds.

**II. Summary of Staff Reports on Economic and Financial Developments[5]**

**A. Money Market Operations in the Intermeeting Period**

The Bank conducted money market operations in accordance with the guideline

decided at the previous meetings on October 6 and 7, 2008 and October 14, and as a result,

the uncollateralized overnight call rate had been at around 0.5 percent.[6] On October 10,

the weighted average of the uncollateralized overnight call rate rose to 0.585 percent, as

funds transactions decreased mainly in anticipation of the introduction of next-generation

real-time gross settlement (RTGS-XG) into the Bank of Japan Financial Network System

(BOJ-NET) Funds Transfer System on the next business day. On October 15, the last day

of the reserve maintenance period, it fell to 0.348 percent, as financial institutions had

satisfied most of their reserve requirements and there was a growing sense of abundance of

liquidity in the money market.

In line with measures regarding money market operations to ensure stability in the

financial markets decided at the previous meeting, the Bank provided sufficient funds

maturing over the year-end and actively conducted Japanese government securities and CP

repo operations. In addition, the Bank started to conduct U.S. dollar funds-supplying

5 Reports were made based on information available at the time of the meeting.
6 The guideline was as follows:
The Bank of Japan will encourage the uncollateralized overnight call rate to remain at
around 0.5 percent.

3


-----

operations whereby funds were provided at a fixed rate set for each operation against

pooled collateral.

**B. Recent Developments in Financial Markets**

Japan's money market had remained nervous reflecting disruptions in global

financial markets. The general collateral (GC) repo rate had remained relatively high due

to lenders' cautious stance on trading. Euroyen rates remained at an elevated level as the

transaction volume decreased.

Japanese stock prices had dropped considerably amid growing concerns about the

stability of the global financial system and about a further slowdown of the world economy

as well as heightening concerns about deterioration in business performance of Japanese

exporters reflecting the ongoing appreciation of the yen. The Nikkei 225 Stock Average

had been moving at around 9,000 yen recently. Long-term interest rates in Japan had

moved within a relatively narrow range, and had recently been in the 1.40-1.50 percent

range.

The yen was bought back rapidly, and had recently been traded in the range of

97-100 yen to the U.S. dollar.

**C. Overseas Economic and Financial Developments**

Growth in the U.S. economy had remained sluggish, and the downward pressure

on the economy had grown. A substantial decline in housing investment continued, and

home prices continued to fall. Private consumption, after remaining more or less

unchanged, had started to show signs of a decrease. The deceleration in business fixed

investment had also continued. In this situation, industrial production had been on a

downward trend and the pace of decrease in the number of employees had been accelerating.

The spending behavior of firms and households had become more cautious, as funding

conditions for firms and households had deteriorated further and the level of uncertainty

about the outlook for the economy had increased. As for prices, the year-on-year rate of

increase in the consumer price index (CPI) for all items had started to decline, due to a

leveling-off of increases in energy and food prices.

The economy of the euro area had been sluggish. The slowdown in business

fixed investment had become more evident, and the pace of increase in exports had also

4


-----

slowed. Private consumption had decreased. In this situation, production had been on a

declining trend. As for prices, the year-on-year rate of increase in the Harmonized Index

of Consumer Prices (HICP) had started to decline, due to a leveling-off of increases in

energy and food prices. The U.K. economy had been sluggish, as significant adjustments

in the housing market had continued and private consumption had been more or less flat.

Moreover, the downward pressure on the economy had grown rapidly in a situation where

funding conditions for firms and households had deteriorated.

Among Asian economies, China and India continued to show high growth,

although the growth was slowing somewhat. The pace of growth in the NIEs and the

ASEAN economies had decelerated. As for prices, the year-on-year rate of increase in the

CPI for all items had started to decline in many Asian economies, due to a leveling-off of

increases in energy and food prices.

With regard to global financial markets, due to a series of financial system

stabilization measures taken by governments and central banks, money markets had

improved slightly as seen in, for example, the fact that Treasury-Eurodollar (TED) spreads

had started to narrow, although they remained at a high level. Credit markets, however,

had not improved: for example, credit spreads on corporate bonds had widened and new

funding of firms had been low. U.S. and European stock prices had declined sharply as

concerns about economic deterioration had heightened due to relatively weak economic

indicators. U.S. and European long-term interest rates had swung widely due to the

persistent concern about a possible increase in the issuance of government securities

resulting from the introduction of financial system stabilization measures and to concerns

about economic deterioration.

**D. Economic and Financial Developments in Japan**

1. Economic developments

Exports had leveled off. Real exports showed a small increase in the

July-September quarter from the previous quarter, after dropping considerably in the

April-June quarter. Exports were likely to be relatively weak for the time being, taking

into account the effects of the slowdown in overseas economies and the appreciation of the

yen.

In the corporate sector, business fixed investment had declined, mainly due to the

5


-----

decrease in corporate profits. Machinery orders, which had been more or less flat at a high

level until the April-June quarter, dropped in July and August in a wide range of industries.

The slowdown in business fixed investment had become more evident, as seen in the fact

that many indicators relating to it had been weak.

With regard to the household sector, private consumption had been relatively weak,

mainly due to sluggish growth in household income and the increase in prices of energy and

food. Consumer sentiment had also become more cautious.

Production had continued to decrease. The index of production declined in the

July-September quarter for the third consecutive quarter. Production was likely to

decrease at a faster pace in the October-December quarter, given the projected figures for

October and November and anecdotal information from firms.

On the price front, the three-month rate of increase in the domestic corporate

goods price index (CGPI) had declined rapidly, due to the setback in commodity prices.

The year-on-year rate of increase in the CPI (excluding fresh food) was likely to decline

gradually reflecting developments in prices of energy and food, although it remained

relatively high to date.

2. Financial environment

The worsening in funding conditions in Japan's capital markets had become more

evident as seen in the fact that issuance spreads on CP had widened rapidly and issuance of

corporate bonds had been sluggish due to increased risk aversion among investors reflecting

disruptions in global financial markets. The year-on-year rate of increase in lending by

private banks had declined somewhat, although the amount outstanding had continued to

increase. These developments seemed to suggest that (1) business performance of small

firms had deteriorated; (2) financial institutions had become more cautious in extending

credit to firms in specific industries, for example, construction and real estate firms and

consumer finance companies, as well as to small firms; and (3) demand for working capital

had leveled off recently, especially among large firms.

6


-----

**III. Summary of Discussions by the Policy Board on Economic and Financial**

**Developments**

**A. Economic Developments**

Members agreed that both financial and economic adjustments in the world

economy stemming from financial crises in the United States and Europe had further

increased in severity recently.

Members shared the view that global financial markets remained under intense

strain as a whole, although an improving trend was seen in some money market indicators.

One member expressed the view that developments in global financial markets remained

highly uncertain, as credit default swap (CDS) premiums had exceeded their levels at the

time of the failure of Lehman Brothers Holdings Inc. while stock prices had fallen

worldwide, particularly in the United States and Europe. Some members noted that effects

of financial market turmoil in industrialized economies had spread worldwide, especially to

emerging economies.

Members concurred that growth in the U.S. economy had remained sluggish and

the downward pressure on the economy had grown. Some members expressed the opinion

that adjustments in the housing market had continued as seen in the continued decline in

home prices, and the housing market showed no signs of bottoming out yet. One member

said that an inter-regional negative feedback loop, in which the slowdown in economic

activity in the United States and Europe affected emerging economies and then these in turn

affected the U.S. and European economies, might have started to operate.

On the current state of Japan's economy, members agreed that economic activity

had been increasingly sluggish due to the effects of earlier increases in energy and materials

prices and the leveling-off of exports.

Members concurred that exports had leveled off against the background of the

slowdown in overseas economies, particularly in the United States and Europe. One

member expressed the view that, in a situation where exports to the United States had

declined for four consecutive quarters and the pace of growth in overseas economies had

been slowing as a whole, it was highly unlikely that the decrease in exports to the United

States would be offset by an increase in exports to other regions. A different member said

that the future effects of the appreciation of the yen also warranted attention.

With regard to the corporate sector, members agreed that business fixed

7


-----

investment had declined, mainly due to the decrease in corporate profits. A few members

noted that the slowdown in machinery orders had become more evident as seen in a drop in

a wide range of industries. One member expressed the view that the deterioration in the

terms of trade had finally come to a halt, but it would take time for positive effects of this to

appear.

As for the household sector, members concurred that private consumption had

been relatively weak, mainly due to sluggish growth in household income and the increase

in prices of energy and food.

Members agreed that production had continued to decrease. Some members

expressed the view that it was likely to decrease at a faster pace in the October-December

quarter, given the projected figures and anecdotal information from firms. Some members

said that production in many industries, such as transportation equipment, iron and steel,

and electronic parts and devices, was projected to decline.

As for prices, members said that the three-month rate of increase in the CGPI had

declined rapidly, due to the setback in commodity prices.

Members noted that the year-on-year rate of increase in the CPI (excluding fresh

food) was likely to decline gradually reflecting the leveling-off of increases in prices of

energy and food, although it remained relatively high to date.

**B. Financial Developments**

Members agreed on the following assessment of financial conditions in Japan:

liquidity pressures remained comparatively low and credit spreads in the financial markets

generally narrow relative to U.S. and European markets; however, the influence of the

turmoil in global financial markets had recently been emerging in Japanese financial

markets as could be seen in nervous conditions in the money market and significant

declines in stock prices. A few members noted that investors had become increasingly risk

averse reflecting disruptions in global financial markets, as the significant widening of

issuance spreads on CP and the continued cancellations and postponements of corporate

bond issuance showed, and that future developments warranted close monitoring. A

different member expressed the view that conditions for firms to carry out funding in the

capital markets through CP had deteriorated and firms had increased their dependence on

indirect financing, but financial institutions' lending attitudes had become severe and

8


-----

financial conditions had become less accommodative.

**C. Outlook for Economic Activity and Prices**

With regard to the outlook for economic activity and prices, members agreed on

the following assessment: (1) the increased sluggishness in economic activity would likely

remain until around the middle of fiscal 2009; and (2) thereafter, the growth rate was likely

to pick up gradually, as the effects of earlier increases in energy and materials prices abated

and overseas economies moved out of their deceleration phase, although the timing was

likely to be sometime after the middle of fiscal 2009.

As for prices, members agreed that the pace of increase in the CGPI would largely

depend on developments in the prices of commodities such as crude oil and on exchange

rates, but that the CGPI was likely to stabilize so long as commodity prices did not start to

surge again. They also shared the view that the rate of increase in the CPI (excluding fresh

food) was likely to decline gradually, as prices of energy and food stabilized with the output

gap remaining negative and wages weak, while medium-term inflation expectations were

likely to remain stable.

Members shared the view that upside and downside risks to the above outlook

were as follows. In relation to economic activity, they were (1) the ongoing financial

crises in the United States and Europe and their impact, (2) developments in emerging

economies and commodity-exporting countries, (3) developments in energy and materials

prices, (4) firms' expectations of future growth, and (5) developments in financial

conditions. In relation to the outlook for prices, they were (1) deviation of inflation caused

by the changes in economic activity, (2) changes in the inflation expectations of households

and the price-setting behavior of firms, and (3) developments in import prices.

As for the ongoing financial crises in the United States and Europe and their

impact, members concurred that, if strains in financial markets intensified further despite

the various measures taken by the authorities, the risk-taking capacity of financial

institutions and investors might decline and this could result in a worsening negative

feedback loop between financial markets and economic activity, causing lower economic

growth especially in the United States and Europe. A few members expressed the view

that overseas economies were unlikely to recover in the short run, given that adjustments in

the U.S. housing market, which had caused financial system disruptions in the United States

9


-----

and Europe, had not made progress and a negative feedback loop was already operating

between financial markets and economic activity. One of these members commented that

one of the long-term issues facing the world economy that warranted attention was how

adjustments in excessive consumption and associated excesses in debt in the United States

would progress.

Regarding developments in energy and materials prices, a few members said that

there was a risk that commodity prices might surge again in the medium to long term, given

the possibility that the world economy might expand at a higher-than-sustainable rate, and

the inefficient use of natural resources in emerging economies. One of these members

noted that commodity prices had been increasingly volatile due to changes in global

supply-demand structure, and attention should therefore be paid to the considerable risk not

only of their deviation either upward or downward, but also in terms of the degree of

deviation. A different member commented that the recent setback in commodity prices

would support domestic demand by improving the terms of trade, but as it was caused by

the slowdown in the world economy, it should be borne in mind that a decrease in Japan's

exports would precede the effects of improvement in the terms of trade.

As for developments in financial conditions, members agreed that there was a

possibility that, if strains in global financial markets should increase further, pressures

acting to depress economic activity from the financial side might become more marked.

One member said that financial institutions had recently started to be aware of their capital

constraints due to the depreciation of securities and the increase in credit costs, and

therefore, financial conditions had been shifting to a tightening. A different member,

however, commented that, from a longer-term perspective, attention should continue to be

paid to the risk that accommodative financial conditions might lead to larger swings in

economic and financial activity as well as in prices.

In relation to the outlook for prices, members concurred that there were

considerable uncertainties attending inflation that could cause it to deviate either upward or

downward from the projection, but the upside risks to prices had decreased compared with

the past. One member, however, said that upside risks to prices continued to require

attention, while noting the following reasons. First, in terms of the CPI, both for all items

and for all items less food and energy, items whose prices had risen outnumbered those

whose prices had declined, and this suggested possible changes in the price-setting behavior

10


-----

of firms. And second, there was a possibility that consumers might be increasingly

accepting the price rises partly due to heightening concerns about food safety.

**IV. Summary of Discussions on Monetary Policy for the Immediate Future**

Based on the above discussions on economic and financial developments,

members made an assessment in terms of the first perspective, that is to say, they assessed

the most likely outlook for economic activity and prices through fiscal 2010. They agreed

that Japan's economy, in the longer run, was most likely to return onto a path of sustainable

growth with price stability. They shared the view, however, that this outlook was largely

dependent on the future course of the world economy. They continued that given recent

developments in the world economy and global financial markets, it needed to be noted not

only that it would take some time for the world economy to make the requisite adjustments

and for the necessary conditions for Japan's economic recovery to be satisfied, but also that

the level of uncertainty in the outlook had increased. In this regard, one member

expressed the view that in a situation where the environment surrounding Japan's economic

activity and prices was subject to a significant level of uncertainty, the Bank should be

careful not to cause speculation among market participants regarding the timing of a policy

change when expressing a view with regard to when the economic growth rate might

gradually start to pick up.

Members then made an assessment in terms of the second perspective, that is to

say, they examined the risks that they considered most relevant to the conduct of monetary

policy, including risks that had a longer time horizon than the first perspective. Regarding

economic activity, members shared the view that the risks that demanded attention were the

increasing downside risks to the economy stemming from uncertainties regarding future

developments in global financial markets, the U.S. and European financial systems, and

overseas economies. They concurred that it should also be noted that, if there should be an

increase in the severity of the lending attitudes of Japanese financial institutions, there

would be a risk of a downward pressure also being exerted on Japan's economic activity

from the financial side. As for prices, members shared the view that although attention

should be paid to upside risks stemming from further increases in energy and materials

prices as well as changes in consumers' inflation expectations and the price-setting behavior

of firms, these risks had decreased compared with the past. They agreed that there was

11


-----

also a possibility that the rate of increase in prices would decline more than expected, if

downward risks to the economy materialized or commodity prices fell further.

As for the monetary policy stance for the future, given the assessment of economic

activity and prices described above, members concurred that the following thinking

remained unchanged: the Bank would carefully assess the future outlook for economic

activity and prices, closely considering the likelihood of its projections materializing as well

as factors posing upside or downside risks, and would conduct monetary policy

appropriately. They agreed that, at the current juncture, particularly close attention should

be paid to the risk of downward deviation in economic activity due to developments in the

U.S. and European financial systems and global financial markets as well as their

subsequent impact on economic activity. They also agreed that the Bank would do its

utmost to ensure market stability by conducting appropriate money market operations.

One member said that stability in financial markets was vital for low interest rates to

produce their maximal monetary easing effect.

On the guideline for money market operations for the intermeeting period ahead,

one member expressed the view that it would be appropriate to maintain the current

guideline that the Bank would encourage the uncollateralized overnight call rate to remain

at around 0.5 percent. Most members, however, were of the view that it would be

appropriate to lower the Bank's target for the uncollateralized overnight call rate, the policy

interest rate. These members noted that the increased sluggishness in Japan's economic

activity would likely remain over the next several quarters and, as for risks to economic

activity, downside risks were increasing, and said that the policy interest rate should be

lowered to maintain accommodative financial conditions.

Members agreed that the level to which the policy interest rate was reduced as well

as the spreads between the policy interest rate and the rates applied to the complementary

lending and deposit facilities should be set so as not to impair the proper functioning of the

market mechanism in the money market and that therefore they should discuss the matter

thoroughly in order to ensure that they reached an appropriate decision on these rates.

They then discussed the appropriate size of an interest rate reduction. Some members

expressed the view that a reduction of 25 basis points in the policy interest rate would be

adequate. These members explained that the Bank should attach more importance to the

fact that market participants were strongly aware that the Bank had often adjusted the policy

12


-----

interest rate by 25 basis points in the past. A few of these members said that in terms of

the impact on the functioning of the market mechanism, there was no great difference

between a reduction of 20 basis points and 25 basis points. Against this view, some

members said that in any further reduction of a policy interest rate that had already been

reduced to an extremely low level, careful consideration should be given not only to the

positive effects of monetary easing, but also to possible adverse effects that might impair

the proper functioning of the market mechanism in the money market and impede the flow

of funds. These members noted that, particularly in the current situation where

considerable deterioration in the functioning of the market mechanism could be observed,

the possible adverse effects were becoming more important. They said that the policy

interest rate should therefore be reduced by a smaller margin of 20 basis points, in order to

clearly show the Bank's concern for the need to maintain the proper functioning of the

market mechanism. One of these members said that, in reducing the policy interest rate,

even a difference of 5 basis points had an effect that could not be ignored. A different

member added that, in this unprecedented situation of disruptions in global financial

markets, there was no need to be swayed by the fact that the Bank had often adjusted the

policy interest rate by 25 basis points in the past.

Members concurred that to ensure stability in the financial markets, it would be

appropriate to introduce the complementary deposit facility in order to further facilitate the

provision of sufficient liquidity over the calendar and fiscal year-ends. One member

expressed the view that even after this facility was introduced, it was important for the Bank

to continue to conduct money market operations in a flexible manner. As for the rates

applied to the complementary lending and deposit facilities, members exchanged views

regarding what would be an adequate level of the spreads between each of these rates and

the policy interest rate. Many members expressed the view that, in discussing the most

suitable level of the spread, it was important to consider both the impact of having wide

spreads -- which might make market rates difficult to control -- and that of having narrow

spreads -- which might impair the proper functioning of the market mechanism, with market

activity being reduced to low levels by a decrease in extension of credit by financial

institutions. One member said that although attention should be paid to the possibility that

the proper functioning of the market mechanism might be impaired, setting narrow spreads

of, for example, 15 basis points might be acceptable given that ensuring market stability

13


-----

was the current priority and the complementary deposit facility was only a temporary

measure. A different member expressed the view that the spread between the rate applied

to the complementary lending facility and the policy interest rate should be kept at 25 basis

points and the spread between the rate applied to the complementary deposit facility and the

policy interest rate should be set at 15 basis points, since narrowing the latter spread to that

extent would not greatly affect market activity, pointing to data on the recent dispersion of

the rate for uncollateralized overnight call transactions. Another member said that once

the transaction volume started to decrease in the market, the pace of decrease tended to

accelerate, and thus a relatively wide spread should be set at the time when the

complementary deposit facility was introduced. A different member said that the rate

applied to the complementary deposit facility should be set at a level higher than 0 percent

to maintain the proper functioning of the market mechanism. Based on the above

discussions, some members expressed the view that both spreads should be set at 20 basis

points.

**V. Submission of Policy Proposals on the Guideline for Money Market Operations**

Based on the above discussions, some members expressed the view that it would

be appropriate to lower the Bank's target for the uncollateralized overnight call rate from

around 0.5 percent to around 0.3 percent.

Some other members, however, said that they would like to propose that the Bank

should lower its target for the uncollateralized overnight call rate to around 0.25 percent.

As a result, the following proposals were submitted.

The chairman submitted the following proposal.

**The Chairman's Policy Proposal on the Guideline for Money Market Operations:**

1. The guideline for money market operations for the intermeeting period ahead will be as

follows, effective immediately from the announcement of the decision.

The Bank of Japan will encourage the uncollateralized overnight call rate

to be at around 0.3 percent.

14


-----

2. A public statement will be decided separately.

Ms. M. Suda, Mr. S. Nakamura, and Mr. H. Kamezaki proposed the following

guideline for money market operations for the intermeeting period ahead:

The Bank of Japan will encourage the uncollateralized overnight call rate

to be at around 0.25 percent.

**VI. Remarks by Government Representatives**

Following the staff reports on economic and financial developments, the

representative from the Ministry of Finance made the following remarks.

(1) On October 30, 2008, the government and the ruling parties decided a new set of

economic measures, "Measures to Counter Difficulties in People's Daily Lives," which

put emphasis on the three objectives of (1) enabling people to deal with difficulties in

their daily lives, (2) stabilizing and bolstering the financial markets and the economy,

and (3) activating the latent strengths of the nation's regions. The government would

take all available measures to address the recent severe economic and financial

conditions; for instance, it would implement fiscal measures, revise the tax system, and

improve financial legislation.

The representative from the Cabinet Office made the following remarks.

(1) On October 30, 2008, the government decided the new set of economic measures,

"Measures to Counter Difficulties in People's Daily Lives," following the release of the

"Comprehensive Immediate Policy Package." The government would continue its

efforts to ensure the stability of the financial markets and underpin the economy given

the recent severe economic and financial conditions by swiftly implementing these

measures.

Following the submission of policy proposals on the guideline for money market

operations, the representative from the Ministry of Finance made the following remarks.

(1) Amid the global economic slowdown, the downward trend of Japan's economy was

likely to continue for the time being. As for developments in consumer and other

15


-----

prices, they were expected to be influenced by the recent downtrend in the prices of

commodities, particularly crude oil futures.

(2) Given this situation, as the representative of the Ministry of Finance had said earlier, on

October 30, 2008 the government and the ruling parties formulated the "Measures to

Counter Difficulties in People's Daily Lives."

(3) The government would like the Bank to conduct monetary policy in an appropriate and

flexible manner so as to support the economy from the financial side, taking account of

the current economic and financial conditions.

(4) Regarding introduction of a complementary deposit facility, the government would like

the Bank to explain clearly to the public that the purpose of introducing the facility

would be to further enhance smooth and flexible provision of liquidity. The

government would also like the Bank to provide liquidity in a more flexible manner.

The representative from the Cabinet Office made the following remarks.

(1) Japan's economy had weakened further as evidenced by the fact that production was

decreasing, and it appeared to be in a contraction phase. The downward trend of the

economy was likely to continue for the time being amid the global economic slowdown.

There was also a risk that the economic situation in Japan would become severer due to

the worsening financial crises in the United States and Europe. As for prices, the

year-on-year rate of increase in consumer prices remained moderate, and upward

pressure on prices in general had not noticeably increased, as seen in a pause in the

improvement in the output gap.

(2) Proposals to reduce the policy interest rate had been submitted. The government

welcomed the measure proposed at this meeting as an appropriate response to address

the current severe economic and financial conditions. The measure was also

consistent with the government's basic thinking that international cooperation was

important.

(3) In order to ensure sustainable economic growth led by private demand and achieve a

stable inflation rate, it was important for the government and the Bank to continue to

conduct their policies based on the shared basic perspective on macroeconomic

management, paying close attention to economic and financial developments at home

and abroad.

16


-----

(4) Amid severe economic and financial conditions at home and abroad, the government

would like to request the Bank to continue to make efforts to ensure stability in the

financial markets, and to conduct monetary policy in an appropriate and flexible manner

so as to support the economy from the financial side in view of the government's efforts

to implement the "Measures to Counter Difficulties in People's Daily Lives" and

structural reforms.

**VII. Votes**

**A. Vote on the Guideline for Money Market Operations**

The proposals, submitted by the chairman, and by the three members, Ms. M. Suda,

Mr. S. Nakamura, and Mr. H. Kamezaki, were put to the vote, the three members' proposal

first, then the chairman's proposal.

Ms. M. Suda, Mr. S. Nakamura, and Mr. H. Kamezaki's policy proposal on the

guideline for money market operations was defeated by a majority vote.

Votes for the proposal: Ms. M. Suda, Mr. S. Nakamura, and Mr. H. Kamezaki.

Votes against the proposal: Mr. M. Shirakawa, Mr. H. Yamaguchi, Mr. K. G.

Nishimura, Mr. A. Mizuno, and Mr. T. Noda.

The vote on the chairman's policy proposal on the guideline for money market

operations was equally split, and the chairman made the final decision, as stipulated in

Article 18, paragraph 2 of the Bank of Japan Act of 1997, approving the proposal.

Votes for the proposal: Mr. M. Shirakawa, Mr. H. Yamaguchi, Mr. K. G. Nishimura,

and Mr. T. Noda.

Votes against the proposal: Ms. M. Suda, Mr. A. Mizuno, Mr. S. Nakamura, and

Mr. H. Kamezaki.

Ms. M. Suda dissented from the chairman's policy proposal for the following

reasons. First, it was not convincing to explain that the Bank needed to change the size of

policy interest rate adjustment from the conventional 25 basis points to 20 basis points for

17


-----

the sole reason that the former would impair the proper functioning of the market

mechanism. And second, such a policy action would be likely to increase uncertainty

regarding the size of future policy interest rate adjustments by the Bank.

Mr. A. Mizuno dissented from the proposal for the following reasons. First, the

current policy priority of the Bank was to implement measures to enhance the smooth flow

of funds, in view of the current situation in CP and GC repo markets, rather than to reduce

the policy interest rate. Second, the Policy Board should have further discussions about

measures to be implemented if the economic situation worsened further. Third, given the

decline in the functioning of CP and corporate bond markets, the transmission mechanism

through which a policy interest rate reduction would influence economic activity was

uncertain. Fourth, despite the policy intention, money market operations to provide ample

liquidity could become more difficult, since market participants were likely to expect

additional policy interest rate reductions, which would exert downward pressure on the call

rate. And fifth, it had been only a short while since the Bank had decided, by a unanimous

vote, to maintain the guideline for money market operations.

Mr. S. Nakamura dissented from the proposal for the following reason. Since the

proper functioning of the market mechanism would be maintained even if the Bank reduced

the policy interest rate by 25 basis points, it would be appropriate to adjust the policy

interest rate by 25 basis points as in the past.

Mr. H. Kamezaki dissented from the proposal for the following reason. When

reducing the policy interest rate, the Bank should show market participants and economic

entities that it was determined to prevent the materialization of downside risks to the

economy and support economic growth, but a reduction of the policy interest rate by a

smaller margin of 20 basis points might convey the impression that the Bank was holding

back from taking decisive policy action or that there was room for further policy interest

rate reductions.

Members agreed that it would be appropriate to make public the reasons for some

members' dissent from the chairman's policy proposal on the guideline for money market

operations today rather than later with the release of the minutes of this meeting.

Although there was an opinion that there should be careful discussion about whether the

reasons for the dissent should be released with the policy statement, members finally

18


-----

concurred that, in order to gain the understanding of market participants, it would be

appropriate that the chairman give the reasons in full at the press conference following this

meeting.

**B. Vote on the Establishment of the Principal Terms and Conditions of**

**Complementary Deposit Facility as a Temporary Measure to Facilitate**

**Supplying of Funds**

Members voted unanimously to approve the staff proposal and agreed that the

decision should be made public.

**C. Vote on a Change in the Basic Discount Rate and the Basic Loan Rate and the**

**Setting of the Interest Rate to Be Applied under the Principal Terms and**

**Conditions of Complementary Deposit Facility as a Temporary Measure to**

**Facilitate Supplying of Funds**

To reflect the view of members, the chairman formulated the following two policy

proposals and put them to the vote: (1) a change in the basic discount rate and the basic loan

rate; and (2) setting of the interest rate to be applied under the Principal Terms and

Conditions of Complementary Deposit Facility as a Temporary Measure to Facilitate

Supplying of Funds.

**The Chairman's Policy Proposal on a Change in the Basic Discount Rate and the Basic**

**Loan Rate:**

1. The basic discount rate for discounting of bills pursuant to Article 33, paragraph 1, item

(i) of the Bank of Japan Act and the basic loan rate for loans made pursuant to Article 33,

paragraph 1, item (ii) of the Act will be as follows, effective immediately from the

announcement of the decision.

The basic discount rate and the basic loan rate will be changed to 0.5

percent.

2. A public statement will be decided separately.

19


-----

**The Chairman's Policy Proposal on the Setting of the Interest Rate to Be Applied to**

**the Complementary Deposit Facility:**

1. The spread between the uncollateralized overnight call rate target decided as the

guideline for money market operations and the interest rate to be applied under the Principal

Terms and Conditions of Complementary Deposit Facility as a Temporary Measure to

Facilitate Supplying of Funds will be as follows.

The spread will be 0.2 percentage point.

2. A public statement will be decided separately.

The chairman's policy proposal on a change in the basic discount rate and the basic

loan rate was approved by a unanimous vote.

Votes for the proposal: Mr. M. Shirakawa, Mr. H. Yamaguchi, Mr. K. G. Nishimura,

Ms. M. Suda, Mr. A. Mizuno, Mr. T. Noda, Mr. S. Nakamura, and Mr. H.

Kamezaki.

Votes against the proposal: None.

The chairman's policy proposal on the setting of the interest rate to be applied to

the complementary deposit facility was approved by a unanimous vote.

Votes for the proposal: Mr. M. Shirakawa, Mr. H. Yamaguchi, Mr. K. G. Nishimura,

Ms. M. Suda, Mr. A. Mizuno, Mr. T. Noda, Mr. S. Nakamura, and Mr. H.

Kamezaki.

Votes against the proposal: None.

**VIII. Discussion on the Public Statement on Monetary Policy Decisions**

Members discussed the statement "On Monetary Policy Decisions," and put it to

the vote. The Policy Board decided the text by a unanimous vote. It was confirmed that

the statement would be released immediately after the meeting (see Attachment 1).

20


-----

**IX. Discussion on the Outlook for Economic Activity and Prices**

Members discussed the draft of the _Outlook for Economic Activity and Prices_

(consisting of "The Bank's View" and "The Background"), and put "The Bank's View" to

the vote. The Policy Board decided, by a unanimous vote, the text of "The Bank's View."

It was confirmed that "The Bank's View" would be published on October 31, 2008 and the

whole report on November 4, 2008.

Votes for the proposal: Mr. M. Shirakawa, Mr. H. Yamaguchi, Mr. K. G. Nishimura,

Ms. M. Suda, Mr. A. Mizuno, Mr. T. Noda, Mr. S. Nakamura, and Mr. H.

Kamezaki.

Votes against the proposal: None.

**X. Approval of the Minutes of the Monetary Policy Meetings**

The Policy Board approved unanimously the minutes of the Monetary Policy

Meetings of September 29, 2008 and October 6 and 7 for release on November 6, 2008.

21


-----

Attachment 1

October 31, 2008

Bank of Japan

**On Monetary Policy Decisions**

1. Adjustments in the world economy stemming from financial crises in the United States

and Europe have further increased in severity. Under these circumstances, increased

sluggishness in Japan's economic activity will likely remain over the next several

quarters with exports leveling off and the effects of earlier increases in energy and

materials prices persisting. As for prices, consumer price inflation is likely to decline

gradually reflecting the recent fall in commodity prices, although it remains relatively

high to date. The outlook for economic activity and prices is attended by increased

downside risks to economic activity but also by decreased upside risks to inflation

relative to the recent past.

2. The Bank, while strains in global financial markets have mounted, has undertaken

various prompt and decisive measures in providing liquidity, bearing in mind that the

most important contribution a central bank can make in this situation is to ensure

stability in financial markets. In addition, at the Monetary Policy Meeting held today,

the Bank judged that a reduction in policy interest rates and a further increase in the

flexibility of money market operations were necessary to maintain accommodative

financial conditions. Respective decisions are as follows.

(1) Change in the guideline for money market operations (decided by the chairman's

final decision after a split vote[[Note 1]])

[Note 1] Voting for the action: Mr. M. Shirakawa, Mr. H. Yamaguchi, Mr. K. G. Nishimura, and Mr. T.
Noda.
Voting against the action: Ms. M. Suda, Mr. A. Mizuno, Mr. S. Nakamura, and Mr. H.
Kamezaki.

22


-----

Lower the Bank's target for the uncollateralized overnight call rate by 20 basis

points and encourage it to remain at around 0.3 percent (effective immediately)

(Attachment 2).

(2) Change in the basic loan rate[[Note 2]] (decided by a unanimous vote[[Note 3]])

Lower the basic loan rate applicable under the complementary lending facility by

25 basis points to 0.5 percent (effective immediately).

(3) Introduction of Complementary Deposit Facility (decided by a unanimous vote[[Note 4]])

To ensure stability in money markets, a temporary measure will be introduced to

pay interest on excess reserve balances in order to further facilitate the

provisioning of sufficient liquidity toward the year-end and the fiscal year-end.

This measure will be effective from the November reserve maintenance period to

the March 2009 reserve maintenance period, and the interest rate applied will be

0.1 percent (Attachment 3).

3. Currently, the world economy is undergoing a process of correcting various imbalances

that accumulated during the past several years, and this will likely weigh on economic

activity for some time to come. Against this background, it will likely take some time

for the necessary conditions for Japan's economic recovery to be satisfied. The Bank

will continue to do its utmost to facilitate a return of Japan's economy to its sustainable

growth path with price stability through maintaining accommodative financial

conditions.

[Note 2] The basic loan rate is stipulated in Article 15, paragraph 1, item (ii) of the Bank of Japan Act.
The basic discount rate in item (i) in the same paragraph is also set at 0.5 percent (discounting
of bills has currently been suspended).

[Note 3] Voting for the action: Mr. M. Shirakawa, Mr. H. Yamaguchi, Mr. K. G. Nishimura, Ms. M.
Suda, Mr. A. Mizuno, Mr. T. Noda, Mr. S. Nakamura, and Mr. H. Kamezaki.
Voting against the action: None.

[Note 4] Voting for the action: Mr. M. Shirakawa, Mr. H. Yamaguchi, Mr. K. G. Nishimura, Ms. M.
Suda, Mr. A. Mizuno, Mr. T. Noda, Mr. S. Nakamura, and Mr. H. Kamezaki.
Voting against the action: None.

23


-----

Attachment 2

October 31, 2008

Bank of Japan

At the Monetary Policy Meeting held today, the Bank of Japan decided, by the

chairman's final decision after a split vote,[[Note]] to set the following guideline for money

market operations for the intermeeting period (effective immediately):

The Bank of Japan will encourage the uncollateralized overnight call rate

to be at around 0.3 percent.

[Note] Voting for the action: Mr. M. Shirakawa, Mr. H. Yamaguchi, Mr. K. G. Nishimura, and Mr. T.
Noda.
Voting against the action: Ms. M. Suda, Mr. A. Mizuno, Mr. S. Nakamura, and Mr. H.
Kamezaki.

24


-----

Attachment 3

October 31, 2008

Bank of Japan

**Introduction of Complementary Deposit Facility**

**as a Temporary Measure to Facilitate Supplying of Funds**

1. The Bank of Japan, based on the announcement released on October 8, has been

reviewing the Bank's reserve system as a step to further improve the workings of

money market operations in order to ensure stability in financial markets. As a

conclusion has been drawn, the Policy Board of the Bank decided, at the Monetary

Policy Meeting held today, to introduce Complementary Deposit Facility.[[Note]]

2. Global financial markets continue to remain under increased strains and their influences

are beginning to be felt in Japanese financial markets. Under these circumstances, the

Bank intends to provide sufficient liquidity toward the year-end and the fiscal year-end

to ensure stability in financial markets. Provisioning of sufficient liquidity, however,

may induce the uncollateralized overnight call rate (the policy interest rate) to sharply

fall below its targeted level.

3. Complementary Deposit Facility is a temporary measure under which the Bank pays

interest, calculated by the interest rate set below the targeted level of the policy interest

rate, on excess reserve balances (balances held at the account with the Bank in excess

of required reserves under the reserve deposit requirement system). This facility is

expected to further increase the flexibility of the Bank's money market operations by

enabling sufficient provision of liquidity while maintaining the policy interest rate at

around its targeted level.

[Note] For details, see "Establishment of Principal Terms and Conditions of Complementary Deposit
Facility as a Temporary Measure to Facilitate Supplying of Funds."

25


-----

4. In view of maintaining the smooth functioning of money markets, the Bank has set the

interest rate applied to excess reserve balances as 0.1 percent, 20 basis points below the

Bank's target rate (0.3 percent). This measure will be effective from the November

reserve maintenance period to the March 2009 reserve maintenance period.

5. The Bank will continue to do its utmost to ensure the stability of financial markets

through money market operations complemented by the use of this facility.

26


-----

