Not to be released until 8:50 a.m.
Japan Standard Time on Tuesday,
January 27, 2009.

January 27, 2009

Bank of Japan

# Minutes of the Monetary Policy Meeting
## on December 18 and 19, 2008

(English translation prepared by the Bank's staff based on the Japanese original)


-----

Please contact the Bank of Japan at the address below in advance to request permission

when reproducing or copying the content of this document for commercial purposes.

Secretariat of the Policy Board, Bank of Japan

P.O. Box 30, Nihonbashi, Tokyo 103-8660, Japan

Please credit the source when quoting, reproducing, or copying the content of this

document.


-----

A Monetary Policy Meeting of the Bank of Japan Policy Board was held in the

Head Office of the Bank of Japan in Tokyo on Thursday, December 18, 2008, from 2:00

p.m. to 5:06 p.m., and on Friday, December 19, from 9:00 a.m. to 2:00 p.m.[1]

**Policy Board Members Present**

**Mr. M. Shirakawa, Chairman, Governor of the Bank of Japan**

**Mr. H. Yamaguchi, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Japan**

**Mr. K. G. Nishimura, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Japan**

**Ms. M. Suda**

**Mr. A. Mizuno**

**Mr. T. Noda**

**Mr. S. Nakamura**

**Mr. H. Kamezaki**

Government Representatives Present

Mr. W. Takeshita, Senior Vice Minister of Finance, Ministry of Finance[2]

Mr. C. Kawakita, Deputy Vice Minister for Policy Planning and Coordination, Ministry

of Finance[3]

Mr. B. Fujioka, Vice Minister for Policy Coordination, Cabinet Office

Reporting Staff

Mr. A. Horii, Executive Director (Assistant Governor)

Mr. K. Ido, Executive Director

Mr. K. Yamamoto, Executive Director

Mr. H. Nakaso, Executive Director[4]

1 The minutes of this meeting were approved by the Policy Board at the Monetary Policy Meeting
held on January 21 and 22, 2009 as "a document describing an outline of the discussion at the
meeting" stipulated in Article 20, paragraph 1 of the Bank of Japan Act of 1997. Those present are
referred to by their titles at the time of the meeting.
2 Mr. W. Takeshita was present on December 19.
3 Mr. C. Kawakita was present on December 18.
4 Mr. H. Nakaso concurrently held the post of Director-General of the Financial Markets
Department.

1


-----

Mr. M. Amamiya, Director-General, Monetary Affairs Department

Mr. M. Ayuse, Associate Director-General, Monetary Affairs Department[5]

Mr. T. Sekine, Associate Director-General, Monetary Affairs Department

Mr. K. Momma, Director-General, Research and Statistics Department

Mr. E. Maeda, Associate Director-General, Research and Statistics Department

Mr. T. Nunami, Director-General, International Department

Secretariat of the Monetary Policy Meeting

Mr. K. Osugi, Director-General, Secretariat of the Policy Board

Mr. K. Shigyoh, Director, Deputy Head of Secretarial Services for the Board, Secretariat

of the Policy Board

Mr. T. Kato, Senior Economist, Monetary Affairs Department

Mr. T. Sakamoto, Director, Head, Monetary Operations Planning, Monetary Affairs

Department[5]

Mr. A. Otani, Senior Economist, Monetary Affairs Department

Mr. K. Nakamura, Senior Economist, Monetary Affairs Department

5 Messrs. M. Ayuse and T. Sakamoto were present on December 19 from 9:00 a.m. to 9:26 a.m.

2


-----

**I. Summary of Staff Reports on Economic and Financial Developments[6]**

**A. Money Market Operations in the Intermeeting Period**

The Bank conducted money market operations in accordance with the guideline

decided at the previous meetings on November 20 and 21 and December 2, 2008.[7] The

uncollateralized overnight call rate had recently been at around 0.3 percent: it was above 0.3

percent through the end of November and had been in the 0.2-0.3 percent range since the

beginning of December due to the provision of ample funds by the Bank.

To ensure market stability in Japan, the Bank provided sufficient funds maturing

over the year-end and actively purchased Japanese government securities and CP under

repurchase agreements.

**B. Recent Developments in Financial Markets**

Japan's money market had been increasingly nervous. Interest rates on CP

declined somewhat in late November due to an increase in the Bank's purchases of CP

under repurchase agreements, but since the beginning of December they had been on an

upward trend as investors had become more selective about the issues they purchased and

demand for liquidity had risen with the year-end approaching. The general collateral (GC)

repo rates had remained high. Regarding interest rates on term instruments, yields on

treasury bills (TBs) and financing bills (FBs) had been at high levels, and Euroyen rates for

periods that included the year-end rose substantially.

Japanese stock prices dropped considerably in October, and had since been

unstable at low levels mainly reflecting overseas stock price movements and concern about

lower corporate profits. The Nikkei 225 Stock Average had been moving in the range of

8,000-9,000 yen recently. Long-term interest rates in Japan had declined, reflecting

decreases in U.S. and European long-term interest rates due mainly to deterioration in the

outlook for the world economy. The benchmark rate had recently been at around 1.3

percent.

The yen appreciated against the U.S. dollar, reflecting heightened concern about

6 Reports were made based on information available at the time of the meeting.
7 The guideline was as follows:
The Bank of Japan will encourage the uncollateralized overnight call rate to remain at
around 0.3 percent.

3


-----

the risk that the downturn in the U.S. economy might be longer and deeper than expected

and also reflecting the policy decisions by the Federal Reserve. It had recently been traded

in the range of 89-90 yen to the dollar.

**C. Overseas Economic and Financial Developments**

U.S. economic conditions had deteriorated. A substantial decline in housing

investment continued, and home prices continued to fall. Private consumption had been

decreasing, and business fixed investment had started to decline. In this situation,

industrial production had been decreasing and the number of employees had declined

considerably. Funding conditions for firms and households had remained tight. As for

prices, the year-on-year rate of increase in the consumer price index (CPI) for all items had

been declining, due to a fall in energy prices and a leveling-off of increases in food prices;

that in the CPI for all items less energy and food, or the core CPI, had declined to 2 percent.

Economic conditions in the euro area had deteriorated. Exports were more or

less unchanged, while private consumption, business fixed investment, and housing

investment had decreased. As for prices, the year-on-year rate of increase in the

Harmonized Index of Consumer Prices (HICP) had been declining, due to a fall in energy

prices and a leveling-off of increases in food prices. Economic conditions in the United

Kingdom had also deteriorated, mainly reflecting the significant adjustments in the housing

market.

Deceleration in the Chinese economy had become evident: although domestic

demand continued to show high growth, exports had declined sharply. Economic growth

in India, the NIEs, and the ASEAN countries had also decelerated. As for prices, the

year-on-year rate of increase in the CPI for all items had declined in many Asian economies,

due to a fall in energy prices and a leveling-off of increases in food prices.

Global financial markets remained under increased strain. In money markets,

Treasury-Eurodollar (TED) spreads had narrowed, but they remained wide, particularly for

periods that included the year-end. In credit markets, credit spreads on corporate bonds

had widened and new funding of firms had been low. U.S. and European stock prices had

been volatile, reflecting both concerns about economic deterioration and increased

expectations about government stimulus packages. U.S. and European long-term interest

rates had declined mainly due to concerns about economic deterioration.

4


-----

**D. Economic and Financial Developments in Japan**

1. Economic developments

Exports had decreased. They were expected to decrease substantially for the time

being, due to the further slowdown in overseas economies and the appreciation of the yen.

With regard to domestic private demand, business fixed investment had declined,

mainly due to the decrease in corporate profits and the deterioration in business sentiment.

It was likely to decline significantly for the time being, mainly due to the further slowdown

in overseas economies, the decrease in corporate profits, and the deterioration in firms'

funding conditions.

Private consumption had weakened, as the employment and income situation had

become increasingly severe. The number of new passenger-car registrations had dropped

further, and sales at department stores and supermarkets had remained relatively weak.

Consumer sentiment had deteriorated mainly due to the drop in stock prices and growing

employment uncertainty. Private consumption was likely to continue weakening, as the

employment and income situation would become increasingly severe for the time being.

Housing investment had been more or less flat. The number of housing starts,

which was a leading indicator of housing investment and had been more or less flat from

January 2008 until recently, had dropped. Housing investment was expected to be flat or

weaken somewhat for the time being, given the sluggishness in housing starts.

Production had decreased substantially. It was likely that production would

continue to register substantial declines, since the weakness in domestic and external

demand had become more evident and inventory adjustment pressures had increased.

Inventories had risen noticeably, while shipments had decreased substantially; the

shipment-inventory balance had therefore deteriorated.

As for employment and income, growth in household income had been sluggish,

as the year-on-year rate of change in nominal wages per worker had been around 0 percent.

Household income was likely to weaken somewhat for the time being, in response to the

decreases in corporate profits and production.

On the price front, commodity prices had fallen significantly. The three-month

rate of decrease in the domestic corporate goods price index (CGPI) had been large and the

CGPI was likely to continue decreasing for the time being, mainly due to the declines in

5


-----

commodity prices. The year-on-year rate of increase in the CPI (excluding fresh food) had

moderated to around 2 percent, mainly due to the declines in the prices of petroleum

products. It was expected to continue to moderate for the time being reflecting the

declines in the prices of petroleum products and the stabilization of food prices.

2. Financial environment

Financial conditions had deteriorated sharply on the whole: funding conditions in

the CP and corporate bond markets had tightened; and an increasing number of firms, not

only small but also large ones, had reported that their financial positions were weak and

lending attitudes of financial institutions were severe. The overnight call rate had been at

a low level given the state of economic activity and price developments. However, it

seemed that funding costs for firms had recently edged up, as indicated by the wider credit

spreads on CP and corporate bonds. The amount outstanding of CP and corporate bonds

issued had been below the previous year's level, as investors continued to be selective in

their purchases of them. The amount outstanding of bank lending had increased,

particularly to large firms, reflecting their need to compensate for the decline in the issuance

of CP and corporate bonds and to secure more liquidity, although lending to small firms had

remained below the previous year's level. Despite the overall increase in bank lending, an

increasing number of firms, including large ones, had reported that their financial positions

were weak and lending attitudes of financial institutions were severe. The money stock

(M2) had been increasing at a somewhat slower pace than previously.

**II. Establishment of Principal Terms and Conditions of the Special Funds-Supplying**

**Operations to Facilitate Corporate Financing**

**A. Staff Proposal**

In accordance with the decision made at the Monetary Policy Meeting held on

December 2, 2008 to introduce a new operation utilizing corporate debt, the staff would like

to propose that the Bank take the necessary steps to introduce Special Funds-Supplying

Operations to Facilitate Corporate Financing, such as establishment of Principal Terms and

Conditions of the Special Funds-Supplying Operations to Facilitate Corporate Financing.

6


-----

**B. Discussion by the Policy Board and Vote**

Members voted unanimously to approve the proposal and agreed that the decision

should be made public.

**III. Establishment of Temporary Rules regarding the Bank's Transactions with the**

**Development Bank of Japan Inc. (DBJ) Related to Money Market Operations**

**A. Staff Proposal**

The DBJ, which would start outright purchases of CP in accordance with the

measures taken by the government, had recently requested that it be allowed to become a

counterparty in the Bank's funds-supplying operations collateralized by CP. As it would

be appropriate, with the aim of facilitating corporate financing, to include the DBJ as a

counterparty in the Bank's funds-supplying operations against pooled collateral, purchases

of CP under repurchase agreements, and special funds-supplying operations to facilitate

corporate financing, the staff would like to propose that the Bank take the necessary steps.

**B. Discussion by the Policy Board and Vote**

Members voted unanimously to approve the proposal and agreed that the decision

should be made public.

**IV. Amendment to Principal Terms and Conditions for U.S. Dollar Funds-Supplying**

**Operations against Pooled Collateral**

**A. Staff Proposal**

In view of the recent liquidity conditions in the U.S. dollar money market, the staff

would like to propose, with the aim of ensuring stability in financial markets by conducting

appropriate money market operations, that the Bank take the necessary actions to extend the

effective period of the U.S. dollar funds-supplying operations against pooled collateral.

**B. Discussion by the Policy Board and Vote**

Members voted unanimously to approve the proposal and agreed that the decision

should be made public.

7


-----

**V. Summary of Discussions by the Policy Board on Economic and Financial**

**Developments**

**A. Economic Developments**

With regard to economic and financial conditions abroad, members shared the

view that, in a situation where the effects of financial crises in the United States and Europe

had been spreading even to emerging economies, the adverse feedback loop between

financial and economic activity had been operating globally, making the slowdown in

overseas economies more pronounced. One member said that the recent sharp

deterioration in economic and financial conditions abroad reflected both (1) the adverse

feedback loop between financial and economic activity and (2) the downward spiral of

declining production, income, and spending stemming from the decrease in exports. The

member added that both these underlying negative factors were growing rapidly on a global

scale. A different member expressed the view that an inter-regional adverse feedback loop

between industrialized and emerging economies was operating: the economic downturn in

the United States and Europe was adversely affecting emerging economies and the

consequent slowdown in emerging economies was reducing exports to them from

industrialized economies, thereby depressing the latter in turn.

Turning to the U.S. economy, members concurred that economic conditions had

deteriorated as the adverse feedback loop between financial and economic activity

worsened. One member noted that new mortgage applications had increased owing to the

recent decline in mortgage rates. In contrast, some members said that adjustments in the

housing market continued and there were no signs of improvement. Some members noted

that private consumption had decreased against the background of deterioration in the

employment and income situation and consumer confidence. One member added that,

although retail sales during the early part of the holiday season were above the previous

year's level because of price discounts, the final results were likely to be weak. A few

members said that business fixed investment had also declined due to weakening demand at

home and abroad and financial institutions' tightening of lending standards. Based on

these assessments, members agreed that considerable uncertainty remained regarding when

and how the adverse feedback loop between financial and economic activity would

diminish.

On Asian economies, some members said that deceleration in the Chinese

8


-----

economy had become evident. A few members commented that, in China, given that some

indicators such as tax revenues and imports had recently fallen significantly below the

previous year's levels, the economy might be decelerating faster than the GDP figure

suggested. A different member noted that Japanese firms in China had recently been

suffering sharp declines in domestic and international orders, and said that closer attention

should therefore be paid to future developments in the Chinese economy, including effects

of monetary and fiscal policies. Some members were of the view that the NIEs and the

ASEAN economies had been decelerating further, with their exports decreasing sharply and

their domestic demand decelerating.

Based on the above discussion on economic and financial conditions abroad,

members discussed the state of Japan's economy. They shared the view that economic

conditions in Japan had been deteriorating due mainly to the decrease in exports caused by

the slowdown in overseas economies and to the weakening of domestic demand, as well as

to the sharp deterioration in financial conditions, and that they were likely to increase in

severity for the immediate future. Many members noted the following as factors behind

the recent rapid change in the state of Japan's economy: (1) there had been declines in

production, income, and spending stemming from the decrease in exports; (2) an adverse

feedback loop between financial and economic activity had started to operate; and (3) the

sharp deterioration in business and consumer sentiment had exerted downward pressure on

economic activity. One member said that the performance of the automobile and electrical

machinery industries, which supported the economic expansion until recently, had

deteriorated substantially due to the significant change in the state of overseas economies,

and the negative effects of this deterioration were spreading to other industries.

As for the outlook, many members expressed the following view: there was

growing uncertainty regarding the outlook for Japan's economy that it would return onto a

sustainable growth path with price stability; and, given the slowdown in overseas

economies and the turmoil in global financial markets, it would likely take some time for

the necessary conditions for Japan's economic recovery to be satisfied. Some members

said that the economy was likely to register negative growth for both fiscal 2008 and 2009.

One member expressed the view that there was an increasing risk that the economy might

not start to pick up in the middle of fiscal 2009 as had been expected. A few members said

9


-----

that due attention should be paid to the risk that the adverse feedback loop between

financial and economic activity might also intensify in Japan.

With regard to developments in each demand component, members concurred that

exports had decreased against the background of the slowdown in overseas economies, and

were likely to decrease substantially due to the further slowdown in overseas economies and

the appreciation of the yen. One member said that exports not only to the United States

and Europe but also to Asia had started to decrease, and that future developments therefore

warranted careful attention.

Members agreed that business fixed investment had declined, and was likely to

decline significantly for the time being mainly due to the further slowdown in overseas

economies, the decrease in corporate profits, and the deterioration in firms' funding

conditions. One member noted that proactive investment, for example in development of

solar batteries, continued to be observed. Some members, on the other hand, said that

weakening demand at home and abroad, tightening of funding conditions for firms, and the

sharp deterioration in business sentiment had been causing cancellation or postponement of

firms' capital investment plans. As for the outlook, many members said that, since the

December _Tankan_ (Short-Term Economic Survey of Enterprises in Japan) showed a

significant increase in the number of firms reporting excessive production capacity, future

developments, including the risk that medium- to long-term growth expectations of firms

might weaken, required closer attention.

Members concurred that private consumption had weakened as the employment

and income situation had become increasingly severe, and was likely to continue weakening.

Some members said that given the recent increase in the number of firms that felt their

employment level was excessive, careful attention should be paid to possible further

deterioration in the employment situation and its effects on private consumption.

Many members expressed the view that production had decreased substantially

and was likely to continue to register substantial declines. One member commented that

the decrease in exports had caused a substantial decrease in production of processing

industries such as the automobile industry, and this in turn was depressing production in

materials industries. Some members explained, as background to the sharp decrease in

production, that an increase in inventories caused by a decrease in sales at home and abroad

tended to lead to an immediate decrease in production due to the wide application of

10


-----

improved supply chain management.

As for prices, members agreed that the year-on-year rate of increase in the CPI

(excluding fresh food) had started to moderate, mainly due to the declines in the prices of

petroleum products, and was likely to moderate further reflecting the declines in the prices

of petroleum products and the stabilization of food prices. Many members expressed the

view that the year-on-year rate of change in the CPI was likely to become negative in fiscal

2009, given that energy and materials prices had fallen and the negative output gap was

expected to widen. One member said that it was necessary to bear in mind that, in the long

run, the worldwide monetary easing might cause a recurrence of the surge in crude oil

prices.

**B. Financial Developments**

Members concurred that financial conditions in Japan had deteriorated sharply on

the whole. A few members said that funding costs for firms had recently edged up, as

increased credit spreads had led to higher issuance rates of CP and corporate bonds and

banks' lending rates also seemed to have risen slightly. Some members commented that

firms were increasingly suffering from difficult funding conditions, especially limited

availability of funds, as shown by, for example, the continuing decrease in the issuance of

CP and corporate bonds and by the December Tankan, which indicated that the number of

firms that saw financial institutions' lending attitudes as "severe" -- not only small firms but

also large ones -- exceeded those that saw them as "accommodative." A few members said

that financial institutions had been increasing lending to large firms against the background

of the deterioration in the issuing environment for CP and corporate bonds, and this,

coupled with their difficulty in increasing lending further due to capital constraints, had

been worsening funding conditions for small firms.

Based on these discussions, members agreed that funding conditions for firms had

tightened further, and it was becoming difficult for the effects of low interest rates to

permeate the economy.

**VI. Summary of Discussions on Monetary Policy for the Immediate Future**

Based on the above discussion of economic and financial developments, members

discussed the guideline for money market operations for the intermeeting period ahead.

11


-----

One member expressed the opinion that the Bank should maintain the policy interest rate at

its current level for the following reasons: it was already very accommodative; and while

reducing the policy interest rate to 0.1 percent would produce a marginal stimulative effect

on the economy, it was likely to cause substantial deterioration in the functioning of the

market mechanism as it would discourage financial institutions from offering funds to the

money market and make the market inactive. Many members, however, were of the view

that the policy interest rate should be reduced to 0.1 percent, since the current sharp

deterioration in economic conditions was an emergency and practicable policy measures

should therefore be taken immediately. One member said, with regard to the thinking on

the monetary policy stance, that the current situation required the Bank to take measures to

deal with firms' difficulty in financing, and that when deciding whether or not to reduce the

policy interest rate, the Bank should weigh both positive effects -- the effect that monetary

easing would have even in the current corporate financing situation -- and negative effects

-- further deterioration in the functioning of the market mechanism -- of reducing the policy

interest rate. As for the efficacy of a policy rate reduction, one member said that despite

the reduction on October 31, 2008, interbank rates on term instruments had risen, and

therefore a further reduction at this juncture would not necessarily push down these rates to

any great extent amid banks' heightened concerns about counterparty risk. On this point, a

different member commented that introducing policy measures aimed at lowering interest

rates on term instruments, which remained at high levels, would be more appropriate than

reducing the policy interest rate to 0.1 percent. Against this view, some members said that

if the Bank further reduced the policy interest rate and took measures to facilitate corporate

financing at the same time, the monetary easing effect was likely to smoothly and

effectively permeate the economy. A few members added that this combination of

measures could also be expected to buoy business and consumer sentiment, which had

recently been deteriorating rapidly. Based on these discussions, most members agreed that

the Bank should reduce the policy interest rate to 0.1 percent.

Members next discussed the appropriate levels of the basic loan rate and the

interest rate applied to the complementary deposit facility. Many members said that, in

parallel with the reduction in the policy interest rate, the basic loan rate should be lowered

to 0.3 percent. As for the interest rate applied to the complementary deposit facility, some

members said that it should remain at the current level of 0.1 percent. One member,

12


-----

however, expressed the view that it should be lowered to 0 percent.

Members then discussed the future conduct of monetary policy. Regarding the

scope for further reducing the policy interest rate, some members expressed the view that

0.1 percent was the lowest possible level that would not impair the proper functioning of the

market mechanism. One member expressed the opinion that, given that economic

conditions were very likely to deteriorate further, a policy option of reducing the policy

interest rate further from 0.1 percent should not be ruled out.

As for possible additional policy measures when the scope for reducing the policy

interest rate was very limited, one member said that the Bank should shift its emphasis to

working upon longer-term interest rates and to facilitating corporate financing. Some

members commented that since interest rates on term instruments remained at high levels,

one possibility was to take measures that would have stronger downward impact on these

rates.

Members considered measures to facilitate corporate financing. They concurred

that, given the current economic situation, the tightness in corporate financing could

increase further during the run-up to the fiscal year-end, and thus more drastic measures to

facilitate corporate financing were necessary. They then agreed that the Bank should

introduce outright purchases of CP as a temporary measure. One member said that, since

an outright purchase of CP from a financial institution would ease its capital constraint,

such purchases were expected to increase lending to firms, including small ones, that were

encountering severe lending attitudes at financial institutions. The member continued that,

as the positive effects of the Bank's outright purchases of CP would be brought about by

financial institutions' lending activity, it was important that the Bank's policy intention be

clearly communicated to them. A few members expressed the view that such purchases of

CP could become a catalyst for the market liquidity of CP to recover. One member added

that outright purchases of CP by the Bank would also enhance the price-discovery function

in the CP market.

Members shared the view that it was an exceptional step for a central bank to take

policy measures that involved taking on the credit risk of individual firms. Many members

said that some safeguards were needed to ensure the maintenance of the Bank's financial

health as well as public confidence in the currency. In relation to these points, members

agreed that it was important to examine what conditions for measures that involved taking

13


-----

on the credit risk of individual firms were necessary and appropriate, in terms of the range

of corporate debt to be accepted, the degree of risk involved, and the duration of the

measures, and also to investigate ways, including the involvement of the government, to

avoid impairing the Bank's financial health or public confidence in the currency.

Members also discussed measures regarding outright purchases of Japanese

government bonds (JGBs). They agreed that while the amount outstanding of banknotes

issued had recently been at a high level, the amount of JGBs held by the Bank had been

declining as, in the Bank's purchases of government securities, the proportion of those with

short remaining maturities had increased, and as a result the burden of short-term

funds-supplying operations was increasing. Given this situation, they agreed that, for the

smooth conduct of money market operations, the burden of short-term funds-supplying

operations should be reduced by increasing the amount of outright purchases of JGBs to

provide longer-term funds. Specifically, they agreed to increase the amount from 1.2

trillion yen to 1.4 trillion yen per month, in view of the amount outstanding of JGBs held by

the Bank relative to that of banknotes issued. They also concurred that it was appropriate

to add 30-year bonds, floating-rate bonds, and inflation-indexed bonds to the list of JGBs

eligible for the Bank's operations, in view of the expansion of the markets for these bonds.

They also agreed that the Bank should purchase JGBs from specific maturity segments in

order to prevent the remaining maturities of JGBs purchased from becoming too short or

too long.

**VII. Remarks by Government Representatives**

The representative from the Ministry of Finance made the following remarks.

(1) Economic conditions in Japan were worsening, and conditions for corporate financing

had become increasingly severe.

(2) The government, whose immediate priority was to stimulate the economy, was drawing

up the second supplementary budget for fiscal 2008 and the budget for fiscal 2009, with

a view to making these and the first supplementary budget for fiscal 2008 work together.

The total amount of the additional fiscal measures for fiscal 2008 was equivalent to

about 2 percent of GDP, and the budget for fiscal 2009 was likely to be approximately

88.5 trillion yen. The government would continue to give priority to stimulating the

economy.

14


-----

(3) The government would like the Bank to promptly implement outright purchases of CP

and increase its outright purchases of JGBs, as these would be very timely measures in

the current situation.

(4) The government would like the Bank to continue to conduct monetary policy in an

appropriate and flexible manner so as to support the economy from the financial side,

based on the Bank's experience of taking various measures in the post-bubble economic

and financial conditions.

The representative from the Cabinet Office made the following remarks.

(1) Japan's economy had weakened further, and it appeared to be in a contraction phase.

Looking ahead, there was a risk that the economic situation in Japan would become

more severe, given the worsening global financial crisis and the possibility of a further

slowdown in overseas economies. The government expected that Japan's real GDP

growth rate for fiscal 2009 would be around 0.0 percent, and there was a risk that the

deflationary pressure would increase.

(2) Based on the "Immediate Policy Package to Safeguard People's Daily Lives," the

government would take prompt and bold action. As the year-end was approaching, the

government was determined to take all possible measures to support employment and

corporate financing.

(3) The Prime Minister expected the Bank to take measures to provide ample liquidity to

the market. Given the recent severe economic and financial conditions at home and

abroad, the government would like to request the Bank to support the economy by

conducting monetary policy in an appropriate and flexible manner, taking account of the

government's policy efforts and its outlook for the economy and sharing the basic

perspective on macroeconomic management with the government.

(4) The government welcomed the proposed reduction in the policy interest rate as an

appropriate response to address the current severe economic and financial conditions.

The government considered that the policy action was also consistent with the

government's basic thinking that international cooperation was important. From the

viewpoint of facilitating corporate financing, for which conditions were tightening

sharply, it was important that the Bank swiftly implement outright purchases of CP.

15


-----

**VIII. Votes**

**A. Vote on the Guideline for Money Market Operations**

Based on the above discussions, most members expressed the view that it would

be appropriate to lower the Bank's target for the uncollateralized overnight call rate from

around 0.3 percent to around 0.1 percent.

To reflect the majority view, the chairman formulated the following proposal and

put it to the vote.

**The Chairman's Policy Proposal on the Guideline for Money Market Operations:**

1. The guideline for money market operations for the intermeeting period ahead will be as

follows, effective immediately from the announcement of the decision.

The Bank of Japan will encourage the uncollateralized overnight call rate

to be at around 0.1 percent.

2. A public statement will be decided separately.

Votes for the proposal: Mr. M. Shirakawa, Mr. H. Yamaguchi, Mr. K. G. Nishimura,

Ms. M. Suda, Mr. A. Mizuno, Mr. S. Nakamura, and Mr. H. Kamezaki.

Votes against the proposal: Mr. T. Noda.

Mr. T. Noda dissented from the above proposal for the following reasons. First,

since market functioning had already weakened, the Bank should avoid taking a policy

action that would lead to further weakening. Specifically, to maintain the proper

functioning of the market mechanism, the interest rate applied to the complementary deposit

facility and the spread between it and the policy interest rate should each be kept above a

certain level. Reducing the policy interest rate to 0.1 percent would eliminate the spread

between the two rates, posing the risk of discouraging financial institutions from offering

funds to the money market and making the market inactive. And second, the current level

of the policy interest rate was already very accommodative. While reducing the policy

interest rate to 0.1 percent would produce a marginal stimulative effect on the economy, it

was likely to cause substantial deterioration in the functioning of the market mechanism.

16


-----

Introducing policy measures aimed at lowering interest rates on term instruments, which

remained at high levels, was more appropriate than reducing the policy interest rate.

**B. Votes on a Change in the Basic Discount Rate and the Basic Loan Rate and on the**

**Setting of the Interest Rate to Be Applied to the Complementary Deposit Facility**

To reflect the view of members, the chairman formulated the following two policy

proposals and put them to the vote: (1) a change in the basic discount rate and the basic loan

rate; and (2) setting of the interest rate to be applied to the complementary deposit facility.

**The Chairman's Policy Proposal on a Change in the Basic Discount Rate and the Basic**

**Loan Rate:**

1. The basic discount rate for discounting of bills pursuant to Article 33, paragraph 1, item

(i) of the Bank of Japan Act and the basic loan rate for loans made pursuant to Article 33,

paragraph 1, item (ii) of the Act will be as follows, effective immediately from the

announcement of the decision.

The basic loan rate and the basic discount rate are set at 0.3 percent.

2. A public statement will be decided separately.

**The Chairman's Policy Proposal on the Setting of the Interest Rate to Be Applied to**

**the Complementary Deposit Facility:**

1. The spread between the uncollateralized overnight call rate target decided as the

guideline for money market operations and the interest rate to be applied under Principal

Terms and Conditions of the Complementary Deposit Facility as a Temporary Measure to

Facilitate Supplying of Funds will be as follows.

The spread is set at 0 percentage point.

2. A public statement will be decided separately.

The chairman's policy proposal on a change in the basic discount rate and the basic

17


-----

loan rate was approved by a unanimous vote.

Votes for the proposal: Mr. M. Shirakawa, Mr. H. Yamaguchi, Mr. K. G. Nishimura,

Ms. M. Suda, Mr. A. Mizuno, Mr. T. Noda, Mr. S. Nakamura, and Mr. H.

Kamezaki.

Votes against the proposal: None.

The chairman's policy proposal on the setting of the interest rate to be applied to

the complementary deposit facility was approved by a majority vote.

Votes for the proposal: Mr. M. Shirakawa, Mr. H. Yamaguchi, Mr. K. G. Nishimura,

Ms. M. Suda, Mr. T. Noda, Mr. S. Nakamura, and Mr. H. Kamezaki.

Votes against the proposal: Mr. A. Mizuno.

Mr. A. Mizuno dissented from the above proposal for the following reason.

Policy action to affect interest rates on term instruments more strongly might be taken in

the future, and the Bank's provision of ample liquidity as necessary would exert downward

pressure on the uncollateralized overnight call rate. To avoid impairing the market's

natural formation of interest rates, it would be appropriate to set the interest rate applied to

the complementary deposit facility at 0 percent.

**IX. Discussions on the Public Statements On Monetary Policy Decisions and**

**Additional Measures regarding Money Market Operation Tools**

Members discussed the statements On Monetary Policy Decisions and Additional

Measures regarding Money Market Operation Tools, and put them to the vote. The Policy

Board decided the texts by a unanimous vote. It was confirmed that the statements would

be released immediately after the meeting (see attachments 1 and 5).

**X. Approval of the Minutes of the Monetary Policy Meeting**

The Policy Board approved unanimously the minutes of the Monetary Policy

Meeting of November 20 and 21, 2008 for release on December 25, 2008.

18


-----

**XI. Approval of the Scheduled Dates of the Monetary Policy Meetings in**

**January-December 2009**

At the end of the meeting, the Policy Board approved the dates of the Monetary

Policy Meetings to be held in the period January-December 2009 for immediate release (see

Attachment 7).

19


-----

Attachment 1

December 19, 2008

Bank of Japan

**On Monetary Policy Decisions**

1. At the Monetary Policy Meeting held today, the Policy Board of the Bank of Japan

decided to reduce policy interest rates as below and also approved "Additional

Measures regarding Money Market Operation Tools" (see Attachment 5) by a

unanimous vote.[[Note 1]]

a. Change in the guideline for money market operations (decided by a 7-1 majority

vote[[Note 2]])

Lowering of the Bank's target for the uncollateralized overnight call rate by 20

basis points; it will be encouraged to remain at around 0.1 percent (effective

immediately) (Attachment 2).

b. Change in the basic loan rate[[Note 3]] (decided by a unanimous vote[[Note 4]])

Lowering of the basic loan rate applicable under the complementary lending

facility by 20 basis points to 0.3 percent (effective immediately) (Attachment 3).

[Note 1] Voting for the action: Mr. M. Shirakawa, Mr. H. Yamaguchi, Mr. K. G. Nishimura, Ms. M.
Suda, Mr. A. Mizuno, Mr. T. Noda, Mr. S. Nakamura, and Mr. H. Kamezaki.
Voting against the action: None.

[Note 2] Voting for the action: Mr. M. Shirakawa, Mr. H. Yamaguchi, Mr. K. G. Nishimura, Ms. M.
Suda, Mr. A. Mizuno, Mr. S. Nakamura, and Mr. H. Kamezaki.
Voting against the action: Mr. T. Noda.

[Note 3] The basic loan rate is stipulated in Article 15, paragraph 1, item (ii) of the Bank of Japan Act.
The basic discount rate in item (i) in the same paragraph is also set at 0.3 percent (discounting
of bills has currently been suspended).

[Note 4] Voting for the action: Mr. M. Shirakawa, Mr. H. Yamaguchi, Mr. K. G. Nishimura, Ms. M.
Suda, Mr. A. Mizuno, Mr. T. Noda, Mr. S. Nakamura, and Mr. H. Kamezaki.
Voting against the action: None.

20


-----

c. Interest rate applied to the complementary deposit facility (decided by a 7-1

majority vote[[Note 5]])

Interest rate applied to the complementary deposit facility will be 0.1 percent

(effective immediately) (Attachment 4).

2. Exports have been decreasing reflecting a slowdown in overseas economies, and

domestic demand has become weaker against the background of the declining

corporate profits and the worsening employment and income situation in the household

sector. Financial conditions have deteriorated sharply on the whole. Under these

circumstances, economic conditions have been deteriorating and are likely to increase

in severity for the immediate future. Meanwhile, the CPI inflation rate (excluding

fresh food), currently around 2 percent, is expected to moderate reflecting the declines

in the prices of petroleum products and the stabilization of food prices. Looking

further ahead, uncertainty in the outlook for the economy to return to a sustainable

growth path with price stability has increased. Given the slowdown in overseas

economies and the turmoil in global financial markets, it will likely take some time for

the necessary conditions for Japan's economic recovery to be satisfied.

3. With regard to risk factors, much depends on financial conditions in the United States

and Europe as well as developments in overseas economies, and attention will need to

be paid to the further downside risks posed to economic activity. In addition, if

financial conditions, as reflected in lending attitudes of financial institutions and

issuing conditions in the corporate bond and CP markets, should increase in severity,

pressures acting to depress economic activity from the financial side may become more

marked. Turning to prices, there is a possibility that the inflation rate will decline

further if downside risks to economic activity materialize or commodity prices fall

further.

[Note 5] Voting for the action: Mr. M. Shirakawa, Mr. H. Yamaguchi, Mr. K. G. Nishimura, Ms. M.
Suda, Mr. T. Noda, Mr. S. Nakamura, and Mr. H. Kamezaki.
Voting against the action: Mr. A. Mizuno.

21


-----

4. The Bank will continue to do its utmost as a central bank to facilitate the return of

Japan's economy to a sustainable growth path with price stability. It strongly expects

private financial institutions to respond appropriately by taking full advantage of low

interest rates and various money market operation measures introduced.

22


-----

Attachment 2

December 19, 2008

Bank of Japan

At the Monetary Policy Meeting held today, the Bank of Japan decided, by a 7-1

majority vote,[[Note]] to set the following guideline for money market operations for the

intermeeting period (effective immediately):

The Bank of Japan will encourage the uncollateralized overnight call rate

to be at around 0.1 percent.

[Note] Voting for the action: Mr. M. Shirakawa, Mr. H. Yamaguchi, Mr. K. G. Nishimura, Ms. M.
Suda, Mr. A. Mizuno, Mr. S. Nakamura, and Mr. H. Kamezaki.
Voting against the action: Mr. T. Noda.

23


-----

Attachment 3

December 19, 2008

Bank of Japan

**Changes in the Basic Loan Rate and the Basic Discount Rate**

At the Monetary Policy Meeting held today, the Bank of Japan decided, by a

unanimous vote,[[Note]] to set the basic loan rate which is stipulated in Article 33, paragraph 1,

item (ii) of the Bank of Japan Act, and the basic discount rate which is stipulated in item (i)

in the same paragraph as follows (effective immediately).

The basic loan rate and the basic discount rate are set at 0.3 percent.

[Note] Voting for the action: Mr. M. Shirakawa, Mr. H. Yamaguchi, Mr. K. G. Nishimura, Ms. M.
Suda, Mr. A. Mizuno, Mr. T. Noda, Mr. S. Nakamura, and Mr. H. Kamezaki.
Voting against the action: None.

24


-----

Attachment 4

December 19, 2008

Bank of Japan

**Setting of the Interest Rate to Be Applied**

**to the Complementary Deposit Facility**

At the Monetary Policy Meeting held today, the Bank of Japan decided, by a 7-1

majority vote,[[Note]] to set the spread between the uncollateralized overnight call rate target

decided as the guideline for money market operations and the interest rate to be applied

under the Principal Terms and Conditions of Complementary Deposit Facility as a

Temporary Measure to Facilitate Supplying of Funds as follows (effective immediately).

The spread is set at 0 percentage point.

[Note] Voting for the action: Mr. M. Shirakawa, Mr. H. Yamaguchi, Mr. K. G. Nishimura, Ms. M.
Suda, Mr. T. Noda, Mr. S. Nakamura, and Mr. H. Kamezaki.
Voting against the action: Mr. A. Mizuno.

25


-----

Attachment 5

December 19, 2008

Bank of Japan

**Additional Measures regarding Money Market Operation Tools**

The Bank, in addition to today's reduction in policy interest rates, judged that additional

measures regarding money market operation tools were necessary for the effects of

extremely low policy interest rates to prevail in financial markets and corporate financing.

Specifically, the Bank has decided to take the following measures to further facilitate

corporate financing in addition to measures regarding outright purchases of Japanese

government bonds (JGBs).

1. Measures regarding outright purchases of JGBs

To reduce the burden of short-term funds-supplying operations, the Bank will

increase its outright purchases of JGBs to provide longer-term funds, and will also

expand the range of eligible JGBs to be accepted.

a. Increase in outright purchases of JGBs

The amount of outright purchases of JGBs will be increased from 14.4 trillion

yen per year (1.2 trillion yen per month) to 16.8 trillion yen per year (1.4

trillion yen per month), effective immediately.

b. Expansion in the range of JGBs accepted in outright purchases and introduction

of purchases from specific maturity segments

The Bank will add 30-year bonds, floating-rate bonds, and inflation-indexed

bonds to the list of eligible JGBs. In order to prevent the remaining

maturities of JGBs purchased from becoming too short or too long, it will also

introduce a scheme to purchase JGBs from specific maturity segments

(maturity segments are defined as 1 year or less, more than 1 year through 10

years, and more than 10 years). The Chairman has instructed Bank staff to

26


-----

examine ways to actually implement these measures and map out a concrete

plan as swiftly as possible.

2. Measures to facilitate corporate financing

a. Introduction of "Special Funds-Supplying Operations to Facilitate Corporate

Financing" (decided by a unanimous vote[[Note 1]])

The terms and conditions of the new operation utilizing corporate debt, of

which introduction had been decided at the Monetary Policy Meeting held on

December 2, were decided. This operation will commence on January 8,

2009 (Attachment 6).

b. Introduction and examination of additional measures to facilitate corporate

financing including outright purchases of CP

Given that the tightness in corporate financing may increase further during the

run-up to the fiscal year-end, the Bank will introduce outright purchases of CP

as a temporary measure. In addition, the Bank decided to investigate how

other corporate financing instruments may be employed, and the Chairman has

instructed Bank staff to report the results at the Monetary Policy Meeting as

swiftly as possible. Since these measures essentially undertake credit risks of

individual firms, they will be an exceptional step taken by a central bank.

Taking this into account, the Chairman has asked Bank staff to examine the

scope of undertakings, in terms of the range of corporate financing instruments,

the degree of risk taking, and the duration of these measures, that are necessary

and appropriate for a central bank, and to investigate ways, including the

involvement of the government, to ensure the Bank's financial health as well as

confidence in the currency.

[Note 1] Voting for the action: Mr. M. Shirakawa, Mr. H. Yamaguchi, Mr. K. G. Nishimura, Ms. M.
Suda, Mr. A. Mizuno, Mr. T. Noda, Mr. S. Nakamura, and Mr. H. Kamezaki.
Voting against the action: None.

27


-----

c. Inclusion of the Development Bank of Japan Inc. (DBJ) as a counterparty in

operations such as CP repo operations (decided by a unanimous vote[[Note 2]])

Since the DBJ, in accordance with the measures taken by the government, is

starting outright purchases of CP as a temporary measure, the Bank decided to

include the DBJ as a counterparty in operations such as CP repo operations.

[Note 2] Voting for the action: Mr. M. Shirakawa, Mr. H. Yamaguchi, Mr. K. G. Nishimura, Ms. M.
Suda, Mr. A. Mizuno, Mr. T. Noda, Mr. S. Nakamura, and Mr. H. Kamezaki.
Voting against the action: None.

28


-----

Attachment 6

**Schedule of Special Funds-Supplying Operations**

**to Facilitate Corporate Financing**

Date of Offer Date of Exercise Date of Repayment

Jan. 8 (Thur.) Jan. 14 (Wed.) Apr. 3 (Fri.)

Jan. 20 (Tue.) Jan. 23 (Fri.) Apr. 8 (Wed.)

Feb. 10 (Tue.) Feb. 16 (Mon.) Apr. 10 (Fri.)

Feb. 27 (Fri.) Mar. 4 (Wed.) Apr. 15 (Wed.)

Mar. 10 (Tue.) Mar. 13 (Fri.) Apr. 21 (Tue.)

Mar. 16 (Mon.) Mar. 19 (Thur.) Apr. 27 (Mon.)

Note: All dates are in 2009. The above schedule is subject to change, and will be
revised and released accordingly.

29

|Date of Offer|Date of Exercise|Date of Repayment|
|---|---|---|
|Jan. 8 (Thur.)|Jan. 14 (Wed.)|Apr. 3 (Fri.)|
|Jan. 20 (Tue.)|Jan. 23 (Fri.)|Apr. 8 (Wed.)|
|Feb. 10 (Tue.)|Feb. 16 (Mon.)|Apr. 10 (Fri.)|
|Feb. 27 (Fri.)|Mar. 4 (Wed.)|Apr. 15 (Wed.)|
|Mar. 10 (Tue.)|Mar. 13 (Fri.)|Apr. 21 (Tue.)|
|Mar. 16 (Mon.)|Mar. 19 (Thur.)|Apr. 27 (Mon.)|


-----

Attachment 7

December 19, 2008

Bank of Japan

**Scheduled Dates of Monetary Policy Meetings in January-December 2009**


(Reference)
Publication of
Monthly Report


Publication of
Date of MPM
MPM Minutes


Publication of
Outlook Report
(The Bank's View)


Jan. 2009 21 (Wed.), 22 (Thur.) Feb. 24 (Tue.) -- 23 (Fri.)

Feb. 18 (Wed.), 19 (Thur.) Mar. 23 (Mon.) -- 20 (Fri.)

Mar. 16 (Mon.), 17 (Tue.) Apr. 10 (Fri.) -- 18 (Wed.)

Apr. 6 (Mon.), 7 (Tue.) May 8 (Fri.) -- 8 (Wed.)

30 (Thur.) May 27 (Wed.) 30 (Thur.) -
May 21 (Thur.), 22 (Fri.) June 19 (Fri.) -- 25 (Mon.)

June 15 (Mon.), 16 (Tue.) July 21 (Tue.) -- 17 (Wed.)

July 14 (Tue.), 15 (Wed.) Aug. 14 (Fri.) -- 16 (Thur.)

Aug. 10 (Mon.), 11 (Tue.) Sep. 25 (Fri.) -- 12 (Wed.)

Sep. 16 (Wed.), 17 (Thur.) Oct. 19 (Mon.) -- 18 (Fri.)

Oct. 13 (Tue.), 14 (Wed.) Nov. 5 (Thur.) -- 15 (Thur.)

30 (Fri.) Nov. 26 (Thur.) 30 (Fri.) -
Nov. 19 (Thur.), 20 (Fri.) Dec. 24 (Thur.) -- 24 (Tue.)

Dec. 17 (Thur.), 18 (Fri.) To be announced -- 21 (Mon.)

Note: The time of release will be, in principle, as follows.
MPM Minutes will be released at 8:50 a.m.
_Outlook for Economic Activity and Prices (Outlook Report):_
"The Bank's View" in the Outlook Report will be released at 3:00 p.m., and the full text at 2:00 p.m.
on the next business day.
_Monthly Report of Recent Economic and Financial Developments (Monthly Report):_
The Japanese original and the English translation for summary will be released at 2:00 p.m. (the
English translation for the full text will be published at 4:30 p.m. on the next business day).

30


-----

