**Bank of Israel**

**Report to the public of the Bank of Israel's discussions prior to setting the**
**interest rate for August 2006**

**The broad-forum discussion took place at the Bank of Israel on 23 July 2006,**
**and the narrow-forum discussions on 23 and 24 July 2006**

**General**

The process by which the Governor makes the monthly interest rate decision consists
of discussions at two levels; the first in a broad forum, and subsequent discussions in
a narrower forum. In the broad forum the relevant background economic conditions
are presented; these include real and monetary-financial developments in Israel's
economy, and developments in the global economy. Participants in this discussion
include the Governor, his deputy, the directors of the various economic departments
in the Bank (the Research Department, the Monetary Department, the Foreign
Currency Department, and the Foreign Exchange Activity Department), and
economists from the different departments who prepare and present the material for
discussion.

In the narrow forum, the department heads present their recommendations regarding
the interest rate decision, and following a discussion of the possible courses of action,
the Governor makes his decision.

A. THE STATE OF THE ECONOMY

**1. Developments on the real side**

_General_
In assessing the state of the economy on the real side, attention was paid to the
situation before the outbreak of hostilities in the north and the initial assessments of
its affect on activities.
**The state of the economy prior to the outbreak of fighting in the north: The latest**
National Accounts data for the first quarter of 2006, together with current data on
economic activity, point to continued rapid growth: an increase of 6 percent in GDP
(in annual terms) and an increase of 7.7 percent in the business product[1]. This growth
was led by an increase in domestic demand.

According to the Bank of Israel's Companies Survey, all industries reported a
continued rise in activity in the first quarter, with the manufacturing, commerce,
business services and hotel industries reporting relatively strong growth in activity

1 In the most recent revision of the National Accounts, the Central Bureau of Statistics changed the
definition of GDP to make it conform to the accepted international definition. According to the
previous definition, GDP increased in the first quarter by 6.3 percent (in annual terms).


-----

while transport and communications and construction saw more modest growth. The
leading index of the Companies Survey pointed to a high likelihood of further
expansion of activity in the third quarter of 2006. It should be noted that this leading
index was based on companies' expectations for the coming quarter, surveyed before
the outbreak of fighting in the north.

**Initial assessments of possible implications of the hostilities in the north on the**
**state of the economy:** The fighting in the north brought about the cancellation of
almost all tourist activities in the area at the height of the summer season, and to the
partial or complete shutdown of most industries in the north. From past experience, in
such circumstances foreign tourism is generally affected fastest and more sharply and
recovers slowly after an improvement in the security situation. As a measure, a drop
of 50 percent in incoming tourism in the third and fourth quarters of 2006 would lead
to a contraction in GDP of 0.4 percent. Assuming that the fighting will continue for a
month, and given that about 15 percent of business sector activities is in the north––
with part of this shut down either completely or in part––we can estimate that the loss
of GDP, beyond the affect on tourism, will be about 0.5 percent. An escalation of the
fighting could affect real activities also through an indirect affect on major macro
variables such as investment and private consumption. Exports could also be affected,
beyond the damage to the export of tourist services. However a fast and successful
completion of the fighting would result in relatively minor damage to the economy.

_Indicators of economic activity_
The composite state-of-the-economy index rose by 0.7 percent in June, prior to the
outbreak of fighting in the north. The manufacturing production index showed a
continuing positive trend. The increase in the composite index was a result mainly of
increases in the manufacturing production index and the index of trade and services
revenue. This was partly moderated by a fall in the import of goods.

_Foreign trade and balance of payments data_
Foreign trade figures for the export of goods (excluding diamonds, in current dollars)
point to a continued positive trend for exports, a trend that began in recent months
after some slowdown in the export of goods in the second half of 2005. Imports of
goods (excluding diamonds, fuel, ships and planes) showed a continuation of a
moderately increasing trend led by the imports of raw materials. Imports of
investment goods showed no rising trend. This was apparently due to the fall in
imports of security goods which are partly registered as imports of investment goods.
Furthermore, the rate of increase that began in recent months in the imports of
consumer products, was less than 5 percent (in annual terms).

_Labor market data_
Labor market data for March and April point to a rise of almost 5 percent in wages per
employee post, compared to a rise of 5.3 percent in the business sector in the parallel
period last year. This rise was led by the business services, banking and
manufacturing industries. Given that the business sector registered the same rise in
wages (compared to the parallel period of last year) in January and February, the rise
in wages is not seen as a result of one-off payments such as bonuses or payments prior


-----

to privatization, but expresses a rise in employee wages in these industries. In public
services the rise in wages was a more moderate 3.2 percent.

**2. Budget data**

In the first half of 2006 there was a cumulative surplus of NIS 4.7 billion in the
general government budget (excluding the provision of credit), reflecting a higher
level of tax revenues than that forecast in the budget and a lower level of spending,
seasonally adjusted. As a result, the budget deficit is expected to total between 0.5 and
1 percent of GDP (an estimate made prior to the outbreak of hostilities in the north).
The fighting in the north is expected to lead to a rise in expenditure on current defense
spending and a fall in tax income following the impact on activity, though it is still too
early to gauge the effect.

The government has expressed its intention of maintaining its budget targets for 2007.
Accordingly increases in expenditure as a result of the fighting will need to lead to a
change in spending priorities but no change in total government spending.

Total income from taxes (discounting for legislative changes and one-time revenues)
grew in real terms in the second quarter by almost 8 percent (compared to the parallel
quarter of last year). This follows a 10 percent rise in the first quarter. The increase in
income from taxes was led by the increase in income from direct taxes, against the
background of a rise in wages and in profits for companies and the self-employed.
The rise in income from indirect taxes was more moderate.

**3. Economic developments, nominal**

_Inflation_
The Consumer Price Index rose by 0.1 percent in June, and by 3.5 percent in the past
12 months. The increase in energy prices in the past 12 months contributed 1 percent
to the increase in the index. The CPI for June was higher than forecast by the Bank of
Israel and the average expectations of private forecasters. Components of the index
that rose by more than forecast were housing, clothing and footwear, and food.

In the first half of 2006 the CPI increased at an annual rate of 2.7 percent (seasonally
adjusted), which is near the upper limit of the inflation target range (1-3 percent).
During the first half, energy prices contributed about 0.7 percent of the rise in CPI (or
1.4 percent in annual terms), while the appreciation of the NIS in the same period
contributed to a moderation of the rise in the CPI. The fall in demand likely to result
from the fighting in the north––principally through a decline in private consumption
and investment––will moderate the rise in prices. In the short term, the reduction in
activity will also reduce supply, and is expected to lead to a rise in selected prices (for
example, fruit). The rise in the economy's risk premium tends to reduce the pressures
for the appreciation of the NIS, thereby putting pressure on prices.


-----

_Expectations and forecasts of inflation_
Inflation expectations for the next 12 months derived from the capital market in July
(up to July 11, before the outbreak of hostilities in the north) stood at 1.7 percent. The
average inflation expectations derived from the capital market after the outbreak of
fighting rose slightly, apparently expressing a modest rise in the risk premium
concerning possible developments of prices in the economy. Breakeven inflation rates
for the medium and long terms (up to 10 years) are near the upper limit of the
inflation target range, at 2.7 percent on average; taking into account estimates of the
risk premium, expected inflation is probably around 2.2 percent.

Forecasters' expectations of inflation in the next 12 months increased following the
outbreak of hostilities in the north by about 0.6 percentage points to an average of 2.3
percent. The range of forecasts is wide, stretching from 1.8 to 3.0 percent. Their
forecast for inflation in the coming months were also adjusted upward by an average
of 0.3 percentage points. Average forecasts for July expect a fall of 0.1 percentage
points in the CPI and for August an average increase of 0.4 percentage points.

_Expectations and forecasts of the Bank of Israel interest rate_
As derived from the average makam curve for July, the interest rate is expected to rise
by about 0.4 percentage points over the next 12 months.

Forecasters raised their assessments of raises in the interest rate following the
outbreak of fighting in the north, and these now (as of July 23) stand at an expected
rise of 25 basis points in August and a further 25 basis point-raise in interest in
September. The forecasters also predict that the Bank of Israel will raise rates by a
further 25-50 basis points by the end of the year. In 12-months hence, they expect, on
average, that the interest rate will reach 6.25 percent compared to their previous
forecast of 5.75 percent.

_The makam market and the bond market_
Developments of nominal and real yields in the government bond market were
relatively stable in July, after a trend of rising yields in the first four months of the
year. Nominal and real long-term yields reached 6.5 and 4 percent, respectively. The
relative stability of yields continued after the outbreak of fighting in the north and was
influenced by the government budget surplus in the first half of the year.

_Interest-rate differential and yield gap between Israel and abroad_
The interest rate differential between the Bank of Israel rate and the US Federal
Reserve rate contracted to zero after the Fed raised its rate by 25 basis points at the
end of June, in line with expectations. Market expectations (as of July 23) are that the
Fed will raise its rate a further 25 basis points in August though the probability that
the markets ascribe to this raise has fallen. In addition, the expectations are that if the
rate is raised, this will be the last in a session of interest rate rises that began two years
ago.


-----

Nominal yield gaps between Israel and the US for five- and 10-year terms continued
to contract in July, reaching 1 and 1.2 percent respectively. Real yield gaps for these
terms also contracted in July both reaching 1.3 percent. However there was some rise
in these gaps after July 15.

_Expected real interest rate_
The expected short-term real interest rate on Bank of Israel sources, which has been
on a rising trend since the last quarter of 2005, stood at 3.5 percent in July, compared
to an average 2.7 percent at the start of the year.

_The money supply_
The annual rate of increase of the money supply (M1) has been on a downward trend
since the beginning of the year, and stood at 15.5 percent in June. This is still though a
higher rate than the forecast GDP growth rate with the expected rise in prices. Since
the beginning of the year, the cash component of the money supply increased by 5
percent, while the checking account component increased more moderately by 1.6
percent.

The annual rate of increase of broad money (M2) continued to fall in June and was
slightly below 3 percent.

The annual rate of growth of total banking credit (C3) in the first half of the year
reached about 7 percent on average, against the background, inter alia, of a continued
rapid growth in the economy and a fall in the rate of increase of nonbanking credit
sources.

_The econometric_ _models[2]_
Various scenarios that were examined using econometric models developed by the
Bank of Israel show that the rise in the prices of imported goods, particularly energy
prices, constitutes a factor for continuing price increases. The main channel by which
the fighting affects inflation is through its effect on the exchange rate. In various
scenarios some increase in the interest rate is required during the year in order to keep
inflation within the target range.

**4. Capital flows, the foreign currency market and the share market**

_Capital flows_
In the past month nonresidents were net sellers of bonds and shares on the Tel Aviv
Stock Exchange. In contrast, falling prices in the emerging markets led Israeli
households to sell investments in mutual funds specializing in foreign investments,
leading to a net inflow of capital to the economy. In addition, institutional investors
reduced their investments overseas compared to previous months.

2 The Bank of Israel uses results of various scenarios derived from econometric models. Due to the
nature of the models, including the fact that their results naturally depend on certain assumptions about
relevant variables, these scenarios are taken as just one among several inputs in the discussions on the
interest rate.


-----

_The foreign currency market_
From the discussion on the policy rate for July (on June 26) until the outbreak of
fighting in the north, the NIS strengthened against the dollar by 1.8 percent against a
background of a weakening dollar globally and a continued inflow of capital into the
economy. In the first three days of fighting the NIS weakened by 3 percent with daily
volatility increasing sharply from 6 percent to about 12 percent. With the outbreak of
hostilities daily trading volumes soared, reaching a new record of $ 3.4 billion
(compared to an average daily trading volume of $ 1 billion in 2005), and daily
spreads reached a high level of 10 agorot. Despite this, there was no halt in normal
trading and there were no signs of market failures. After a number of days the trends
moderated and the exchange rate stabilized around NIS 4.46 to the dollar, showing a
depreciation of around 2 percent since the outbreak of the fighting.

High levels of activity were also recorded on the side of foreign investors during the
period of fighting in the north, with their buying more than $ 1 billion net. The share
of nonresident activity in market activity increased since the outbreak of fighting and
reached an average of 33 percent, compared to an average of 28 percent in the second
quarter of 2006 and 21 percent in 2005.

_The share market_
After the outbreak of fighting in the north, the stock market saw increased volatility
and the leading indices, which fell initially by around 12 percent, later made some
recovery, such that the overall fall in indices from July 12 to July 20 was 6 percent.

**5. Israel's financial risk, the risk premium, and foreign investment houses’**
**surveys**

Israel's risk premium, as measured by the 5-year CDS spread, increased in the week
following the outbreak of fighting in the north by 7 basis points to 37 bp. Ten-year
CDS spread increased by the same amount. Trends were mixed in other emerging
markets.

Credit rating agencies Fitch and Standard & Poor's published updates on the latest
developments in Israel in which they kept Israel's credit ratings unchanged and the
economic outlook at "Stable". In their announcements, the agencies noted the Israeli
economy's strong starting point which, together with a responsible fiscal policy, is
expected to limit the negative economic implications of the hostilities.

The reviews of foreign investment houses published after the outbreak of fighting
expressed confidence in the Israeli economy and noted that for as long as the fighting
did not escalate and that the government maintained its budget framework, the
negative economic implications of the fighting were limited. Furthermore they
stressed that despite the slight impact on the economy, the NIS was not expected to
continue weakening.


-----

**6. Developments in the global economy[3]**

Global growth remained strong, though the rate of growth is expected to slow down,
particularly in light of the expected fall in US domestic demand. Nevertheless, most
forecasts point to a "soft landing" of the US economy. The expected slowdown in the
US will be moderated by faster growth in the euro zone, Japan and the emerging
markets. Global inflation has increased modestly and is expected to be 3.3 percent in
2006 and to fall slightly during 2007. However rising prices of energy and goods raise
the risk of global inflation.

B. NARROW-FORUM DISCUSSION––THE INTEREST RATE DECISION FOR
AUGUST 2006

The discussions this month took place against the background of the fighting in the
north and the possible implications for the Israeli economy, both on real activity and
on inflation and the financial markets Basic economic data are strong, and, according
to the indicators in general prior to the fighting, point to rapid growth in the economy.
Rapid growth leading to a narrowing output gap, and higher import prices,
particularly energy prices created inflationary pressures. The impact of these factors
on prices was partly tempered by the continued appreciation of the exchange rate,
particularly as a result of the current account surplus and long-term capital inflow to
the economy by nonresidents. At the time of the meeting the 12-month inflation rate
stood at 3.5 percent, above the upper limit of the target inflation range of 1-3 percent a
year. Prior to the outbreak of fighting, the assessment was that the 12-month inflation
rate would return to within the target range in the coming month, despite the
inflationary effects of growth and higher import prices. This was based mainly on the
assumption that the factors behind the NIS' appreciation would continue.

The discussion concentrated on the possible effects of the fighting on the economy's
real activity, on inflation, on the foreign currency market and on the financial system,
and covered also the factors that could determine the strength of these effects. The
aim was to obtain the clearest macroeconomic picture possible given the uncertainty
surrounding the fighting and its outcome.

With the economy on a path of continued rapid growth and a narrowing output gap,
the fighting has added uncertainty over this growth and its strength. The effects of the
fighting depend in large part on its military and geopolitical outcome. Even assuming
a rapid and successful end to the hostilities, the fighting will likely affect both the
supply side of the economy––that is the economy's production capacity––and the
demand side, in light of the effects of greater uncertainty and fall in income on private
demand. According to Bank of Israel calculations the damage to real activity is
expected to total up to 1 percent of GDP. The major harm on real activity will be felt
through tourism. Even after the security situation improves, recovery of incoming

3 Further details on the major developments in the US, Europe, Japan and the emerging markets are
presented in the appendix.


-----

tourism is slow. A further component is the shutdown of economic activity in the
north.

Until the outbreak of fighting in the north, the economy enjoyed an inflow of longterm capital through the surplus in the current account of the balance of payments,
which reached around an annual rate of $ 3 billion in the first half, and from an inflow
of foreign investment. All of this encouraged an appreciation of the NIS. The fighting
in the north is expected to affect this trend, given the possible reduction in foreign
investment and current account surplus, particularly through the possible drop in
tourism. The measure of the damage is also dependent on the developments of the
fighting and its outcome, though assuming a quick and successful end to hostilities,
the damage will be relatively moderate.

The financial markets reacted with stability to the events in the north. Though share
prices fell and the NIS depreciated, these changes occurred within the first few days
of fighting. Afterward, the cumulative drop in share prices contracted and the
exchange rate strengthened somewhat. During the whole period of the fighting the
markets functioned well, with particularly high volumes of trade, especially in the
foreign exchange market. This picture is based probably on the firm economic
foundations of the Israeli economy, investors' confidence––both nonresident and
local––in macroeconomic policies and the assessment of a quick and successful end to
the fighting. In this context, it was very important that the government declare its
commitment to the budget framework for 2006 and 2007, despite the expected
increase in certain expenditure items connected with the fighting and its economic
implications, and a decline in tax income given the possible affect on activity.

Against the background of fighting in the north Israel's risk premium increased, albeit
at a relatively modest rate. Since the outbreak of hostilities, the CDS index increased
only moderately, and the credit rating agencies and investment houses which
reexamined the Israeli economy did not change their assessments. It is important to
note that according to them, the economy's commitment to pursue its macroeconomic
policies was the most important factor affecting their decision. The 10-year interest
rate gap with the US also rose by 15 basis points.

As for inflation, apparently the factors that up to now have created pressure on
inflation––these being the effects of continued fast growth and the increase in import
prices, particularly energy prices––are continuing to operate. If the inflow of capital
into the economy––which led to an appreciation of the NIS and hence a moderating
force on prices––does contract, then the factors pushing prices up will be stronger
than before. The long-term possible damage of the fighting on private sector demand
will create a moderating force on price rises. However in the short term, the effect will
be to raise prices given the more immediate impact on supply.

Some of the participants in the discussion recommended that the Governor raise the
interest rate for August by 25 basis points. They were of the opinion that the factors
creating inflationary pressures were expected to continue, while the factors


-----

moderating the rise in prices would subside, and that while the possible slowdown in
activity would be a moderating force on prices, this effect would not be present in the
immediate term. Furthermore, and more importantly, they believed that it was
important to take the increase in Israel's risk premium into consideration. It is
important to note that the extent of the increase in the risk premium depends on policy
responses, both fiscal and monetary. Therefore, they argued, current circumstances
dictate a raise in the interest rate as part of this policy in order to maintain price
stability, according to the inflation target, and to support the financial stability of the
economy. By so doing, these participants argued, the Bank would contribute to
strengthening the future growth of the economy.

Some of the participants in the discussion recommended that the Governor leave the
interest rate for August unchanged. They were of the opinion that greater weight
should be given to those factors acting to moderate the rise in prices relative to others,
and to the stability demonstrated by the financial markets even at a time of hostilities.
The probability that stability would continue was high, and the expected reduction in
capital inflows and the rise in the economy's risk premium in the eyes of investors,
would be moderate. Furthermore, the impact of capital movements on the exchange
rate, and through that on prices, would continue to be moderate. The possible damage
of the fighting on real activity, principally through a fall in demand, will also act to
moderate the rise in prices and therefore these participants believed that the interest
rate at the time of discussion could maintain price stability.

The Governor decided to raise the interest rate by 25 basis points to 5.5 percent for
August. In reaching this decision, the Governor ascribed a decisive weight to the rise
in the economy's risk premium, in light of the fighting, and also to the continuation of
inflationary factors that had operated in the first half of 2006. The Governor was of
the opinion that this decision would increase the chances of a rapid recovery from the
estimated damage to economic activity as a result of the fighting and after it is over.
This was an important step in an overall macroeconomic policy that contributes to
strengthening the infrastructure for sustainable growth in the economy while
maintaining price and financial stability.

The decision was made and published on July 24, 2006.

Those present at the discussion:
Prof. Stanley Fischer, Governor of the Bank of Israel
Prof. Zvi Eckstein, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Israel
Dr. Edward Offenbacher, Director of the Monetary Department
Barry Topf, Director of the Foreign Currency Department
Balfour Ozer, Director of the Foreign Exchange Activity Department
Dr. Karnit Flug, Director of the Research Department
Ohad Bar-Efrat, Head of International Affairs and Advisor to the Governor
Gaby Fiszman, Chief of Staff to the Governor
Amnon Jacoby, Advisor to the Governor


-----

**Appendix: Major developments in the World Economy**

_US_
Recently published macroeconomic data point to a slowdown in the rate of growth in
the second quarter of 2006 after the rapid 5.6 percent growth in the first quarter.
However according to most assessments the slowdown in the rate of growth for the
rest of the year will represent a "soft landing" for the economy, which is expected to
continue growing at a rate of about 3 percent, a level assessed as the economy's
potential. Private consumption continues to fall against the background of high fuel
prices, the lagged effect of higher interest rates and developments in the housing
market. Despite the signs of a deceleration, this month saw a sharp rise in
manufacturing output and a continued growth in the export sector which is expected
to strengthen in light of the strong global economy and to provide support for
continued growth during the year. In addition, companies are in a fairly strong
situation given the high rates of profitability and manufacturing capacity which are
expected to continue and to support investment in the business sector. Tax revenues
also saw a surprising increase. Inflation is rising and inflationary pressures are getting
stronger; the CPI and the core inflation rate reached annual levels of 4.3 and 2.6
percent respectively, against a narrowing output gap. Average forecasts from
investment houses on the CPI rate for the second quarter of 2006 stand at 4 percent,
though the inflation rate is expected to fall gradually during the remainder of the year.
The US Federal Reserve decided at its last meeting to raise its interest rate by 25 basis
points to 5.25 percent. Fed-rate futures contracts factor in a further increase of 25
basis points at the next meeting, similar to the expectations of the investment houses.

_Europe_
The improvement in economic activity continued in the euro zone and apparently
growth is picking up pace and becoming more established and broader, and is
expected to remain close to its potential growth rate. The growth in investment is
expected to continue, benefiting from the favorable terms of financing, the structural
changes in company balance sheets, and the rise in profits and corporate efficiency.
Domestic demand on the side of companies shows signs of acceleration. Private
consumption is on the recovery path and is expected to continue strengthening in light
of the recent fall in unemployment in the euro zone, particularly in Germany, France
and Italy. The investment houses expect, on average, growth of 2.7 percent in the
second quarter and growth of 2.3 percent for the year 2006. Inflation in June showed
no change at 2.5 percent, in annual terms. The ECB expects inflation in the second
half of 2006 and for 2007 to remain above the central bank's target of 2 percent. The
investment houses, on average, expect inflation to be 2.4 percent in the second quarter
and to fall gradually during the rest of the year. The ECB left its interest rate
unchanged at 2.75 percent, and the market expects the ECB to raise its interest rate for
August by 25 basis points. The markets and investment houses believe the interest
rate will reach 3.5 percent at the end of the period of tightening monetary policy.


-----

_Japan_
Japan's economy continues to recover, supported mainly by the growth of domestic
demand. Business sector investment continues to grow against a background of high
company profitability and private consumption is on a rising trend in light of the
growth registered in household income. Manufacturing output is expected to continue
growing in light of increased demand both domestically and abroad. Japan's central
bank expects that the economy will continue to grow and the government expects
growth of 2.1 percent in 2006. The investment houses expect, on average, growth of
2.5 percent in the second quarter and a faster rate of growth for the rest of the year.
The change in the core inflation in May maintained the positive trend with a rise of
0.6 percent, and is expected to remain positive. In addition, the CPI also rose. The
central bank raised its interest rate this month by 25 basis points to 0.25 percent, for
the first time in about five years. The investment houses expect, on average, that the
interest rate will continue to rise, to 0.5 percent by the end of the year.

_Emerging markets_
From mid-June there was a fall in the risk associated with the emerging markets,
which was expressed in a rise in share prices and a strengthening of the exchange
rates against the dollar. However against a background of a significant rise in the
geopolitical risk as a result of the conflict in the Middle East, following the outbreak
of hostilities the emerging markets saw sharp falls in shares prices particularly in the
Middle East. Apart from the Israeli markets, the Turkish stock market stood out,
losing more than 6.5 percent since the outbreak of fighting on the Israel-Lebanon
border. However there has been no change in the major economic data of the
emerging markets and they continue to present impressive rates of growth.


-----

