Bank of Israel

**Report to the public of the Bank of Israel’s discussions**
**prior to setting the interest rate for October 2006**

**The broad-forum discussion took place at the Bank of Israel on September 20,**
**2006, and the narrow-forum discussion on September 25, 2006.**

**General**

Before the Governor makes the monthly interest-rate decision, discussions are held at
two levels. The first takes place in a broad forum, in which the relevant background
economic conditions are presented, including real and monetary developments in
Israel’s economy and developments in the global economy. Participants in this
discussion include the Governor, the Deputy Governor, the directors of the various
economic departments of the Bank (Research Department, Monetary Department,
Foreign Currency Department, Foreign Exchange Activity Department) and
economists from different departments who prepare and present the material for
discussion.

In the narrow forum, the department heads present their recommendations regarding
the interest rate and following a discussion, the Governor makes his decision.

A. THE BROAD-FORUM DISCUSSION—THE STATE OF THE ECONOMY

**1. Developments on the real side**

_General_
In analyzing the state of the economy on the real side, the discussants related to data
reflecting both the situation shortly before the fighting in the north began and the
situation expected after the fighting. The data on real activity indicate that output
recovered swiftly from the shock caused by the fighting.

**State of the economy shortly before the eruption of fighting in the north: On the**
eve of the hostilities, the economy was in the midst of rapid growth. According to
National Accounts data, the economy grew at a 5.7 percent pace and the business
sector by 7.5 percent in the first half of the year (both rates in annual terms).

**The effects of the fighting on the economy: The main long-term economic damage**
occasioned by the hostilities will be felt in inbound tourism. The GDP growth forecast
for 2006 is estimated at 4.6 percent as against 5.4 percent before the fighting; the
2007 forecast is 4 percent. Most of the growth slowdown in 2007 is expected to result
from a deceleration in the growth rate of the output of public-services..

_Balance-of-payments and foreign trade_


-----

The surplus on balance-of-payments current account continued to grow in the first
half of 2006, and reached $3.6 billion (almost 5.5 percent of mid-year GDP). The
favorable foreign-trade data for August show that the economy recovered rapidly
from the fighting. Total exports (seasonally adjusted and excluding ships, aircraft, and
diamonds) grew by 4.2 percent in August relative to July, [NB PLS CHECK THIS
**NUMBER – IT’S VERY HIGH], which is consistent with the upward trend since**
the beginning of the year. Imports of goods (seasonally adjusted and excluding ships,
aircraft, and diamonds) increased by 17.8 percent in August relative to July, and by
6.8 percent excluding imports of energy products.

_Labor market_
The unemployment rate was largely unchanged, at 8.9 percent as against 8.8 percent
in the previous half-year. The slight increase in unemployment was caused by an
upturn in the labor-force participation rate; had the participation rate remained stable,
the unemployment rate would have fallen to 8.3 percent.

According to National Insurance data, the average real wage per employee post
increased by 1.3 percent in the first half of 2006 relative to the year-earlier period.
Unit labor cost declined slightly during the first half of 2006 due to an increase in
productivity.

**2. Budget**

Tax revenues in 2006 are expected to exceed the budget outlook by NIS 10 billion
(4.8 percent). Assuming that the budget will be implemented in full, the total deficit is
expected to be 1.4 percent of GDP, or 1.7 percent including civil compensation that is
not covered by the property tax fund. In the 2007 budget as approved by the
government, the deficit target was raised to 2.9 percent of GDP and the limit on
expenditure growth was increased by 1.6 percent, temporarily, due to expenses related
to the war in the north and by 0.5 percent due to expenses related to the
disengagement. The government’s budget proposal must be approved by the Knesset.

**3. Developments on the nominal side**

_Inflation_
The August Consumer Price Index was flat, affected mainly by increases in the prices
of fuel and recreation and vacation services and a seasonal decrease in clothing prices.
Dollar-denominated owned housing prices increased, following upturns in June and
July. The total CPI rose by 2.2 percent in the past twelve months and by 1.7 percent
since the beginning of the year, which is consistent with keeping inflation within the
target range.

_Expectations and forecasts of inflation and the Bank of Israel interest rate_
Inflation expectations for the next twelve months,, as derived from the capital market,
have been close to the mid-point of the target range in recent months. In September,
expectations stood at 1.9 percent on average, unchanged from the previous month.


-----

After the CPI data for August were released, the forecasters lowered their estimates of
inflation for the next twelve months from 1.9 percent to 1.7 percent. The average
inflation outlook for 2007 also declined, to 1.8 percent.

Interest-rate expectations as derived from the money market (the makam curve)
indicate that the markets expect no significant change in the Bank of Israel rate during
the coming year. .

_Makam and bond markets_
Nominal and real yields shifted moderately in September. The real curve dipped (by
up to 0.1 percentage point) at the short end and rose slightly at the long end,,
resulting in a term structure that was essentially flat, at 3.9 percent. Nominal yields
climbed by up to 0.1 percentage points at almost all maturities, from 5.9 percent at the
short end to 6.5 percent at the long end (ten years).

_Makam yields remained unchanged and the curve was flat at 5.8 percent._

_Interest spread and yield gap between Israel and abroad_
The NIS/$ interest spread stands at 0.25 percentage point. U.S. capital market data
indicate a strong probability of no change in the U.S. federal funds target rate in the
coming months.

The nominal yield gap between Israeli shekel denominated bonds (Shahar) and the
U.S. dollar bonds at the ten year maturity continued to widen during the past month,
rising by more than 20 basis points to slightly above 170 basis points (4.79 percent as
against 6.52 percent) as against 150 basis points a month earlier and 125 basis points
shortly before the fighting erupted. The gap between U.S. bonds and those of other
emerging-market economies also widened in the past month.

_Expected real interest rate_
The expected short-term real interest rate was unchanged in September at 3.7 percent
and has hardly changed since the beginning of the year

_Money supply_
The annual growth rate of the money supply (M1) has been trending downward since
the beginning of the year and fell from 14.3 percent in July to 12.2 percent in August.
The growth was led by the increasing in deposit component in the money supply,
which grew by 15.2 percent, as against the cash component, which expanded by 8.3
percent.

_Econometric models[1]_
The various scenarios that were generated using the Bank of Israel’s econometric
models show a strong connection between the behavior of the exchange rate and

1 The Bank of Israel uses econometric models to test various scenarios. Due to their nature, including
the fact that their results naturally depend on certain assumptions about relevant variables, the scenarios
should be viewed as one input among several in the discussions on the interest rate.


-----

inflation. (The results of the models are referred to in the section of this report on the
narrow-forum discussion, below).

**4. Capital flows, foreign-currency market, and share market**

_Capital flows_
Activity in all major market segments was rather moderate in the past month. This
behavior traces to the strong economic fundamentals that were in place immediately
before the fighting began, including the credibility of macroeconomic policy.

_Foreign-currency market and share market_
The shekel continued to appreciate in the past month—from around NIS 4.40 to the
dollar shortly before the fighting began in July to around NIS 4.32 in the days
immediately preceding the interest-rate decision. The shekel appreciated by a similar
amount against the currency basket.

The share market lost ground during the first days of the fighting but afterwards
recovered to pre-hostilities levels.

**5. Israel’s financial risk, risk premium, and foreign investment house surveys**

Israel’s risk premium as measured by the five-year CDS spread was unchanged in
September at 31 basis points. Other emerging-market economies also showed no
change in their risk-premium as measured by this metric.

S&P, Fitch, and Moody’s surveyed Israel’s fiscal situation in view of the new
government budget. Their announcements indicated that they accept the widening of
the budget framework and the deficit due to the costs of the fighting, but they noted
that this will slow the reduction of Israel’s debt/GDP ratio. The ratings companies left
their Israel ratings and outlooks unchanged but stressed the need for the government
to stay within the new budget limits if the rating is to be maintained.

**6. Global economic developments[2]**

Global growth is holding firm and is expected to remain vigorous in 2007. The
composition of global growth is becoming more balanced as growth in Europe, Japan,
and the developing countries—especially China and India—is expected to increase
and offset the current and expected slowdown in U.S. growth.

B. NARROW-FORUM DISCUSSION––THE INTEREST RATE DECISION FOR
OCTOBER 2006

Inflation over the past twelve months  has fallen to 2.2 percent, around the mid-point
of the target range. The inflation estimates and expectations for twelve months ahead

2 Further details on main developments in the U.S., Europe, Japan, and the emerging-market economies

are presented in the Appendix.


-----

and longer are also close to the mid-point of the target range. According to
expectations derived from the markets, and to private forecasts, the markets expect no
significant change in the Bank of Israel interest rate during the next year.

The GDP loss occasioned by the fighting is believed to be temporary and is not
expected to have a long-lasting effect on future growth and inflation. In other words,
the GDP gap is expected to continue narrowing and the unemployment rate to decline
gradually. Continued long-term capital inflows and the large surplus on balance-ofpayments current account is expected to continue to subject the shekel to appreciation
pressure, thereby dampening inflation.

A considerable part of the discussion this month was devoted to consideration of the
effects of the hostilities in the north on domestic economic activity. The data on real
activity point to a rapid recovery of activity after the fighting, with the negative
impact of the fighting on economic activity expected to be concentrated in the third
quarter of the year. On the eve of the hostilities, the economy had been on a rapid
growth trajectory accompanied by a narrowing of the GDP gap. In the first half of the
year, GDP grew at a 5.7 percent rate and the business sector by 7.5 percent (both rates
annualized). The adjusted growth outlook for 2006 stands at 4.6 percent as against 5.4
percent before the fighting, and the growth rate expected for 2007 is 4 percent.
Generally speaking, the fighting is not expected to cause significant damage to
demand because some of the decline in private-sector demand will be offset by an
increase in government expenditure. The belief that aggregate demand will not change
significantly, coupled with the temporary and limited nature of the supply-side
damage, leads to the conclusion that the fighting is unlikely to have a material effect
on price developments.

The unemployment rate stood at 8.9 percent in the second quarter of 2006. The
unemployment rate failed to decline due to an upturn in the labor-force participation
rate. Discussants saw no significant inflation pressures arising from the labor market,
after a slight decline in unit labor cost in the first half of 2006 due to the rapid
increase in productivity.

In September, as in August, estimates of the fiscal cost of the fighting and its
implications for the state budget were discussed. In view of the costs of the fighting
and the attendant economic damage, the government decided to increase its spending.
Real government expenditure is projected to grow by nearly 3 percent in 2006. (The
increase is composed of a 1 percent real increase in the state budget plus an expected
increase in the rate of fulfillment of budget spending plans.) For 2007, it was decided
to raise the spending limit by an extra 1.6 percent (beyond the 1.7 percent increase
already agreed upon) due to war-related expenditures and 0.5 percent for the costs in
2007 of the 2005 disengagement.[3] The spending increase is expected to raise the
government deficit to 1.7–1.8 percent of GDP this year and 2.8–2.9 percent in 2007.
Political pressures to increase budget spending both to improve defense preparedness

3 For technical reasons this will be added to the increase in government spending, even though
disengagement spending will be lower in 2007 than it was in 2006.


-----

and to tackle welfare-related issues increased uncertainty about the government’s
budget decision before it was approved in September. . This uncertainty may persist
for the next few months, until the Knesset approves the budget. Referring to the
budget pressures, the discussants noted the importance of staying within the budget
limits in order to help maintain economic stability and bolster the confidence of
domestic and foreign investors in the performance of the Israeli economy, especially
in view of Israel’s heavy debt burden.

The strength of Israel’s financial markets continued to stand out in September. . This
stability reflects the strong fundamentals prior to the fighting, the belief that the basic
macroeconomic framework would be maintained, and the belief that the economic
effects of the fighting will be relatively minor. During the hostilities (except for the
first few days) and afterwards, the financial markets displayed robustness. After the
fighting, the risk premium as measured by the five-year CDS spread reverted to prefighting levels and remained stable in the past month. However, the yield gap between
ten-year Shahar bonds and U.S. government bonds to the same term widened to 170
basis points as against 125 basis points shortly before the fighting began. In the past
month, the shekel continued to appreciate in the foreign-currency market and was
stronger than before the fighting began. The NIS/$ central bank interest spread
remained steady at 0.25 percentage point.

The discussants also noted that after rising oil prices contributed to an acceleration of
inflation at the beginning of the year, the downward trend in global energy prices in
recent months is expected to mitigate price increases in the short term.

The participants referred to scenarios that were run using the Bank of Israel’s
econometric models. In scenarios that envisaged the continuation of current exchange
and interest rates, inflation was projected to fall to the lower part of the target range
by year’s end.

The discussants noted that the appreciation of the shekel against the dollar has eased
inflation pressures and this effect will continue as long as these developments do.

Overall, the receding of inflation to the mid-point of the target range, the appreciation
of the shekel in the foreign-currency market, and the decline in global energy prices
are important factors that are acting to strengthen price stability, against budget
uncertainty originating in demands and pressures for more government spending.

In view of these various considerations, all the department directors who took part in
the discussion recommended that the interest rate for October be left unchanged. The
Governor decided to leave the rate for October at 5.50 percent.

The decision was made and published on September 25, 2006.

**Those present at the discussion:**
Prof. Stanley Fischer, Governor of the Bank of Israel
Prof. Zvi Eckstein, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Israel


-----

Dr. Edward Offenbacher, Director of the Monetary Department
Barry Topf, Director of the Foreign Currency Department
Balfour Ozer, Director of the Foreign Exchange Activity Department
Dr. Karnit Flug, Director of the Research Department
Dr. Ohad Bar-Efrat, Head of International Affairs and Advisor to the Governor
Gaby Fiszman, Chief of Staff to the Governor
Amnon Yaacoby, Advisor to the Governor


-----

**Appendix: Major Global Economic Developments**

_U.S._
The main questions on today’s agenda are the intensity of the American economic
slowdown and the extent of its effect on the global economy. Will the pace of
inflation in the coming months correspond to the Fed’s estimate, with inflation
expectations abating over time in view of the growth slowdown, or will U.S. inflation
maintain and even gather strength? The main scenario speaks of a “soft landing.”
Under this scenario, which is expected by the Fed, the growth rate will slow as the
housing market cools gradually and earlier interest rate increases have a lagged effect,
but the new growth rate will be only slightly lower than the potential long-term
growth rate of around 3 percent. This scenario is shared by the IMF, which expects
the U.S. growth rate to slow from 3.4 percent this year to 2.9 percent in 2007, and is
supported by data from the labor market, consumer spending, retail sales, and
consumer confidence indices, which have remained stable. The business sector is also
displaying stability at a high level of activity. Even in the construction industry, the
leading sector in the activity slowdown, the major slump in the housing market is not
matched by any such development in the business real-estate market. One factor does
favor an upturn in inflation: the sizable increase in unit labor cost in recent quarters (9
percent in the first quarter of 2006 and 5 percent in the second quarter).

Market data imply only a 16 percent probability of another rate hike by year’s end and
a 25 basis-point decline in the first half of 2007.

_Europe_
Growth in Europe is gathering strength and expanding in breadth. . Domestic demand
is firm in view of strong corporate profits and an improvement in the labor market,
accompanied by increases in employment and wages. The business-confidence and
consumer-confidence indices are continuing to trend upward, supporting the belief
that growth in 2006 will slightly surpass the potential growth rate, which the ECB
estimates at 2 percent. The IMF raised its 2006 growth outlook by half a percentage
point, to 2.5 percent, but left its 2007 outlook at 2 percent. The slowdown in 2007 is
expected to originate mainly in a slowdown in global growth, appreciation of the euro
against the dollar, and monetary and fiscal restraint.

The ECB expects inflation to remain above its 2 percent target in the second half of
2006 and in 2007. This outlook carries an upward-biased risk due to concern about
unexpectedly strong transmission of previous increases in oil prices to consumer
prices, the raising of indirect taxes in Europe, and unexpectedly large wage increases.

As expected, the ECB left its key rate for October unchanged at 3.00 percent,
explaining that this rate is still low and that liquidity in the euro area remains strong.
The markets and the investment houses expect the rate to climb to 3.5 percent by
year’s end with near certainty and express the probability of another increase in the
first half of 2007 at 70 percent.

_Japan_


-----

Japan’s growth rate slowed to only 1 percent in the second quarter as against 2.7
percent in the first quarter. Still, domestic demand remained firm, the labor market
continued to improve, and the unemployment rate is falling. The investment houses
predict an average annualized growth rate of 3.3 percent in the second half of the
year.

The Consumer Price Index was the focal point of interest in September as its base
year was changed from 2000 to 2005. The new base implied much lower inflation
data than those previously recorded. For example, in July the total CPI climbed by 0.3
percent and the core index by 0.2 percent, as against 0.8 percent and 0.6 percent,
respectively, under the previous reckoning. But even according to the adjusted series,
the pace of inflation has picked up and has been positive for the past two months.
However, the significant decline in the inflation rate led to a change in investors’
assessments. Thus, ten-year yields fell by almost 20 basis points and expectations of
another rate hike in Japan receded into the more distant future.
h


-----

