**Bank of Israel**

**Report to the public of the Bank of Israel’s discussions**
**prior to setting the interest rate for November 2006**

**The broad-forum discussion took place at the Bank of Israel on October 22,**
**2006, and the narrow-forum discussion on October 22 and 23, 2006.**

**General**

Before the Governor makes the monthly interest rate decision, discussions are held at
two levels. The first takes place in a broad forum, in which the relevant background
economic conditions are presented, including real and monetary developments in
Israel’s economy and developments in the global economy. Participants in this
discussion include the Governor, the Deputy Governor, the directors of the various
economic departments of the Bank (Research Department, Monetary Department,
Foreign Currency Department, Foreign Exchange Activity Department) and
economists from different departments who prepare and present the material for
discussion.
In the narrow forum, the directors of the economic departments present their
recommendations regarding the interest rate, and following a discussion, the Governor
makes his decision.

A. THE BROAD-FORUM DISCUSSION—THE STATE OF THE ECONOMY

**1. Developments on the real side**

_General_
The data presented on real activity indicated that the economy was recovering rapidly
from the impact of the fighting in the north. In October the Central Bureau of
Statistics published its forecast of growth in 2006––4.5 percent. Companies’
responses to the Bank of Israel’s Companies Survey for the third quarter of 2006 also
support the assessment that the economy is making a swift recovery following the
shock occasioned by the war.

_Data from the Bank of Israel Companies Survey_
The survey shows that the impact of the war on economic activity was short-lived and
moderate, and that it affected different industries to different degrees. Tourism and the
business services sector in the north suffered most severely. In the third quarter of
2006 the output of manufacturing companies continued rising. Construction
companies reported a steady level of activity in the third quarter, following increases
in the previous two months. Analysis of the responses of all the participating


-----

companies shows that in most industries, the increase in activity is expected to
continue in the fourth quarter, the exceptions being in the hotel and commerce sectors.

_The labor market_
According to data from the Manpower employment agency, demand for employees in
September was 10.3 percent higher than in August, and 3.3 percent higher than in
September 2005. The increased demand for labor included most industries.

**2. Budget data**

Tax revenues in 2006 are expected to exceed the budget forecast by some NIS 9.5
billion. The budget deficit is expected to be 1.5 percent of GDP. The budget for 2007,
approved by the government and still to be passed by the Knesset, includes an
increase in the deficit to 2.9 percent of GDP and a rise in the expenditure ceiling to
3.3 percent, due to the cost of the war in the north.

**3. Developments on the nominal side**

_Inflation_
The Consumer Price Index (CPI) posted a large drop of 0.9 percent in September,
more than that expected by private economic forecasters, whose estimates were of a
drop of between 0.3 percent and 0.6 percent. The decline in the index was due mainly
to the appreciation of the shekel, the fall in fuel prices, and seasonal price reductions.
Dollar prices of owner-occupied apartments stabilized in September, in contrast to the
increases in the previous three months.
The CPI rose by 1.3 percent in the last twelve months, and by 0.8 percent since
the beginning of 2006, close to the lower limit of the seasonal path consistent with the
target range of inflation.

_Expectations and forecasts of inflation and the Bank of Israel interest rate_
Inflation expectations to one year ahead derived from the capital market have declined
from their level in the last ten days of September, and in October they averaged about
1.5 percent, down from an average of 1.9 percent in August−September.
Forecasters’ lowered their assessment of one-year inflation to 1.3 percent, from
1.9 percent in September. They cut their assessments of inflation for 2006 to a mere
0.3 percent, from 1.8 percent in September.
The break-even inflation rate for ten years, calculated from the returns on
nominal and real bonds, fell by about 0.2 of a percentage point to about 2.3 percent.
This exceeds the expectation of the ten-year inflation rate by a risk premium that is
about 0.3-0.5 percent.
Following the publication of the most recent CPI, there was a consensus among
all forecasters that the Bank of Israel would lower the interest rate for November by a
quarter of a percentage point. Most of them expect a further similar reduction in
December.


-----

The _makam curve (see below) reflects expectations of a cut in the interest rate_
over the next year.

_The makam and bond markets_
In the month prior to the interest rate decision, short-term real interest rates rose by
about 0.2 of a percentage point to a level of 4 percent (up to 4 years) while long-term
real interest rates reached a level of 3.8 percent (10 years). The nominal yield curve
dropped in the month prior to the interest rate decision by 0.4 of a percentage point for
the short run and by 0.2 of a percentage point for 10 years. The makam curve dropped
along its entire length by 0.3 of a percentage point, and is flat at 5.6 percent.

_The interest rate differential and the yield gap between Israel and abroad_
Before this interest rate decision, the Bank of Israel interest rate exceeded that of the
Fed by 25 basis points. US capital market data indicate a strong probability of no
change in the US federal funds rate in the coming months and a cut in the first half of
2007.
The gap between the unindexed shekel yield curve and the US 10-year bond
curve contracted during October to 127 basis points (from about 173 basis points in
the middle of September). The narrowing of the gap reflects the fall of the _Shahar_
unindexed bond yield curve.

_The expected real interest rate_
The expected real interest rate for one year forward rose in October by 0.4 of a
percentage point to 4.1 percent because of the decline in inflation expectations. Since
the beginning of the year the expected real interest rate has risen by 1.4 percentage
points.

_The money supply_
The growth rate of the money supply (M1) over the past twelve months has been
slowing since the beginning of the year and in September it stood at 11.6 percent. The
growth was led by the demand deposit component, which grew in September at an
annual rate of 14.7 percent, down from 16 percent in August. The cash element,
which has been contracting since April, expanded by 7.6 percent over the past year.

_The econometric models[1]_
The various scenarios that were examined using the Bank of Israel’s econometric
models showed that achievement of the inflation target over the next twelve months
would require a cut in the interest rate, as a result of the appreciation of the shekel and
the fall in energy prices.

1 The Bank of Israel uses econometric models to test various scenarios. Due to their nature, including the fact that
their results naturally depend on certain assumptions about relevant variables, the scenarios should be viewed as
one input among several in the discussions on the interest rate.


-----

**4. Capital flows, the foreign-currency market, and the share market**

_Capital flows_
The shekel appreciated against the background of a surplus in the balance-ofpayments current account that is expected to exceed $ 6 billion in 2006, and foreign
investment in Israel. The strengthening of the shekel was also partly due to the
activity of nonresidents, who bought shekels in forward transactions, where most of
the contracts were short term (up to three months).

_The foreign-currency market and the share market_
In October the shekel continued to appreciate: in the days immediately preceding the
interest rate decision the exchange rate was around NIS 4.28 to the dollar. The shekel
appreciated at a similar rate also against the currency basket.
Israel’s share indices have been rising since the first third of September.

**5. Israel’s financial risk, the risk premium, and foreign investment house surveys**

Israel’s risk premium as measured by the five-year CDS spread edged down in
October to 29 basis points. Other emerging-market economies showed no change in
their CDS levels.
Investment houses’ surveys showed that the strength of the shekel and of the
capital market during and after the war in the north reinforced nonresidents’
confidence in Israel’s economy, and as soon as it became clear that the hostilities had
had only a limited effect on the economy and that the government coalition was more
stable, investors returned to Israel. The strength of the shekel led many nonresidents
to the conclusion that a reduction in the interest rate was imminent, and they therefore
bought Shahar bonds and boosted their activity in the interest rate derivatives market.
Apparently many of them considered Israel a safe haven among the emerging
markets, partly due to its strong economic fundamentals.

**6. Global economic developments (Full details in appendix)**

Global growth is holding firm and, against the slowdown registered recently in the
pace of growth in the US, the economies of Europe, Japan, and the developing
countries––particularly China and India––are expanding and increasing their share.
Expectations are that the Fed will keep its interest rate unchanged in the coming
months, but will cut the rate in the first half of 2007. The European Central Bank is
expected to raise its interest rate to 3.5 percent by the end of the year.

B. THE NARROW-FORUM DISCUSSION––THE INTEREST RATE DECISION
FOR NOVEMBER 2006

The inflation rate in the last twelve months, 1.3 percent, was below the mid-point of
the target range. The inflation estimates and expectations to twelve months ahead are
also lower than the mid-point. The major factors behind the reduction in the inflation


-----

environment are the strengthening of the shekel and the drop in global energy prices.
As a result of the drop in the inflation rate, private forecasters and the players in the
capital market expect a cut in the Bank of Israel interest rate for November and a
further reduction for December, which would take the rate at the end of the year to 5.0
percent.
The data on real activity continue to indicate that the economy is recovering
rapidly from the shock caused by the war, that led to reduced activity, mostly in the
third quarter. The CBS revised its forecast of growth in 2006 to about 4.5 percent, and
the Bank of Israel’s forecast of growth in 2007 is about 4 percent. At the same time no
inflationary pressures from the labor market are evident, as unit labor cost is showing
a gentle downward trend due to the rapid rise in labor productivity.
As in last month’s discussions on the interest rate, assessments of the fiscal cost
of the hostilities and the implications for budget policy were discussed this time too.
As a result of the cost of the war and the economic damage suffered, the government
decided to increase its expenditure and to spread the increase over three years. This is
expected to bring the government deficit to about 1.5 percent of GDP in 2006 and to
2.8–2.9 percent of GDP in 2007. Pressures for additional budget expenditures to
improve Israel’s defenses and to tackle welfare-related issues created uncertainty
about the final shape of the budget. This uncertainty may persist for the next few
months, until the Knesset approves the budget.
Israel’s financial indicators strengthened further in the past month. Israel’s risk
premium, as measured by the five-year CDS spread, contracted slightly. The yield gap
between 10-year Shahar bonds and US government bonds of the same term declined
to 127 basis points from 173 basis points in mid-September. The shekel continued to
appreciate, against the background of the surplus in the balance-of-payments current
account, which is expected to exceed $ 6 billion in 2006, and substantial foreign
investment in Israel. The strengthening of the shekel in the last few months follows a
period since 2002 when a trend of real depreciation of the shekel against the currency
basket––depreciation adjusted for differences in inflation rates in Israel and abroad––
was evident; that depreciation totaled more than 25 percent. Prior to the Bank of Israel
decision for November, the Bank of Israel interest rate exceeded that of the Fed by
0.25 of a percentage point.
The Bank of Israel’s assessments and models indicate a high probability that the
rate of inflation in the next few months will drop below the lower limit of the target
range. Participants in the discussion related to scenarios tested by the various
econometric models according to which it was reasonable to assume that, even after a
cut in the interest rate for November of 25 basis points, the inflation environment
would enable a further reduction in the interest rate.
The participants considered the possibility of a larger reduction in the interest rate
for November but decided that it was important to pursue a gradual approach, both to
avoid shocks in the financial markets and given the possibility of rapid changes in the
inflationary environment.
To summarize: the decline of inflation to the lower part of the target range, the
high probability of a temporary drop in the inflation rate (over the past twelve
months) to below the lower limit of the target range, the appreciation of the shekel in
the foreign-currency market as a factor affecting inflation, and the decline in global


-----

energy prices continue to constitute important factors that support a lowering of the
interest rate. On the other hand, economic activity is continuing to expand rapidly,
and pressures are being exerted to increase budget expenditure, and these are reflected
in fiscal uncertainty that will persist until the budget is passed by the Knesset. The
objective of the Bank of Israel’s monetary policy is to bring inflation gradually back
to around the mid-point of the target range.
In view of these various considerations, all the department directors who took
part in the discussion recommended that the interest rate for November be cut by 0.25
of a percentage point. The Governor decided to reduce the rate for November to 5.25
percent.

The decision was made and published on October 23, 2006.

**Those present at the discussion:**
Prof. Stanley Fischer, Governor of the Bank of Israel
Prof. Zvi Eckstein, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Israel
Dr. Edward Offenbacher, Director of the Monetary Department
Barry Topf, Director of the Foreign Currency Department
Balfour Ozer, Director of the Foreign Exchange Activity Department
Dr. Karnit Flug, Director of the Research Department
Mr. Yosi Fisher, Assistant Director of the Foreign Exchange Activity Department
Dr. Ohad Bar-Efrat, Head of International Affairs and Advisor to the Governor


-----

**Appendix: Major Global Economic Developments**

_U.S._
The latest economic data were mixed: on the positive side, employment figures were
stronger than expected. Unemployment fell to 4.6 percent. The annual update of
employment data showed that the number of employed was some 800,000 higher than
the previously known figure. Housing market data on the other hand cast a shadow,
indicating that the slowdown was persisting. As yet there is no consensus on the effect
the housing market is likely to have on the economy. The concern is that stability or
even a possible future drop in housing prices is likely to result in a considerable
cutback in consumer spending. The wealth effect, however, created by rising share
prices, the rise in incomes and the fall in oil prices will offset, at least in part, the
moderating effect of the housing market, and will boost consumer confidence and
support the continued rise in consumer spending.
Investment houses differ widely in their assessments of the growth rate, and their
forecasts vary from 2.5 percent to 1.5 percent annual rate for the second half of 2006.
The inflation indices are still at a high level, with the main risk deriving from the
persistent rapid rise of unit labor cost. At its October meeting the Fed left the interest
rate unchanged at 5.25 percent. In its accompanying statement it mentioned that some
additional firming may be needed in the future.
The bond market still believes that the round of interest rate hikes has ended and
that the next change will be a cut in the course of the first half of 2007. Nevertheless,
the probability of a reduction in the interest rate, as derived from the financial
markets, declined.

_Europe_
The European economy continues to grow at a buoyant pace; the growth is becoming
more firmly based and is expanding in scope, and is supported mainly by domestic
demand. Data on economic activity, and the results of various confidence surveys for
the third quarter published so far came as a pleasant surprise and support the
assessment that the rate of growth during 2006 will stay at 2 percent, which is taken to
be the potential long-term growth rate. European exports remain strong, and the rise in
investment is expected to continue and to benefit from favorable financing conditions
and from the rise in business profits. The rise in domestic consumption is expected to
continue, against the background of the continued gradual improvement in the labor
market and the fall in oil and commodity prices.
That said, the rate of growth is expected to slow in 2007, mainly because of the
increase in VAT in Germany planned for the beginning of the year, the slowdown in
global growth, and the strengthening of the euro against the dollar. These
considerations led the European Commission to revise downwards its 2007 growth
forecast for the eurozone. The investment houses also share the view that European
growth will weaken in the first half of 2007, and expect it to average an annual rate of
1.5 percent.
The rate of inflation fell in September to an annual rate of 1.7 percent, from 2.3
percent in August, apparently due to the recent drop in energy prices. The ECB


-----

expects inflation to rise again in the coming months to more than 2 percent, and
assesses that the risks in this forecast are biased upwards.
As expected, the ECB raised the interest rate in October by 25 basis points to
3.25 percent. The markets and the investment houses expect a further increase to 3.5
percent by the end of the year with complete certainty, and another rise in the first half
of 2007 with a 70 percent probability.

_Japan_
The investment houses expect that the growth rate in the last quarter of the year will
reach about 3 percent, and that it will ease back to close to 2 percent in 2007.
The Consumer Price Index rose by 0.9 percent in August, and core inflation by
0.3 percent, and both these indices reached their highest level in eight years.
Inflationary pressures are likely to ease in the short term, however, as a result of the
fall in commodity prices in general and oil prices in particular. The renewed decline in
unit labor cost is also expected to restrain inflation.
In its October meeting, the central bank left the interest rate unchanged. It is
expected to start raising the rate in the first half of 2007. The investment houses
expect on average a rise of 25 basis points to 0.5 percent as early as the last quarter of
2006, with a probability of 40 percent.


-----

