**HIGHLIGHTS OF THE MEETING OF THE MONETARY BOARD ON THE**

**MONETARY POLICY STANCE HELD ON 23 MARCH 2023 [1]**


**I.** **Monetary Policy Decision**

The Monetary Board decided to:

a) Raise the BSP’s current policy interest rate by 25 basis points to

6.25 percent for the overnight RRP rate; and

b) Increase the current interest rates on the overnight deposit facility

(ODF) to 5.75 percent and overnight lending facility (OLF) to
6.75 percent.

**II.** **Key Considerations in the Formulation of the Monetary Policy Stance**

  - Inflation is projected to continue tracking an elevated path over the near

term driven mainly by broad-based price pressures stemming from strong
domestic demand and supply-side constraints. Projected inflation could
remain above 4.0 percent until Q3 2023, which would be equivalent to 19
consecutive months of above-target inflation outturns. Meanwhile, inflation
is projected to decelerate close to the lower end of the target range by Q1
2024 due mainly to negative base effects and the expected decline in
global oil and non-oil prices.

  - Since November 2008, the Monetary Board noted that headline inflation

accelerated to its fastest pace in January 2023. While headline inflation has
eased slightly, various measures of core inflation continue to rise, indicating
a further broadening of price pressures. The risks to the inflation outlook
remain significantly skewed to the upside for both 2023 and 2024.

  - The Monetary Board deemed it necessary for a continued monetary action

and increased vigilance until there is firm evidence that inflation is reverting
to the target in a sustained manner. Monetary policy continues to be
focused on anchoring inflation expectations, which remain near the upper
end of the inflation target band. Follow-through monetary tightening will
help anchor inflation expectations by underlining the BSP’s commitment
to its price stability objective.

  - The Monetary Board was of the view that the strong near-term gross

domestic product (GDP) growth path has continued to feed into price
pressures, both for goods and services. Nonetheless, the domestic economy
is seen to be able to maintain its momentum despite a tighter monetary

1 The discussions herein reflect the assessment made by the Monetary Board based on macroeconomic and financial

information available at the time of the monetary policy meeting. The next meeting of the Monetary Board on the

li i h d l d 18 M 2023


-----

policy stance. In a high-inflation environment with robust pent-up demand,
inflation expectations will require closer monitoring until a deceleration in
headline inflation becomes evident.

  - The Monetary Board also considered the rise in core inflation rates which

suggests a continued widening of price pressures, even as supply-side
pressures on non-core elements (food and energy prices) may be slowly
starting to abate. Nevertheless, the marginal decline in headline inflation in
February does not yet signify the beginning of broad disinflation. With
inflation proving to be more persistent than expected, the BSP will need to
raise real interest rates to positive territory to temper the emergence of
further second-round effects.

  - The Monetary Board also noted that further monetary tightening will also

preserve the buffer against external spillovers amid heightened uncertainty
and volatility emanating from financial sector distress in the US. Meanwhile,
the domestic banking sector remains sound and stable, which allows for a
measured increase in the monetary policy rate without compromising
financial stability.

**III.** **Recent Developments and Inflation Outlook**

The Monetary Board considered the recent macroeconomic and financial

developments discussed below in assessing the monetary policy stance:

**A. Domestic price conditions**

  - Inflation increased slightly in February 2023, implying the strong

persistence of inflation. Headline inflation settled at 8.6 percent year-onyear (y-o-y) in February 2023 due mainly to lower transport inflation amid
price rollbacks for petroleum products.

  - Meanwhile, core inflation measures indicate a further broadening of price

pressures, as both core goods and services inflation are still rising sharply.
The official core inflation rose further to 7.8 percent in February 2023.
Alternative core inflation measures, particularly trimmed mean and
principal component, likewise increased.

**B.  Inflation expectations**

  - Inflation expectations stay elevated for 2023, and remain near the upper
end of the inflation target range for 2024 and 2025, which suggests that
the public’s expectations continue to be at risk of being disanchored by
further shocks. The March 2023 survey of economists showed a slightly
higher mean inflation forecast for 2023 at 6.1 percent (from 6.0 percent
based on the February 2023 survey round). Meanwhile, the mean inflation
forecasts for 2024 and 2025 have declined to 3.7 percent and 3.6 percent
(from 4.0 percent and 4.1 percent, respectively). Analysts expect inflation to
remain above the upper end of the government’s target range in 2023
owing to supply shocks and demand-side price pressures. However,


-----

inflation is seen to start decelerating by March this year due to base effects
and the BSP’s policy rate increases since May 2022.

**C.  Inflation outlook**

  - The latest baseline forecasts indicate that inflation will remain elevated in

the coming months with inflation averaging at 6.0 percent for 2023 and at
2.9 percent for 2024. The forecasts for 2023 and 2024 were adjusted
downwards by 0.1 percentage point for both years from the previous
forecasts of 6.1 percent and 3.0 percent, respectively. The downward
revisions mainly reflect the slower domestic and global growth outlook, as
well as the cumulative impact of BSP’s policy rate adjustments. These
factors were partly offset by the peso depreciation seen over the policy
horizon.

**Baseline Inflation Forecasts**

**16 February 2023** **23 March 2023**

**MB Meeting** **MB Meeting**

2023 6.1 6.0

2024 3.1 2.9

  - The risks to the inflation outlook remain significantly skewed toward the

upside for 2023 and 2024. Inflation has proven to be much more persistent
than originally expected at the beginning of supply shocks, and both BSP
and the market have been consistently surprised on the upside in the past
year. The potential impact of transport fare increases, higher electricity
rates and elevated domestic prices of key food items facing supply
constraints, such as sugar, as well as above-average wage adjustments in
2023 are the major upside risks to the inflation outlook. Meanwhile, the
impact of a weaker-than-expected global recovery is the primary
downside risk to the outlook.

**D. Demand conditions**

  - The outlook for domestic economic activity remains strong for 2023, within

the DBCC’s growth target range,[2] in view of the normalization of postpandemic conditions, higher net exports with China's reopening, return of
domestic and foreign tourism, as well as greater MSME activities induced
by the resumption of face-to-face classes. Meanwhile, the relatively slower
forecast for 2024 reflects weaker global growth prospects as well as the
impact of the BSP’s cumulative policy rate adjustments.

  - Domestic labor market conditions continued to show overall improvement.

While the 4.8-percent unemployment rate in January 2023 was marginally
higher than the 4.3 percent unemployment rate in December 2022,
unemployment rate during the month was considerably lower than the
6.4 percent and 5.3 percent rates recorded a year ago and during the
pre-pandemic period, respectively.

2 Government growth targets based on the 183rd Development Budget Coordination Committee (DBCC) Meeting on
5 D b 2022

|Baseline Inflation Forecasts|Col2|Col3|
|---|---|---|
||16 February 2023 MB Meeting|23 March 2023 MB Meeting|
|2023|6.1|6.0|
|2024|3.1|2.9|


-----

**E.  Supply-side indicators**

Developments in Agriculture

  - Nationwide average retail rice prices increased in February 2023. The uptick

in average rice prices for the month coincides with the end of the
traditional main harvest season and the start of the optional cropping
season in the first quarter of the year.

  - Prices of key food items rose mainly due to lingering supply-side issues and

spillover effects of the Russia-Ukraine conflict leading to persistent global
supply chain bottlenecks and soaring prices of fuel, feeds, and fertilizers.
Likewise, increasing food inflation highlights the country’s vulnerability to
natural calamities, animal diseases, and volatility in global commodity
prices. It also exposes gaps in the agricultural value chain as well as indicate
non-competitive practices. To cushion the impact of these challenges on
the country’s food security, the Government implemented crucial nonmonetary measures to fill short-term supply gap (e.g., temporary reduction
of tariff rates and time-bound increase in import volumes and expansion of
import sources) and boost local production (e.g., longer-term productivityenhancing programs).

At the same time, on 7 March 2023, President Ferdinand R. Marcos, Jr.
approved the creation of the Inter-agency Committee on Inflation and
Market Outlook (IAC-IMO)[3] which will serve as an advisory body to the
President and the Cabinet on measures to mitigate inflation and ensure
food and energy security while balancing the interests of local food
producers, consumers, and the overall economy.

  - Based on the latest assessment of weather conditions as of 9 March 2023,

La Niña conditions concluded and has transitioned to ENSO-neutral, which
will likely persist until June-July-August 2023 season. The latest assessment
of PAGASA points to an increased likelihood of an El Niño event occurring
by July-August-September 2023 season. However, uncertainty remains
high during the third quarter of each year due to spring prediction barrier,
which is typically associated with lower forecast accuracy. Nonetheless, it is
worthy to note that an El Niño event is often associated with drought due
to delayed onset of rains and weak monsoon activity, which may dampen
water resources and agricultural productivity.

Oil Price Developments

  - Dubai crude oil prices were generally steady in the first half of March 2023

compared to the full-month average in February. International crude oil
prices have been highly volatile in recent weeks driven by both demand and

3 The IAC-IMO will be co-chaired by the Department of Finance (DOF) and the National Economic and Development
Authority (NEDA). The Department of Budget and Management (DBM) will be the vice-chairperson of the IAC-IMO and the
members are composed of the Department of Agriculture (DA), Department of Trade and Industry (DTI), Department of
Energy (DOE), Department of Science and Technology (DOST), and the Department of the Interior and Local Government
(DILG) Th PSA BSP d h Phili i C i i C i i (PCC) ill h IAC IMO’ i i i


-----

supply-side factors. On the demand side, optimism over Chinese demand
recovery boosted oil prices with Saudi Arabia raising its official selling price
(OSP). However, the lower-than-expected GDP forecast combined with
concerns from further US Federal Reserve (US Fed) monetary tightening
have tempered the increase. Meanwhile, supply disruptions from internal
conflicts (union strikes due to pension) in France alongside impact of
Europe sanctions on Russian oil exports, as well as the reintroduction of the
NOPEC bill[4] to the judiciary committee have also added to the uncertainties
in the energy market. Most recently, however, oil prices increased as the
turmoil over the Silicon Valley Bank collapse is broadly expected to temper
aggressive US Fed rate increases.

  - Meanwhile, global oil supply-demand outlook suggests a broadly balanced

market for 2023.[5] The US Energy Information Administration’s (EIA’s) latest
projection, as of March 2023, shows a slight surplus in oil supply for both
2023 and 2024. Moreover, demand is projected to increase as China pivoted
from its zero-COVID tolerance policy while India is also expected to
contribute to demand. This in turn, would compensate for the broadly flat
consumption from OECD countries, where demand remained soft due to
inflationary pressures. Meanwhile, US EIA also revised their supply
projections given the higher-than-expected supply from Russia as the
country continued to search for alternative consumers.

Developments in the Utilities Sector

  - The overall electricity rate increased in March 2023 due mainly to higher

generation charge. According to Meralco, the generation charge rose due
to the higher costs from the Wholesale Electricity Spot Market (WESM) and
Independent Power Producers (IPPs), which effectively offset the generally
flat charges from Meralco’s Power Supply Agreements (PSAs). To cushion
the impact of higher electricity cost, Meralco deferred the collection of
portions of the generation costs as agreed with its suppliers. A total of
around P1.1 billion deferred costs reduced the generation charge for March,
which will be billed on a staggered basis in April and May 2023, as
coordinated with the Energy Regulatory Commission.

**F. Financial market developments**

  - The peso appreciated against the US dollar, on a year-to-date basis, by

0.4 percent on 27 February 2023 from the end-December 2022 closing rate.
The appreciation is partly on account of positive market sentiment
following dovish remarks from the US Fed, which reinforced expectations
of a slower pace of monetary policy tightening. In addition, lower global oil
prices, the increase in the country’s gross international reserves at endJanuary 2023, as well as the BSP’s decision to raise interest rate by 50 basis
points during its 16 February 2023 meeting to curb elevated inflation
provided support to the peso.

4 A legislation to pressure the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC) into increasing production and
preventing the group from making quota cuts.
5 B d h US E I f i Ad i i i (US EIA) Sh T E O l k (M h 2023)


-----

**G. Domestic liquidity and credit conditions**

- Domestic credit growth has slowed down, although broader liquidity

conditions remain appropriate to sustain the economic recovery.
Preliminary data show that domestic liquidity (M3) grew by 5.5 percent y-oy in January 2023 from the 6.7-percent (revised) growth in December 2022.
Meanwhile, preliminary data on outstanding loans of universal and
commercial banks for production and consumption activities rose by 9.2
percent in January 2023 (from 12.4 percent (revised) in December 2022) and
20.3 percent (from 25.1 (revised)), respectively.

- Secondary market GS yields increased across all tenors on 7 March 2023

relative to end-January 2023. Yields rose on market participants’
cautiousness following the 50-basis point (bp) policy interest rate increase
by the BSP on 16 February 2023. The increase in yields was supported by
market players’ higher expectation of another policy rate increase in
anticipation of a higher CPI data in February 2023 based on the BSP
inflation forecast.

**H.  Fiscal developments**

- Fiscal consolidation continued as the National Government (NG) recorded

a deficit of P1.6 trillion for January - December 2022, about 3.4 percent lower
than the amount recorded in 2021. Netting out the interest payments, the
primary deficit amounted to P1.1 trillion, lower by 10.0 percent than the 2021
level.

**I.  External developments**

- Global growth outlook remains weak with risks skewed to the downside.

At the same time, global inflation expectations rose further as strong wage
gains underpin the sustained increase in the prices of service-based
categories such as rent, transportation, and food away from home
(restaurants).

- Several central banks have raised their respective key policy rates in March

to address price pressures and anchor inflation expectations in their
respective jurisdictions.

- Although monetary authorities have intensified their hawkish rhetoric

amid the persistence of price pressures, the recent collapse of several banks
in the US has also prompted financial markets to forecast lower terminal
rates and possible interest rate reductions by the US Fed by late 2023.
Interest rate expectations for the US have declined as market participants
expected the Federal Reserve to slow down the pace of monetary
tightening amid an increased risk of financial instability due to liquidity
constraints and broad repricing of asset prices.


-----

