Not to be released until 8:50 a.m.
Japan Standard Time on Friday,
January 26, 2024.

January 26, 2024

Bank of Japan

# Minutes of the
 Monetary Policy Meeting

## on December 18 and 19, 2023

(English translation prepared by the Bank's staff based on the Japanese original)


-----

Please contact the Bank of Japan at the address below in advance to request permission when

reproducing or copying the content of this document for commercial purposes.

Secretariat of the Policy Board, Bank of Japan

P.O. Box 30, Nihonbashi, Tokyo 103-8660, Japan

Please credit the source when quoting, reproducing, or copying the content of this document.


-----

A Monetary Policy Meeting of the Bank of Japan Policy Board was held in the Head

Office of the Bank of Japan in Tokyo on Monday, December 18, 2023, from 2:00 p.m. to 4:04

p.m., and on Tuesday, December 19, from 9:00 a.m. to 11:42 a.m.[1]

**Policy Board Members Present**

**UEDA Kazuo, Chairman, Governor of the Bank of Japan**

**HIMINO Ryozo, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Japan**

**UCHIDA Shinichi, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Japan**

**ADACHI Seiji**

**NAKAMURA Toyoaki**

**NOGUCHI Asahi**

**NAKAGAWA Junko**

**TAKATA Hajime**

**TAMURA Naoki**

Government Representatives Present

SAKAMOTO Motoru, Deputy Vice-Minister for Policy Planning and Coordination,

Ministry of Finance

SHINDO Yoshitaka, Minister of State for Economic and Fiscal Policy, Cabinet Office[2]

INOUE Hiroyuki, Vice-Minister for Policy Coordination, Cabinet Office[3]

MORO Kengo, Deputy Director General for Economic and Fiscal Management, Cabinet

Office[4 ]

Reporting Staff

SHIMIZU Tokiko, Executive Director (Assistant Governor)

KAIZUKA Masaaki, Executive Director

1 The minutes of this meeting were approved by the Policy Board at the Monetary Policy Meeting
held on January 22 and 23, 2024, as "a document describing an outline of the discussion at the meeting"
stipulated in Article 20, paragraph 1 of the Bank of Japan Act of 1997. Those present are referred to
by their titles at the time of the meeting.

2 Present on December 19 from 10:39 a.m. to 11:42 a.m.

3 Present on December 18.

4 Present on December 19 from 9:00 a.m. to 10:38 a.m.

1


-----

SHIMIZU Seiichi, Executive Director

MASAKI Kazuhiro, Director-General, Monetary Affairs Department

NAGANO Teppei, Head of Policy Planning Division, Monetary Affairs Department

FUJITA Kenji, Director-General, Financial Markets Department

OTANI Akira, Director-General, Research and Statistics Department

FUKUNAGA Ichiro, Advisor to Director-General, Research and Statistics Department[5]

NAGAHATA Takashi, Head of Economic Research Division, Research and Statistics

Department

KAMIYAMA Kazushige, Director-General, International Department

Secretariat of the Monetary Policy Meeting

KURAMOTO Katsuya, Director-General, Secretariat of the Policy Board

KINOSHITA Takao, Director, Deputy Head of Planning and Coordination Division,

Secretariat of the Policy Board

KITAHARA Jun, Senior Economist, Monetary Affairs Department

KURACHI Yoshiyuki, Senior Economist, Monetary Affairs Department

5 Present on December 18 from 3:26 p.m. to 4:04 p.m.

2


-----

**I. Summary of Staff Reports on Economic and Financial Developments[6]**

**A. Market Operations in the Intermeeting Period**

The Bank had been conducting market operations, including purchases of Japanese

government bonds (JGBs), in accordance with the guideline for market operations and the

guideline for conduct of yield curve control, both of which were decided at the previous

meeting on October 30 and 31, 2023.[7] As for the Bank's conduct of nimble market operations,

specifically, it had carried out unscheduled purchases of JGBs and reduced the amount of its

scheduled JGB purchases, mainly taking into account interest rate developments and supply

and demand conditions in the JGB markets. With these market operations, long-term interest

rates had been at levels consistent with the Bank's guideline and the shape of the JGB yield

curve continued to be generally smooth.

The Bank had conducted operations to purchase exchange-traded funds (ETFs),

Japan real estate investment trusts (J-REITs), CP, and corporate bonds in accordance with the

guidelines for asset purchases decided at the previous meeting.

**B. Recent Developments in Financial Markets**

In the money market, interest rates on both overnight and term instruments generally

had been in negative territory. With regard to interest rates on overnight instruments, the

uncollateralized call rate had been in the range of around minus 0.008 to minus 0.027 percent;

general collateral (GC) repo rates had been in the range of around minus 0.077 to minus 0.270

percent. As for interest rates on term instruments, yields on three-month treasury discount

bills (T-Bills) had increased somewhat.

The Tokyo Stock Price Index (TOPIX) had risen. Long-term interest rates (10-year

JGB yields), after reaching around 0.95 percent immediately after the previous meeting,

declined to the 0.6-0.7 percent level in line with a significant decrease in U.S. long-term

interest rates. Many of the liquidity indicators in the JGB markets improved in the period

6 Reports were made based on information available at the time of the meeting.

7 The short-term policy interest rate:

The Bank will apply a negative interest rate of minus 0.1 percent to the Policy-Rate Balances

in current accounts held by financial institutions at the Bank.

The long-term interest rate:

The Bank will purchase a necessary amount of JGBs without setting an upper limit so that

10-year JGB yields will remain at around zero percent.

3


-----

from summer 2023 to early autumn but had seen a pause in their improvement recently. The

diffusion index (DI) for the degree of bond market functioning in the Bond Market Survey,

despite remaining negative, showed an improvement from the previous survey. In the foreign

exchange market, the yen had appreciated against the U.S. dollar as the yield differential

between Japan and the United States had narrowed due to the significant decline in U.S. long
term interest rates. The yen had also appreciated against the euro.

**C. Overseas Economic and Financial Developments**

The pace of recovery in overseas economies had slowed. The U.S. economy had

been firm, mainly led by private consumption, although it had been affected by policy interest

rate hikes by the Federal Reserve. European economies kept slowing moderately as they

continued to be affected by factors such as policy interest rate hikes by the European Central

Bank (ECB). The Chinese economy remained on a moderate slowing trend, mainly owing to

the effects of a slowdown in external demand and adjustments in the real estate market, but

signs of a pick-up had been observed in some aspects, such as private consumption. Emerging

and commodity-exporting economies other than China had improved moderately on the

whole, with exports showing signs of a pick-up.

As for the outlook, the pace of recovery in overseas economies was projected to

remain slow for the time being. Thereafter, they were expected to grow moderately, albeit

with variation across countries and regions. There were considerably high uncertainties

regarding the outlook, such as the impact of past policy interest rate hikes by central banks,

developments in the Chinese economy, and how geopolitical tensions would unfold.

With respect to overseas financial markets, in the United States and Europe, long
term interest rates had declined significantly, led by the United States, as market participants'

concern over prolonged monetary tightening and a deterioration in the supply and demand

conditions of U.S. Treasury securities had abated. U.S. and European stock prices had risen

substantially, reflecting the significant decline in long-term interest rates. Meanwhile,

currencies in many emerging economies had appreciated in reflection of the decline in U.S.

long-term interest rates. Crude oil prices had declined, mainly due to the disagreement among

oil-producing economies over further coordinated oil production cuts.

4


-----

**D. Economic and Financial Developments in Japan**

1. Economic developments

Japan's economy had recovered moderately. Regarding the outlook, the economy

was likely to continue recovering moderately for the time being, supported by the

materialization of pent-up demand, as well as by factors such as accommodative financial

conditions and the government's economic measures, although it was expected to be under

downward pressure stemming from the slowdown in the pace of recovery in overseas

economies.

Although exports and production had been affected by the slowdown in the pace of

recovery in overseas economies, they had been more or less flat, supported by a waning of

the effects of supply-side constraints. Regarding the outlook, exports and production were

projected to continue showing similar developments for the time being. Thereafter, as

overseas economies grew moderately, albeit with variation across countries and regions, they

were likely to return to an uptrend.

Corporate profits and business sentiment had improved. In this situation, business

fixed investment had been on a moderate increasing trend. With regard to the outlook, as

corporate profits improved, such investment was expected to continue on an increasing trend,

mainly on the back of accommodative financial conditions.

Private consumption continued to increase moderately, despite being affected by

price rises. The consumption activity index (CAI; real, travel balance adjusted) had been on

an increasing trend until October 2023, albeit with monthly fluctuations. With regard to

private consumption since November 2023, based on anecdotal information from firms and

high-frequency indicators, this seemed to have continued on a moderate uptrend, as the

income situation had improved and pent-up demand had also provided support. However, a

gradually increasing number of firms had pointed out a rise in households' thriftiness in

response to price rises. Consumer sentiment remained at an improved level compared with a

while ago, although it had seen a pause in its improvement due to the effects of high prices.

Regarding the outlook, although such consumption was expected to be affected by price rises,

it was projected to keep increasing moderately with nominal employee income continuing to

improve, and partly supported by household savings that had accumulated as a result of

pandemic-related restrictions.

5


-----

The employment and income situation had improved moderately. Regarding the

number of employed persons, that of regular employees had risen moderately, albeit with

fluctuations, mainly in the medical, healthcare, and welfare services industry, as well as the

information and communications industry, with both these industries facing severe labor

shortages. With economic activity normalizing, the number of non-regular employees had

been on a moderate uptrend, mainly in the wholesale and retail trade as well as the face-to
face services industries. Nominal wages per employee had increased moderately, reflecting

the recovery in economic activity and the results of the annual spring labor-management wage

negotiations. With regard to the outlook, nominal employee income was likely to continue to

see a clear increase in reflection of an acceleration in nominal wage growth. Partly as inflation

declined, the year-on-year rate of decline in real employee income was projected to follow a

decelerating trend; thereafter, the rate of change was likely to gradually turn positive.

As for prices, while crude oil prices had declined, other commodity prices had been

more or less flat on the whole. With the impact of past high commodity prices gradually

waning, the rate of change in the producer price index (PPI) relative to three months earlier

had been at around 0 percent. The year-on-year rate of increase in the consumer price index

(CPI, all items less fresh food) was slower than a while ago, mainly due to the effects of

pushing down energy prices from the government's economic measures, but it had been at

around 3 percent recently owing to the effects of a pass-through to consumer prices of cost

increases led by the past rise in import prices. Inflation expectations had risen moderately.

With regard to the outlook, the year-on-year rate of increase in the CPI (all items less fresh

food) was likely to be above 2 percent through fiscal 2024, due to factors such as the

remaining effects of the pass-through to consumer prices of cost increases led by the past rise

in import prices. Thereafter, the rate of increase was projected to decelerate owing to

dissipation of these factors.

2. Financial environment

Japan's financial conditions had been accommodative.

With a high level of demand for working capital stemming from elevated raw

material costs, firms' demand for funds had increased moderately on the back of, for example,

the recovery in economic activity as well as mergers and acquisitions of firms. With regard

to credit supply, financial institutions' lending attitudes as perceived by firms had been

6


-----

accommodative. Issuance conditions for CP and corporate bonds had been favorable. Firms'

funding costs had been hovering at extremely low levels. In this situation, the year-on-year

rate of increase in the amount outstanding of bank lending had been in the range of 3.0-3.5

percent. That in the aggregate amount outstanding of CP and corporate bonds had been at

around 2 percent. Firms' financial positions had been favorable. The number of bankruptcies

of firms had increased.

Meanwhile, the year-on-year rate of change in the monetary base had been at around

9 percent. That in the money stock had been in the range of 2.0-2.5 percent.

**II. Summary of Staff Reports and Discussions by the Policy Board on the** **_Review of_**

**_Monetary Policy from a Broad Perspective_**

**A. Staff Reports**

As part of the Review of Monetary Policy from a Broad Perspective, the Research

and Statistics Department was conducting a research project that looked back on

developments in economic activity and prices over the past 25 years.

In this project, the staff had been conducting the following so far: (1) summarizing

past discussions and previous studies, and (2) with regard to economic activity and prices in

Japan since the late 1990s, making analyses from various perspectives, such as the effects of

globalization, sluggish productivity, deterioration in the terms of trade, and people's mindset

on prices as well as the social norm for them. The staff reported an overview of the analyses

made so far, as follows.

With regard to productivity and other factors, (1) it was likely that productivity of

Japan's trading sector had not necessarily benefitted fully from globalization, compared with

in the United States and Europe. In this situation, (2) the decline in the competitiveness of

Japan's trading sector relative to that of other countries seemed to be a factor that had led to

deterioration in Japan's terms of trade, and this in turn had a negative impact on household

income and private consumption. Meanwhile, (3) it was less likely that the so-called zombie

firms had significantly inhibited Japan's economic growth, as their share had been at low

levels in recent years.

As for price and wage developments, (1) the view that prices and wages do not

increase easily was deemed to have gradually taken hold in society, as the costs that firms

incur when revising prices -- or menu costs -- had increased, and to have strengthened due to

7


-----

the prolonged low-inflation environment. Meanwhile, (2) firms seemed to have secured

profits by holding down wages as markups had contracted due to a highly competitive

environment. In addition, (3) as globalization had proceeded, it was highly likely that

overseas factors had acted to continuously exert downward pressure on Japan's consumer

prices, except for the most recent period. Furthermore, (4) the relationship between economic

activity and prices seemed to have weakened, as observed by the deviation between growth

expectations and inflation expectations, as well as the flattening of the Phillips curve.

As inflation rates had been relatively high over the past year or two, there seemed

to be signs of change in the long-standing situation of prices not increasing easily. Specifically,

the frequency of price revisions had seen a rapid rise recently, and it was likely that the view

that prices do not increase easily would begin to dissipate through the accumulation of firms'

experiences from raising prices. In addition, downward pressure on costs from abroad that

had been observed over most of the past 25 years was turning to upward pressure. However,

the sustainability of such changes continued to warrant attention.

The Research and Statistics Department would continue with this research project,

also making use of the results of a survey that was mainly on corporate behavior since the

mid-1990s, which the Bank's Head Office and branches were currently working on together.

With regard to the analyses of individual research, these were expected to be released in the

form of research papers, such as the Bank of Japan Working Paper Series, and the staff would

exchange views on the findings with experts, making use of occasions such as workshops.

**B. Discussions by the Policy Board**

Based on the above staff reports, members discussed developments in economic

activity and prices over the past 25 years, particularly the background to the prolonged

situation of wages and prices not increasing easily.

Some members expressed the recognition that it was the norm that wages and prices

do not increase easily having taken hold in society during the deflationary period that had

significantly contributed to the subsequent prolongation of low inflation. One of these

members said that, with the low-inflation environment expected to be maintained, firms' pass
through of cost increases to selling prices had been less likely to take place. The member

continued that this in turn had in part further intensified the perception that prices do not

increase easily. A different member expressed the view that, when faced with such substantial

8


-----

shocks as financial crises, the impact on corporate and household behavior, as well as the

adaptive formation mechanism of inflation expectations, would likely be prolonged by around

a decade or more. The member added that, in the current situation where the Bank patiently

continued with monetary easing for a long period, there had been a new shock of significant

cost increases, and this had finally started to create an environment that was favorable for

inflation expectations to change. One member pointed out that it was necessary to conduct a

more detailed analysis of how, and to what extent, the norm of prices not increasing easily

had affected the price formation mechanism.

Some members pointed to the effects of changes in Japan's growth potential and in

the global environment on corporate behavior and prices. One of these members expressed

the view that, amid environmental changes surrounding firms, including globalization, the

declining population, and the yen's appreciation, Japanese firms had lagged behind reforms

in their business models, and business management that emphasized cutting costs had taken

hold against the background of the lingering management philosophy that had become

entrenched during Japan's high-growth era -- namely, the idea that "wage increases stemming

from improved labor productivity should be absorbed by firms' efforts, including the

containment of costs through mass production." The member continued that this had resulted

in stagnant innovation and wages. A different member pointed out that, as Japanese firms had

long been exposed to intense competition, they had improved their production efficiency to

secure high international competitiveness. The member -- noting that such competent

business models of Japanese firms had seen a collapse during the 1990s -- expressed interest

in whether the collapse was brought about by the effects of rapid appreciation of the yen or

of monetary policy. One member commented that it also was important to consider whether

changes in the global inflationary environment over the past few years were a structural or

temporary phenomenon, with the latter arising from the course of recovery from the COVID
19 pandemic. The member -- noting that the norm for prices and the global low-inflation

environment had significantly influenced past low inflation -- pointed out that, if these

structural factors were beginning to shift, the implication would be that there was a greater

possibility of Japan's economy achieving the price stability target of 2 percent and enabling

it to take hold.

Meanwhile, one member noted, as an example, that there could be varied views

regarding the relationship between the so-called zombie firms and Japan's growth potential.

9


-----

The member then said that, with a view to enhancing the objectivity and transparency of the

review from a broad perspective, it was important that the Bank incorporate diverse expertise

through such initiatives as conducting surveys, holding interviews and workshops, and

inviting public comment concerning its releases. A different member commented that it was

necessary to continue to examine whether low interest rates had been one of the causes of the

issue of zombie firms. On this basis, the member pointed out that low interest rates provide

benefits for a wide range of firms, and even if there was a certain chance of such low rates

extending the lifespan of zombie firms, it would not imply that the level of interest rates

should have been raised. The member then added that the impact of other factors, such as

various public measures, should be examined.

Based on these discussions, members shared the recognition that it was appropriate

to continue with some on such factors as the background to the continued low-inflation

environment, while taking into account the staff's additional analyses and examinations.

**III. Summary of Discussions by the Policy Board on Economic and Financial**

**Developments**

**A. Economic and Price Developments**

With regard to global financial and capital markets, members concurred that,

although attention continued to be drawn to uncertainties over the U.S. and European

monetary policies, as well as the outlook for the global economy, market sentiment had shown

signs of improvement, reflecting the significant decline in U.S. and European long-term

interest rates. One member expressed the recognition that, compared with developments in

economic activity and prices, it seemed that the markets had factored in policy interest rate

cuts in the United States rather excessively.

Members shared the recognition that the pace of recovery in overseas economies

had slowed. One member expressed the view that global inflationary pressure had been easing

as a trend, although uncertainties stemming from geopolitical risks remained.

Members agreed that the U.S. economy had been firm, mainly led by private

consumption, although it had been affected by policy interest rate hikes by the Federal

Reserve. Some members pointed out that the inflation rate had slowed gradually while labor

market conditions had eased somewhat. Some members expressed the view that, under such

10


-----

circumstances, private consumption had been firm and the possibility of the U.S. economy

achieving a soft landing had risen.

Members shared the recognition that European economies kept slowing moderately

as they continued to be affected by factors such as policy interest rate hikes by the ECB. Some

members pointed out that deceleration in these economies was becoming evident, mainly

reflecting the effects of past interest rate hikes and heightened geopolitical risks.

Members shared the view that the Chinese economy remained on a moderate

slowing trend, mainly owing to the effects of the slowdown in external demand and

adjustments in the real estate market, but signs of a pick-up had been observed in some aspects,

such as private consumption. Some members pointed out that the growth momentum from a

somewhat long-term perspective had declined, mainly reflecting the sluggish real estate

market and U.S.-China tension. One of these members, however, expressed the view that it

was highly likely that the Chinese government would support the economy through fiscal

policy measures for the time being.

Regarding emerging and commodity-exporting economies other than China,

members shared the recognition that these economies had improved moderately on the whole,

with exports showing signs of a pick-up.

Based on the above deliberations on economic and financial conditions abroad,

members discussed the state of Japan's economy.

With regard to economic activity, members agreed that Japan's economy had

recovered moderately. A few members pointed out that, although weakness shown in the GDP

statistics for the July-September quarter of 2023, for example, was a matter of concern,

various data, including the Tankan (Short-Term Economic Survey of Enterprises in Japan)

and financial results of firms, revealed that private consumption had increased, despite being

affected by price rises, and that corporate profits as well as business fixed investment plans

had been solid.

As for the outlook for economic activity, members shared the recognition that

Japan's economy was likely to continue recovering moderately for the time being, supported

by factors such as the materialization of pent-up demand, although it was expected to be under

downward pressure stemming from the slowdown in the pace of recovery in overseas

economies. They continued that, thereafter, as a virtuous cycle from income to spending

11


-----

gradually intensified, Japan's economy was projected to continue growing at a pace above its

potential.

Members shared the recognition that, although exports and production had been

affected by the slowdown in the pace of recovery in overseas economies, they had been more

or less flat, supported by the waning of the effects of supply-side constraints.

Members agreed that business fixed investment had been on a moderate increasing

trend, with corporate profits and business sentiment improving. Some members expressed the

view that, mainly taking into account the strong business fixed investment plans in the

December 2023 _Tankan, firms maintained an active investment stance, although some_

coincident indicators had been relatively weak. One of these members expected that the

favorable corporate performance of large firms would spread to profits of small and medium
sized firms through an increase in prices of goods sold by small and medium-sized firms to

large ones, and that the existing virtuous cycle would intensify. The member then added that

it was important for startups to grow and expand their scale of funding, as well as for larger

firms and small and medium-sized firms to gain a higher degree of autonomy by augmenting

their management resources.

Members concurred that private consumption continued to increase moderately,

despite being affected by price rises. Some members expressed the view that it had been

relatively weak in part, such as in nondurable goods, as households' spending behavior had

become more defensive, mainly due to a decline in real income. A few members expressed

the view that, until wage hikes were realized in spring 2024, private consumption would be

supported by pent-up demand and household savings that had accumulated as a result of

pandemic-related restrictions, and thus could lack momentum. Nevertheless, one of these

members pointed out that private consumption was unlikely to decline as consumer sentiment

had held up, mainly due to expectations for future income growth. A different member noted

that a key issue was whether wage hikes would continue and could support private

consumption from the household income side.

Members shared the view that the employment and income situation had improved

moderately. One member expected that winter bonuses for 2023 would exceed those for the

previous year, reflecting improvements in corporate profits.

As for prices, members agreed that the year-on-year rate of increase in the CPI (all

items less fresh food) was slower than a while ago, mainly due to the effects of pushing down

12


-----

energy prices from the government's economic measures, but it had been at around 3 percent

recently owing to the effects of the pass-through to consumer prices of cost increases led by

the past rise in import prices. Moreover, they shared the recognition that it had gradually

become evident that the effects of the pass-through of the past rise in import prices to

consumer prices had gradually waned, as seen, for example, in the preliminary estimates of

the CPI for Tokyo's 23 wards for November 2023. Some members pointed out that the upward

pressure of costs had paused as a trend, mainly as the number of items for which prices were

raised had decreased, such as in food items. A different member expressed the view that there

was a higher likelihood of the rate of increase in flexible prices, which include goods,

decelerating temporarily, as the number of items which had experienced a significant price

hike had decreased. Members shared the view that prices for services, for example, had risen

moderately. One member pointed out that the rate of increase in services prices, excluding

administered prices and housing rent, continued to be high. Meanwhile, members agreed that

inflation expectations had risen moderately. A few members pointed out that the Tankan and

other sources had indicated changes in firms' price-setting stance, including that of small and

medium-sized firms, which also suggested a moderate rise in inflation expectations.

With regard to the outlook for prices, members agreed that the year-on-year rate of

increase in the CPI was likely to be above 2 percent through fiscal 2024, due to factors such

as the remaining effects of the pass-through to consumer prices of cost increases led by the

past rise in import prices. They continued that, thereafter, the rate of increase was projected

to decelerate owing to dissipation of these factors. Moreover, members shared the view that

underlying CPI inflation was likely to increase gradually toward achieving the price stability

target, as the output gap turned positive and as medium- to long-term inflation expectations

and wage growth rose. On this point, many members expressed the recognition that the

likelihood of realizing this outlook had been rising gradually. Some members pointed out that

a future scenario could be expected in which intensification of the virtuous cycle between

wages and prices led by wage hikes made progress. One of these members said that, until the

effects of wage hikes and the government's measures materialized, it was necessary to

monitor whether economic developments, particularly in private consumption, would be solid

and stay at that level. A different member pointed out that the second half of fiscal 2023 would

be an important period for determining whether underlying inflation and inflation

expectations would rise.

13


-----

From the perspective of confirming that the virtuous cycle between wages and prices

had intensified, members discussed wage developments. Some members expressed the

opinion that the possibility had heightened of a notable wage increase being achieved in the

2024 annual spring labor-management wage negotiations. One of these members pointed out

that the momentum in wage hikes at this point was stronger than in 2022, as various factors

that affected wage formation, such as corporate profits, labor market conditions, and observed

inflation, had improved compared with at this time in 2022. The member continued that these

developments allowed for strong expectations for wage hikes, including among small and

medium-sized firms. A different member said that the past rise in import prices had affected

wage-setting behavior, and many firms had taken moves toward raising wages, partly

reflecting heightening expectations in the society; given these factors, it was highly possible

that the wage growth to be agreed in the 2024 wage negotiations would exceed that agreed in

2023. On the other hand, some members expressed the view that, with respect to local small

and medium-sized firms in particular, there were high uncertainties as to whether a notable

wage increase would be achieved, due mainly to weakness in their profit bases. A few of these

members commented that whether or not a wide range of firms would achieve wage hikes

could not be viewed optimistically, as evidenced, for example, by some firms avoiding raising

the rate of base pay increases, even in industries where profits and business sentiment had

improved significantly. In response, one member pointed out that, in the pre-pandemic phase,

firms had addressed labor shortages, mainly by reducing unprofitable services and promoting

labor participation of women and seniors. The member continued, however, that there was

less room for such responses recently, and firms therefore were in a situation of being forced

to raise wages to retain employees. A few members, including this member, added that the

improvement in corporate profits and a decline in the labor share, partly due to progress in

the pass-through of cost increases to selling prices, would also encourage wage hikes.

Members also discussed spillovers from wage increases to prices. A few members

expressed the opinion that, as firms' price-setting behavior changed, moves to pass on higher

personnel expenses to prices had spread and the year-on-year rate of increase in services

prices, which are sticky, continued to be high. These members added that government support,

such as the formulation of guidelines concerning price negotiations, also had affected firms'

price setting. In response, some members pointed out that many firms had reported that it

remained difficult to pass on higher wages to services prices. One of these members added

14


-----

that statistics showed that a notable increase in services prices had been seen, mainly for hotel

charges, and the contribution of the rise in services prices to the rise in the overall CPI had

been only around 1 percent. A different member said that there were some cases where

existing systems and practices concerning price setting had made it difficult for firms to raise

prices, and that attention needed to be paid to whether or not this would hinder the virtuous

cycle between wages and prices. In relation to these points, one member pointed out that

attention was warranted on whether higher personnel expenses would be passed on to selling

prices in the services industry, where it was more difficult relative to the manufacturing

industry to absorb cost increases by raising productivity. Meanwhile, one member expressed

the opinion that, given the entrenchment of the idea held in the high-growth era that an

increase in personnel expenses should be absorbed by firms' efforts, including the

containment of costs through mass production, a pass-through of wage hikes to selling prices

required improvement in customer satisfaction. The member continued that, therefore, human

resource development as well as investment in human capital and research and development

(R&D) were important.

As for risks to economic activity and prices, members concurred that there were

extremely high uncertainties surrounding Japan's economic activity and prices, including

developments in overseas economic activity and prices, developments in commodity prices,

and domestic firms' wage- and price-setting behavior. Moreover, they shared the view that,

under these circumstances, it was necessary to pay due attention to developments in financial

and foreign exchange markets and their impact on Japan's economic activity and prices. With

respect to overseas economies, one member noted the intention to continue paying significant

attention to economic and financial developments in the United States. A different member

expressed the recognition that uncertainties regarding overseas economies, including a

reversal of globalization and geopolitical risks, had heightened. Regarding the Chinese

economy, a few members pointed out that there were high uncertainties concerning the real

estate sector. One of these members added that, while there was considerable room for

conducting macroeconomic policy measures in China, where the potential growth rate was

high, there was a risk that fiscal support to, for example, the real estate sector would be

insufficient, as the government appeared to prioritize social stability in the long term. One

member pointed out that, if Japanese firms adopted stronger cost-cutting measures in

response to lower capacity utilization due to the yen's appreciation and slowdowns in overseas

15


-----

economies, they could have less of an appetite for wage hikes and investment. The member

then noted that close attention was required on firms' profit plans and their business policies,

including those of small and medium-sized firms.

**B. Financial Developments**

Members agreed that financial conditions in Japan had been accommodative. In

addition, they shared the view that firms' funding costs had been hovering at extremely low

levels. A few members expressed the recognition that the degree of bond market functioning,

for example, continued to improve as a trend. On this basis, one member expressed the view

that issuance conditions for corporate bonds remained favorable. However, a different

member said that long-term funding from the corporate bond market had been somewhat

difficult as investors' expectations of a rise in interest rates had been growing.

**IV. Summary of Discussions on Monetary Policy**

Based on the above assessment of economic and financial developments, members

discussed monetary policy.

With regard to the Bank's basic stance on its future conduct of monetary policy,

members agreed that sustainable and stable achievement of the price stability target

accompanied by wage increases was not yet envisaged with sufficient certainty at this point,

and thus the Bank needed to patiently continue with monetary easing under yield curve

control, aiming to support Japan's economic activity and thereby facilitate a favorable

environment for wage increases. Some members expressed the view that, from the

perspective of achieving the price stability target, it was essential at this point to examine

demand and wage developments. One member said that the Bank should continue with the

current monetary easing in order to encourage changes in economic and wage structures

resulting from labor shortages.

Many members once again pointed out that, in determining whether to terminate the

negative interest rate policy and the yield curve control framework, sustainable and stable

achievement of the price stability target needed to come in sight, with a virtuous cycle

between wages and prices being confirmed. Some members expressed the view that the

determination of whether such achievement had come in sight should not be based on specific

numerical values such as the rate of wage increases achieved in labor-management wage

16


-----

negotiations or other indicators, but instead on a comprehensive judgement. Moreover, with

regard to the timing of making such a determination, members concurred that it would be

decided at each future meeting based on various data and information obtained at each point

in time. On this point, some members said that it seemed that the Bank was currently not in

a situation where it would fall behind the curve if it did not rush to raise policy interest rates.

These members continued that, even if the Bank made a decision after it saw developments

in labor-management wage negotiations in spring 2024, it would not be too late. One of these

members expressed the view that, given that the wage growth rate had not caught up with the

inflation rate to date, even if wage hikes in 2024 were considerably higher than expected, the

risk that this would intensify the cycle between wages and prices excessively and cause

underlying inflation to significantly exceed 2 percent was small. A different member added

that, unlike the situation seen in the United States in 2021, the strong upward pressure on

prices was currently subsiding in Japan, and that it was important to thoroughly determine

wage and price developments. In addition, another member expressed the view that,

considering the fact that increasing the flexibility in the conduct of yield curve control at the

previous meeting had lowered the likelihood of side effects, the Bank would have sufficient

leeway to determine whether the virtuous cycle between wages and prices had intensified. In

response, some other members pointed out that, looking ahead toward the exit from the

current monetary policy, it was necessary to consider the treatment of yield curve control and

the negative interest rate policy while taking into consideration their side effects and impact

on the market. One of these members noted that, with the likelihood of achieving the price

stability target in a sustainable and stable manner rising further, the timing of normalization

of monetary policy was getting closer. The member then said that, to avoid the risk of high

prices damaging the underlying trend in consumption and undermining the achievement of

the target as a result of overly careful assessment, the Bank should not miss an opportunity

to revise its policy. This member added that, while the risk of prices becoming excessively

higher than expected and the Bank needing to rapidly tighten monetary policy was small, it

was necessary to understand that the cost incurred if this risk materialized would be

significant.

Members shared the recognition that, in determining whether to terminate the

negative interest rate policy and the yield curve control framework, it was necessary to decide

what means and which order of procedures would be appropriate based on developments in

17


-----

economic activity, prices, and financial conditions at that time. On this basis, a few members

pointed out that one option could be to keep a moderate framework to avoid causing

instability in long-term interest rates, even after sustainable and stable achievement of the

price stability target had come in sight. One member noted that termination of the negative

interest rate policy was different in some aspects from a short-term policy interest rate hike

within positive territory. This member then expressed the view that, bearing in mind that the

termination would not necessarily induce a change that was the opposite of the one observed

at the time of the introduction of the negative interest rate policy in 2016, it was necessary to

analyze possible effects in advance. Meanwhile, one member commented that the Bank held

a large amount of JGBs, bearing much of the market's interest rate risk; therefore, from the

perspective of maintaining confidence in its ability to conduct monetary policy in the exit

phase, it was important that the Bank provide communication on central banks' balance sheets

and the mechanism of changes in their profits.

Members also discussed policy conduct from a somewhat long-term perspective. A

few members expressed the view that the Bank was likely to continue with substantial

monetary easing for the time being, even after termination of the negative interest rate policy

and the yield curve control framework. One of these members noted that it was important to

maintain accommodative financial conditions, while slightly adjusting the degree of

monetary easing. On this point, one member commented that the current guideline for future

policy conduct -- specifically, that the Bank would continue with Quantitative and Qualitative

Monetary Easing (QQE) with Yield Curve Control, aiming to achieve the price stability target,

as long as it was necessary for maintaining that target in a stable manner -- had allowed for

some modifications to QQE with Yield Curve Control if achievement of the target was likely

to be in sight after implementing them. The member continued that the guideline did not

imply that the Bank would continue with the current policy until it had no choice but to

implement, for example, rapid policy interest rate hikes after a policy revision.

Based on the above discussions, members shared the recognition that it was

important for the Bank to continue to deepen discussions on issues such as the timing of the

exit from the current monetary policy and the appropriate pace of raising policy interest rates

thereafter, while giving consideration to the relationship with wage and price developments

going forward.

18


-----

With respect to yield curve control, members agreed that long-term interest rates

had been at levels consistent with the guideline for market operations, as the Bank had been

conducting yield curve control in accordance with the guideline decided at the previous

meeting, at which the Bank had decided to further increase the flexibility in the conduct of

yield curve control. With regard to the increase in the flexibility decided at the previous

meeting, one member judged that, given, for example, that long-term interest rates had been

relatively stable and the shape of the JGB yield curve had been smooth, the intended purpose

had been achieved. One member commented that many market participants had indicated that

they had regarded the reduction in the amount of JGB purchases implemented during the

intermeeting period as a factor that would contribute to the recovery in liquidity.

Based on the above discussions, regarding the guideline for market operations for

the intermeeting period, members agreed that it was appropriate for the Bank to maintain the

current guideline. In addition, they shared the recognition that it was appropriate for the Bank

to continue with its current conduct of yield curve control.

Members concurred that it was appropriate to maintain the current guideline for

asset purchases other than JGB purchases. One member expressed the view that, given the

improving trend in economic activity and prices, the treatment of asset purchases other than

JGB purchases should be considered as well, taking account of, for example, their impact on

the market.

With respect to the future conduct of monetary policy, members shared the basic

stance that, with extremely high uncertainties surrounding economies and financial markets

at home and abroad, the Bank would patiently continue with monetary easing while nimbly

responding to developments in economic activity and prices as well as financial conditions,

and that, by doing so, it would aim to achieve the price stability target of 2 percent in a

sustainable and stable manner, accompanied by wage increases. On this basis, they shared the

view that the Bank would (1) continue with QQE with Yield Curve Control, aiming to achieve

the price stability target, as long as it was necessary for maintaining that target in a stable

manner, and (2) continue expanding the monetary base until the year-on-year rate of increase

in the observed CPI (all items less fresh food) exceeded 2 percent and stayed above the target

in a stable manner. In addition, members agreed that the Bank would continue to maintain the

stability of financing, mainly of firms, and financial markets, and would not hesitate to take

additional easing measures if necessary.

19


-----

**V. Remarks by Government Representatives**

The representative from the Cabinet Office made the following remarks.

(1) The Japanese economy was on a moderate recovery trend that offered a golden

opportunity to shift to a new stage. On the other hand, private demand had lacked in

strength as wage growth had not caught up with inflation, and the economy could revert

to a deflationary state if left unaddressed. With regard to the supply side, Japan's potential

growth rate remained at a low level of around 0.5 percent.

(2) Through the comprehensive economic measures, the government would protect people's

daily lives from high prices and would sustain and expand the trend of wage hikes. It

would also raise the potential growth rate by enhancing the supply capacity of its

economy, thus leading to sustained wage hikes. The government would explore frontiers

and promote efforts such as social implementation of new technologies, thereby

structuring an economy that could grow in a sustainable manner even with a declining

population.

(3) The government expected the Bank to conduct appropriate monetary policy toward

achieving the price stability target of 2 percent in a sustainable and stable manner,

accompanied by wage increases, taking account of developments in economic activity

and prices as well as financial conditions.

The representative from the Ministry of Finance made the following remarks.

(1) The supplementary budget for implementing comprehensive economic measures was

approved by the Diet recently. The government was currently in the process of finalizing

the budget for fiscal 2024.

(2) The outline for tax reform for fiscal 2024 was formulated by the ruling parties on

December 14, and the government would take appropriate actions based on it.

(3) The government expected the Bank to conduct appropriate monetary policy toward

achieving the price stability target in a sustainable and stable manner while closely

cooperating with the government.

20


-----

**VI. Votes**

**A. Vote on the Guideline for Market Operations**

Based on the above discussions, to reflect the view of the members, the chairman

formulated the following proposal on the guideline for market operations and put it to a vote.

The Policy Board decided the proposal by a unanimous vote.

**The Chairman's Policy Proposal on the Guideline for Market Operations:**

The guideline for market operations for the intermeeting period will be as follows.

1. The Bank will apply a negative interest rate of minus 0.1 percent to the Policy
Rate Balances in current accounts held by financial institutions at the Bank.

2. The Bank will purchase a necessary amount of JGBs without setting an upper

limit so that 10-year JGB yields will remain at around 0 percent.

Votes for the proposal: UEDA Kazuo, HIMINO Ryozo, UCHIDA Shinichi,

ADACHI Seiji, NAKAMURA Toyoaki, NOGUCHI Asahi, NAKAGAWA Junko,

TAKATA Hajime, and TAMURA Naoki.

Votes against the proposal: None.

**B. Vote on the Conduct of Yield Curve Control**

To reflect the view of the members, the chairman formulated the following proposal

on the conduct of yield curve control and put it to a vote.

The Policy Board decided the proposal by a unanimous vote.

**The Chairman's Policy Proposal on the Conduct of Yield Curve Control:**

The conduct of yield curve control for the intermeeting period will be as follows.

The Bank will regard the upper bound of 1.0 percent for 10-year JGB

yields as a reference in its market operations, and in order to encourage the

formation of a yield curve that is consistent with the guideline for market operations,

it will continue with large-scale JGB purchases and make nimble responses for each

21


-----

maturity by, for example, increasing the amount of JGB purchases and conducting

fixed-rate purchase operations and the Funds-Supplying Operations against Pooled

Collateral.

Votes for the proposal: UEDA Kazuo, HIMINO Ryozo, UCHIDA Shinichi,

ADACHI Seiji, NAKAMURA Toyoaki, NOGUCHI Asahi, NAKAGAWA Junko,

TAKATA Hajime, and TAMURA Naoki.

Votes against the proposal: None.

**C. Vote on the Guideline for Asset Purchases**

To reflect the view of the members, the chairman formulated the following proposal

on the guideline for asset purchases and put it to a vote.

The Policy Board decided the proposal by a unanimous vote.

**The Chairman's Policy Proposal on the Guideline for Asset Purchases:**

The guideline for asset purchases other than JGB purchases will be as follows.

1. The Bank will purchase ETFs and J-REITs as necessary with upper limits of

about 12 trillion yen and about 180 billion yen, respectively, on annual paces

of increase in their amounts outstanding.

2. The Bank will maintain the amount outstanding of CP at about 2 trillion yen. It

will purchase corporate bonds at about the same pace as prior to the COVID
19 pandemic, so that their amount outstanding will gradually return to the pre
pandemic level of about 3 trillion yen. In adjusting the amount outstanding of

corporate bonds, the Bank will give due consideration to their issuance

conditions.

Votes for the proposal: UEDA Kazuo, HIMINO Ryozo, UCHIDA Shinichi,

ADACHI Seiji, NAKAMURA Toyoaki, NOGUCHI Asahi, NAKAGAWA Junko,

TAKATA Hajime, and TAMURA Naoki.

Votes against the proposal: None.

22


-----

**D. Discussion on the Statement on Monetary Policy**

On the basis of the above discussions, members discussed the Statement on

Monetary Policy. The chairman formulated the Statement on Monetary Policy and put it to a

vote. The Policy Board decided the text by a unanimous vote. It was confirmed that the

statement would be released immediately after the meeting (see Attachment).

**VII. Approval of the Minutes of the Monetary Policy Meeting**

The Policy Board approved unanimously the minutes of the Monetary Policy

Meeting of October 30 and 31, 2023, for release on December 22.

23


-----

Attachment

December 19, 2023

Bank of Japan

**Statement on Monetary Policy**

1. At the Monetary Policy Meeting held today, the Policy Board of the Bank of Japan decided

upon the following.

(1) Yield curve control

a) The Bank decided, by a unanimous vote, to set the following guideline for market

operations for the intermeeting period.

The short-term policy interest rate:

The Bank will apply a negative interest rate of minus 0.1 percent to the Policy-Rate

Balances in current accounts held by financial institutions at the Bank.

The long-term interest rate:

The Bank will purchase a necessary amount of Japanese government bonds (JGBs)

without setting an upper limit so that 10-year JGB yields will remain at around zero

percent.

b) Conduct of yield curve control (a unanimous vote)

The Bank will regard the upper bound of 1.0 percent for 10-year JGB yields as a

reference in its market operations, and in order to encourage the formation of a yield

curve that is consistent with the above guideline for market operations, it will continue

with large-scale JGB purchases and make nimble responses for each maturity by, for

example, increasing the amount of JGB purchases and conducting fixed-rate purchase

operations and the Funds-Supplying Operations against Pooled Collateral.[8]

(2) Guidelines for asset purchases (a unanimous vote)

With regard to asset purchases other than JGB purchases, the Bank decided to set the

following guidelines.

8 The Bank will determine the offer rate for fixed-rate purchase operations each time, taking account of
market rates and other factors.

24


-----

a) The Bank will purchase exchange-traded funds (ETFs) and Japan real estate investment

trusts (J-REITs) as necessary with upper limits of about 12 trillion yen and about 180

billion yen, respectively, on annual paces of increase in their amounts outstanding.

b) The Bank will maintain the amount outstanding of CP at about 2 trillion yen. It will

purchase corporate bonds at about the same pace as prior to the COVID-19 pandemic,

so that their amount outstanding will gradually return to the pre-pandemic level of

about 3 trillion yen. In adjusting the amount outstanding of corporate bonds, the Bank

will give due consideration to their issuance conditions.

2. Japan's economy has recovered moderately. The pace of recovery in overseas economies has

slowed. Although exports and industrial production have been affected by the developments in

overseas economies, they have been more or less flat, supported by a waning of the effects of

supply-side constraints. Corporate profits and business sentiment have improved. In this

situation, business fixed investment has been on a moderate increasing trend. The employment

and income situation has improved moderately. Private consumption has continued to increase

moderately, despite being affected by price rises. Housing investment has been relatively weak.

Public investment has been more or less flat. Financial conditions have been accommodative.

On the price front, the year-on-year rate of increase in the consumer price index (CPI, all items

less fresh food) is slower than a while ago, mainly due to the effects of pushing down energy

prices from the government's economic measures, but it has been at around 3 percent recently

owing to the effects of a pass-through to consumer prices of cost increases led by the past rise

in import prices. Inflation expectations have risen moderately.

3. Japan's economy is likely to continue recovering moderately for the time being, supported by

factors such as the materialization of pent-up demand, although it is expected to be under

downward pressure stemming from a slowdown in the pace of recovery in overseas economies.

Thereafter, as a virtuous cycle from income to spending gradually intensifies, Japan's economy

is projected to continue growing at a pace above its potential growth rate. The year-on-year

rate of increase in the CPI (all items less fresh food) is likely to be above 2 percent through

fiscal 2024, due to factors such as the remaining effects of the pass-through to consumer prices

of cost increases led by the past rise in import prices. Thereafter, the rate of increase is projected

to decelerate owing to dissipation of these factors. Meanwhile, underlying CPI inflation is

likely to increase gradually toward achieving the price stability target, as the output gap turns

positive and as medium- to long-term inflation expectations and wage growth rise.

25


-----

4. Concerning risks to the outlook, there are extremely high uncertainties surrounding Japan's

economic activity and prices, including developments in overseas economic activity and prices,

developments in commodity prices, and domestic firms' wage- and price-setting behavior.

Under these circumstances, it is necessary to pay due attention to developments in financial

and foreign exchange markets and their impact on Japan's economic activity and prices.

5. With extremely high uncertainties surrounding economies and financial markets at home and

abroad, the Bank will patiently continue with monetary easing while nimbly responding to

developments in economic activity and prices as well as financial conditions. By doing so, it

will aim to achieve the price stability target of 2 percent in a sustainable and stable manner,

accompanied by wage increases.

The Bank will continue with Quantitative and Qualitative Monetary Easing (QQE) with Yield

Curve Control, aiming to achieve the price stability target, as long as it is necessary for

maintaining that target in a stable manner. It will continue expanding the monetary base until

the year-on-year rate of increase in the observed CPI (all items less fresh food) exceeds 2

percent and stays above the target in a stable manner. The Bank will continue to maintain the

stability of financing, mainly of firms, and financial markets, and will not hesitate to take

additional easing measures if necessary.

26


-----

