Not to be released until 8:50 a.m.
Japan Standard Time on Monday,
September 12, 2011.

September 12, 2011

Bank of Japan

# Minutes of the Monetary Policy Meeting
## on August 4, 2011

(English translation prepared by the Bank's staff based on the Japanese original)


-----

Please contact the Bank of Japan at the address below in advance to request permission

when reproducing or copying the content of this document for commercial purposes.

Secretariat of the Policy Board, Bank of Japan

P.O. Box 30, Nihonbashi, Tokyo 103-8660, Japan

Please credit the source when quoting, reproducing, or copying the content of this

document.


-----

A Monetary Policy Meeting of the Bank of Japan Policy Board was held in the

Head Office of the Bank of Japan in Tokyo on Thursday, August 4, 2011, from 11:15 a.m. to

1:55 p.m.[1]

**Policy Board Members Present**

**Mr. M. Shirakawa, Chairman, Governor of the Bank of Japan**

**Mr. H. Yamaguchi, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Japan**

**Mr. K. G. Nishimura, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Japan**

**Mr. S. Nakamura**

**Mr. H. Kamezaki**

**Mr. R. Miyao**

**Mr. Y. Morimoto**

**Ms. S. Shirai**

**Mr. K. Ishida**

Government Representatives Present

Mr. M. Sakurai, Senior Vice Minister of Finance, Ministry of Finance

Mr. K. Umetani, Director-General, Economic and Fiscal Management, Cabinet Office

Reporting Staff

Mr. K. Yamamoto, Executive Director

Mr. H. Nakaso, Executive Director (Assistant Governor)

Mr. M. Amamiya, Executive Director

Mr. N. Kinoshita, Executive Director

Mr. K. Momma, Director-General, Monetary Affairs Department

Mr. T. Umemori, Deputy Director-General, Monetary Affairs Department

Mr. K. Kamiyama, Head of Policy Planning Division, Monetary Affairs Department

Mr. S. Aoki, Director-General, Financial Markets Department

Mr. E. Maeda, Director-General, Research and Statistics Department

1 The minutes of this meeting were approved by the Policy Board at the Monetary Policy Meeting
held on September 6 and 7, 2011 as "a document describing an outline of the discussion at the
meeting" stipulated in Article 20, paragraph 1 of the Bank of Japan Act of 1997. Those present are
referred to by their titles at the time of the meeting.

1


-----

Mr. T. Sekine, Head of Economic Research Division, Research and Statistics Department

Mr. H. Ono, Director-General, International Department

Secretariat of the Monetary Policy Meeting

Mr. Y. Iino, Director-General, Secretariat of the Policy Board

Mr. T. Tachibana, Director, Deputy Head of Planning and Coordination Division,

Secretariat of the Policy Board

Mr. H. Chida, Head of Policy Infrastructure Division, Monetary Affairs Department

Mr. A. Okuno, Senior Economist, Monetary Affairs Department

Mr. M. Kasai, Senior Economist, Monetary Affairs Department

2


-----

**I. Approval of the Change in Date for the Monetary Policy Meeting**

The chairman began the meeting by stating that, recently, the yen had been

appreciating against the U.S. dollar and stock prices had been volatile, on the back of

considerable uncertainty regarding the outlook for overseas economies, and that on August

4 the Ministry of Finance had been intervening in the foreign exchange market since the

morning, as the one-sided trend of the appreciating yen could exert negative effects on

economic and financial stability. The chairman continued that, given this situation, it was

important for the Bank -- from the standpoint of ensuring stability in the foreign exchange

and financial markets and thereby preventing business sentiment from deteriorating -- to

swiftly decide on a monetary policy stance and make its decision public accordingly after

examining economic and financial developments in Japan. The chairman then proposed

that the meeting, which was originally scheduled to be held over two days, proceed with the

intention of concluding within a day. The proposal was unanimously approved by the

members.

**II. Summary of Staff Reports on Economic and Financial Developments[2]**

**A. Money Market Operations in the Intermeeting Period**

The Bank, in accordance with the guideline decided at the previous meeting on

July 11 and 12, 2011, had been providing ample funds sufficient to meet demand in

financial markets and was doing its utmost to ensure stability in the markets.[3] In this

situation, the uncollateralized overnight call rate had generally been in the range of

0.07-0.08 percent.

**B. Recent Developments in Financial Markets**

Money market rates had been stable amid the Bank's provision of ample funds.

General collateral (GC) repo rates had been at around 0.1 percent. As for interest rates on

term instruments, yields on treasury discount bills (T-Bills), including those with a one-year

maturity, had been at around 0.1 percent on the whole. Rates on longer-term interbank

instruments had been more or less unchanged.

2 Reports were made based on information available at the time of the meeting.
3 The guideline was as follows:
The Bank of Japan will encourage the uncollateralized overnight call rate to remain at
around 0 to 0.1 percent.

3


-----

The benchmark long-term interest rate had declined as the yield curve was

flattening on the whole, and was recently at around 1.0 percent. Japanese stock prices had

recently been somewhat weak against the background of declining U.S. stock prices and the

appreciation of the yen, and the Nikkei 225 Stock Average had been in the range of

9,500-10,000 yen. In the foreign exchange market, the yen appreciated against the U.S.

dollar, reaching the range of 76.0-76.5 yen to the dollar in early August -- the highest level

since March 2011 -- as U.S. interest rates declined against the background of rising concern

over a slowdown in the U.S. economy. However, the yen depreciated following the

intervention in the foreign exchange market on August 4 and most recently was being

traded in the range of 79-80 yen to the dollar.

**C. Overseas Economic and Financial Developments**

The world economy continued to recover, but the pace of recovery was slowing.

The U.S. economy continued to recover, but the pace of recovery was slowing.

Exports continued to increase, and business fixed investment rose moderately. In this

situation, production remained on an increasing trend, although the pace of increase was

slowing. On the other hand, in a situation where balance-sheet adjustments continued to

weigh on the economy, the pace of increase in private consumption slowed to the extent that

it had become more or less flat due to a decline in real purchasing power brought about by

the earlier rise in crude oil prices. Housing investment remained at a depressed level,

while housing prices were weak. As suggested by these developments, the risk of a

prolonged economic slowdown seemed to have heightened in the face of continuing

balance-sheet adjustments in the household sector. As for prices, the rate of increase in the

consumer price index (CPI) for all items less energy and food, or the core CPI, remained

only moderate due to slack in supply and demand conditions in the goods and labor markets.

The year-on-year rate of increase in the CPI for all items moved up as a result of the earlier

rise in international commodity prices.

Economic activity in the euro area as a whole continued to recover moderately,

with some differences in pace by country. Although the rate of increase in exports slowed

due to the deceleration in the pace of recovery of the world economy, private consumption

and business fixed investment continued to increase moderately. As for prices, the

year-on-year rate of increase in the Harmonized Index of Consumer Prices (HICP) for all

4


-----

items slowed somewhat in a situation where slack in supply and demand conditions, as well

as the relatively slow growth in wages, continued to exert downward pressure on prices.

Meanwhile, in the United Kingdom, the economy was on a recovery trend but the pace of

recovery was slowing.

The Chinese economy continued to show high growth. Although the pace of

increase in exports seemed to be slowing recently, domestic demand remained firm overall

as fixed asset investment maintained high growth. The Indian economy also continued to

grow at a relatively rapid pace. Economic conditions in the NIEs and the ASEAN

countries continued to be on a recovery trend backed by firm domestic demand, although

production decreased recently partly due to the slower growth in exports. In many of these

Asian economies, inflationary pressure continued to be strong due to the rise in food and

materials prices, reflecting the effects of the hike in international commodity prices, and to

the increase in utilization of production factors such as labor and capital.

As for global financial markets, U.S. and European stock prices fell compared

with the levels at the time of the previous meeting and long-term interest rates declined -
especially in the United States -- mainly due to uncertainties regarding the sovereign debt

problems in some peripheral European countries and the federal debt ceiling problem in the

United States, and to heightening concern about the risk of a prolonged slowdown in the

U.S. economy. After an agreement had been reached regarding measures for providing

further financial support to Greece, yields on government bonds issued by Greece, Ireland,

and Portugal fell while yields on those issued by Italy and Spain continued to rise.

**D. Economic and Financial Developments in Japan**

1. Economic developments

After declining sharply following the earthquake, production and exports

continued to increase with the easing of supply-side constraints. Production was expected

to continue picking up as supply-side constraints eased further. In this situation, exports

were also expected to continue increasing against the background of the improvement in

overseas economic conditions.

Public investment had recently stopped declining, albeit with fluctuations. It was

expected to increase gradually, mainly due to the restoration of damaged social capital.

5


-----

Business fixed investment had been generally picking up, aided partly by the

restoration of disaster-stricken facilities, and was expected to increase.

The employment and income situation continued to be severe, partly due to the

effects of the disaster.

Private consumption began to pick up on the whole, although weakness remained

in evidence with regard to some aspects of consumer behavior, against the background that

production had recovered and household sentiment had improved somewhat. Private

consumption was expected to continue picking up, with a recovery in production and

improvement in household sentiment.

Housing investment, which had been relatively weak due to the disaster, recently

showed signs of picking up. It was expected to increase gradually as supply-side

constraints eased and disaster-stricken homes were rebuilt.

As for prices, international commodity prices were flat at high levels after falling

back slightly. The three-month rate of increase in the domestic corporate goods price

index (CGPI) was slowing as international commodity prices fell back. The CGPI was

expected to be more or less flat for the time being, reflecting the developments in

international commodity prices. The year-on-year rate of change in the CPI (excluding

fresh food) was slightly positive. However, it was likely to be revised downward with the

base-year change scheduled in August 2011, and in the new index was expected to be at

around 0 percent, potentially falling into slightly negative territory, for the time being.

2. Financial environment

Financial conditions generally continued to ease, albeit with weakness observed in

the financial positions of some firms, mainly small ones.

As the overnight call rate remained at an extremely low level, the levels of firms'

funding costs also continued to be low. Stimulative effects from low interest rates were

still partly constrained given current developments in economic activity and prices. With

regard to credit supply, firms continued to see financial institutions' lending attitudes as

being on an improving trend. Issuing conditions for CP continued to be favorable. Those

for corporate bonds were favorable as a whole, leading to an increased variety of corporate

bond issuers. As for credit demand, firms showed signs of increasing their demand for

working capital. Against this backdrop, the year-on-year rate of decline in bank lending

6


-----

was slowing. The amounts outstanding of both corporate bonds and CP exceeded their

previous year's levels. In these circumstances, firms retained their recovered financial

positions on the whole, albeit with weakness observed at some firms, mainly small ones.

Meanwhile, the year-on-year rate of change in the money stock had been at around 3

percent.

**III. Summary of Discussions by the Policy Board on Economic and Financial**

**Developments**

**A. Economic Developments**

Members discussed the economic and financial conditions abroad, and shared the

view that overseas economies were still recovering at a slower but moderate pace, led by

high growth in emerging and commodity-exporting economies, and would continue to

recover. They then agreed on the following points: (1) in the United States, concern over

fiscal consolidation had not dissipated in financial markets even after the settlement of the

federal debt ceiling problem, and worries about economic deceleration had recently been

increasing; (2) in general, global financial markets still faced strain from the sovereign debt

problems in some peripheral European countries; and (3) as for emerging and

commodity-exporting economies, there remained a high degree of uncertainty about

whether price stability and economic growth could be realized at the same time.

Members concurred that the U.S. economy continued to recover but the pace of

recovery slowed recently. Many members expressed the view that signs of a slowdown

were becoming more evident, as many of the economic indicators released recently were

somewhat weak -- for example, the growth rate for real GDP had been revised downward

significantly for the January-March quarter of 2011, to 0.4 percent from 1.9 percent on an

annualized basis, and had increased only 1.3 percent for the April-June quarter. In relation

to the federal debt ceiling problem, some members pointed to the possibility that economic

activity would be dampened due to future reductions in fiscal expenditures.

Members shared the view that economic activity in the euro area as a whole

continued to recover moderately, with some differences in pace by country. One member

expressed the opinion that there seemed to be some signs of an economic slowdown.

Many members said that, even though an agreement had been reached regarding measures

to provide further financial support to Greece, concerns over fiscal conditions had not been

7


-----

dispelled in Greece or in other countries, and the risk remained high that sovereign debt

problems in peripheral countries would spread beyond these countries.

Regarding emerging and commodity-exporting economies, members agreed that

the pace of growth had been decelerating, due to a decline in exports and the effects of

monetary tightening, but as a whole maintained relatively high growth backed by solid

demand. They shared the view that, in many of these economies, inflationary pressure

caused by the increases in international commodity prices and in utilization of production

factors had not been sufficiently contained, and there remained a high degree of uncertainty

about whether price stability and economic growth could be realized at the same time.

Based on the above deliberations on economic and financial conditions abroad,

members discussed the state of Japan's economy. They agreed that economic activity had

been picking up steadily with an easing of the supply-side constraints caused by the disaster.

As for the outlook, they shared the view that the economy was likely to return to a moderate

recovery path with production regaining traction, backed by an increase in exports and a

rise in demand for restoring capital stock.

With regard to risks to the outlook for Japan's economy, members shared the view

that the economic outlook entailed high uncertainty and recent developments called for

closer attention to downside risks. They referred to the fiscal problem and the economic

deceleration in the United States, the sovereign debt problems in Europe, and uncertainty

about whether price stability and economic growth could be realized at the same time in

emerging and commodity-exporting economies, and agreed that there was a possibility that

these overseas economic and fiscal developments, as well as the ensuing fluctuations in the

foreign exchange and financial markets, might have adverse effects on business sentiment,

and consequently on economic activity in Japan. Many members said that the possibility

warranted attention that, in the longer run, uncertainty about electricity supply and further

appreciation of the yen could accelerate the shift of Japanese firms' production sites to

overseas as well as the shift in procurement of materials and parts from Japan to other

countries. A few members said that the ongoing appreciation of the yen, especially at a

time when the economy was overcoming the supply-side constraints caused by the disaster,

could lead to significant deterioration in business sentiment. A different member said that

the appreciation of the yen could lead to a decline in growth expectations for Japan's

economy.

8


-----

Members agreed that the year-on-year rate of change in the CPI (excluding fresh

food) was likely to remain slightly positive as the aggregate supply and demand balance

improved as a trend. They shared the view that the year-on-year rate of change in the CPI

was likely to be revised downward with the base-year change scheduled in August, and that

it would temporarily return to around 0 percent, potentially falling into slightly negative

territory. They also shared the view that, with the new index, given that the year-on-year

rate of change in the CPI was likely to be revised downward, it would still take some time

to reach the stage at which it could be judged that price stability was in sight on the basis of

the "understanding of medium- to long-term price stability." Many members said that a

downward revision in the CPI might affect the public's view on prices. Some members

expressed the opinion that it was necessary to explain carefully that the change in the base

year would not affect the underlying trend of prices, and thus the economy was moving

toward overcoming deflation as the output gap narrowed.

**B. Financial Developments**

Members agreed that financial conditions generally continued to ease, albeit with

weakness observed in the financial positions of some firms, mainly small ones.

Members shared the view that money market rates had been stable amid the Bank's

provision of ample funds. As for corporate financing, they agreed that issuing conditions

for both CP and corporate bonds were favorable as a whole and the year-on-year rate of

decline in bank lending was slowing. They shared the view that firms retained their

recovered financial positions on the whole, albeit with weakness observed at some firms,

mainly small ones.

**IV. Summary of Discussions on Monetary Policy for the Immediate Future**

Regarding the guideline for money market operations for the intermeeting period

ahead, members agreed that it was appropriate to maintain the current guideline that the

Bank would encourage the uncollateralized overnight call rate to remain at around 0 to 0.1

percent.

With regard to the operation of the Asset Purchase Program (hereafter the

Program), members concurred that -- in view of current and future developments in

economic activity and prices -- it was necessary to further enhance monetary easing by

9


-----

increasing the total size of the Program, in order to encourage further declines in

longer-term interest rates and risk premiums with a view to ensuring a successful transition

from the recovery phase following the disaster to a sustainable growth path with price

stability. Regarding the extent to which the Bank should increase the amount of the

Program, members agreed that this should be of enough size to have a notable impact, with

the aim of clearly presenting the Bank's policy stance that it would sufficiently enhance

monetary easing at this point, taking into account various potential risk factors. Many

members expressed the view that it would be appropriate for the increase in the amount of

the Program to surpass the past increase of 5 trillion yen and reach 10 trillion yen.

The chairman requested that the staff explain what specific proposals could be

considered if the Bank were to increase the amount of the Program based on the members'

views.

In response to the chairman's direction, the staff provided the following

explanation.

(1) The staff considered that, if the Bank were to increase the total size of the Program by

about 10 trillion yen, it should boost the amount for the fixed-rate funds-supplying

operation against pooled collateral (hereafter the fixed-rate operation) and asset

purchases by about 5 trillion yen, respectively, from the perspective of encouraging

further declines in longer-term interest rates and risk premiums. With regard to the

fixed-rate operation, the Bank should increase the amount for the six-month term

operation given the demand from eligible counterparties. As for the asset purchases, it

should increase the amount by about 3.5 trillion yen for Japanese government bonds

(JGBs) and T-Bills combined, and about 1.5 trillion yen for risk assets -- equivalent to

the proportion of funds allocated for each asset category at the time the Program was

initially introduced. With regard to the allocation of funds between JGBs and T-Bills,

considering the significant decline in short-term interest rates, the Bank should allocate

slightly more funds to the JGBs, with an increase of about 2 trillion yen for JGBs and

about 1.5 trillion yen for T-Bills. Regarding the amount of increase in the purchases of

risk assets, the amount for CP and corporate bonds combined should be about 1 trillion

yen, as was the case at the time the Program was introduced. However, since there

was only a little room left for additional purchases of CP, the Bank should allocate more

funds to corporate bonds, with an increase of about 0.9 trillion yen, while CP should

10


-----

receive a boost of about 0.1 trillion yen. The Bank should increase the amount for

exchange-traded funds (ETFs) and Japan real estate investment trusts (J-REITs)

combined by about 0.5 trillion yen, equivalent to the amount at the time the Program

was introduced. In this case, however, since there was only a little room left for

additional purchases of J-REITs, the Bank should only increase the amount by about

0.01 trillion yen for J-REITs and add about 0.5 trillion yen for ETFs. Moreover,

increasing the amount of purchases of ETFs and J-REITs was conditional on obtaining

authorization once more for the purchases in accordance with the Bank of Japan Act.

(2) If the Bank were to increase the total size of the Program by about 10 trillion yen, the

term for accumulating the outstanding amount of the Program should be extended by

about six months, such that the total amount would be reached by around the end of

December 2012.

In response to the staff's explanation, many members expressed the view that, with

regard to the allocation of funds for each asset category, it would be appropriate for the

Bank to expand the fixed-rate operation and purchase various assets while taking into

account the market size of financial assets subject to the Program and the Bank's financial

soundness.

As for the future conduct of monetary policy, members shared the view that, in

order for Japan's economy to overcome deflation and return to a sustainable growth path

with price stability, it was necessary that the Bank continue to consistently make

contributions as the central bank through the three-pronged approach of pursuing powerful

monetary easing consisting of comprehensive monetary easing, ensuring financial market

stability, and providing support to strengthen the foundations for economic growth. A few

members said that if the Bank were to further enhance monetary easing at this meeting, they

would like to reconfirm that it would implement measures that were considered sufficient,

taking full account in advance of various potential risk factors, including those regarding

overseas economies.

**V. Remarks by Government Representatives**

The representative from the Ministry of Finance made the following remarks.

(1) The Japanese economy had been exhibiting signs of upward movement recently,

although the situation remained severe. Due attention still needed to be paid to the

11


-----

downside risks to the economy stemming mainly from the effects of electric power

supply constraints, the slowdown in overseas economies, and developments in financial

markets. In particular, the government was greatly concerned that the ongoing

appreciation of the yen might negatively affect corporate profits and business sentiment.

It intervened in the foreign exchange market earlier in the day because the recent

one-sided trend of the appreciating yen could exert negative effects on economic and

financial stability at a time when the Japanese economy was finally heading toward

rebuilding after the disaster.

(2) The second supplementary budget for fiscal 2011 was recently approved by the Diet.

The government would work toward realizing restoration and rebuilding as early as

possible, by steadily implementing the supplementary budget. Moreover, on July 29,

it decided the Basic Guidelines for Reconstruction in response to the Great East Japan

Earthquake (hereafter the Basic Guidelines). The government would promptly

proceed with conducting an examination among relevant ministries and agencies of the

specifics of reconstruction projects based on the Basic Guidelines, and formulate a

full-fledged budget for rebuilding.

(3) The government welcomed the Bank's proposal made at this meeting to increase the

total size of the Asset Purchase Program as an appropriate and prompt response to the

recent changes in the economic and financial situation. The government deemed it

necessary to carefully consider the conduct of future macroeconomic management

given the continued severe conditions in the Japanese economy caused by the effects of

the disaster. The government hoped that the Bank would share its view on the current

severe economic conditions and continue taking decisive monetary policy actions,

considering the developments in domestic and overseas economies as well as in the

financial markets.

The representative from the Cabinet Office made the following remarks.

(1) The Japanese economy had been exhibiting signs of upward movement recently and

was expected to pick up as production recovered. Nevertheless, due attention needed

to be paid to downside risks to the economy such as concerns about deterioration in

overseas economies, the heightening risks in financial developments in the United

States and European countries, and the rapid appreciation of the yen.

12


-----

(2) As for prices, the year-on-year rate of increase in the CPI for all items excluding fresh

food, or the core CPI, had been positive for the past three consecutive months.

However, due attention needed to be paid to the possibility that the rate of change

would be revised downward with the base-year change scheduled in August. The

economy was still in a mild deflationary situation, as evidenced, for example, by the

continued fall in price trends excluding energy prices and other special factors. In this

situation, close attention should continue to be paid to the effects on economic activity

of the upward pressure on costs exerted by supply-side constraints and the sharp rise in

energy prices in particular.

(3) The government would make its utmost efforts to achieve rebuilding based on the Basic

Guidelines for Reconstruction in response to the Great East Japan Earthquake while

swiftly implementing the first and second supplementary budgets for fiscal 2011.

Moreover, it would take all possible measures in response to electric power constraints

from both the demand and supply sides, and work toward restoring the growth potential

of the Japanese economy by strengthening its initiatives to bring about new growth.

Furthermore, the government would steadily carry out the measures laid out in the final

draft of the proposal for the comprehensive reform of social security and taxation

systems in order to secure confidence in public finance.

(4) The government welcomed the Bank's proposal made at this meeting to increase the

total size of the Asset Purchase Program as a timely and appropriate action, taking into

account the current downside risks to the economy. It expected the Bank to continue

to steadily carry out the funds-supplying operation to support financial institutions in

disaster areas, and to underpin the economy through appropriate and flexible conduct of

monetary policy while continuing to sufficiently exchange views and keep close contact

with the government in order to overcome deflation.

**VI. Votes**

**A. Vote on the Guideline for Money Market Operations**

Based on the above discussions, members shared the view that it was appropriate

to maintain the current guideline for money market operations, which encouraged the

uncollateralized overnight call rate to remain at around 0 to 0.1 percent.

13


-----

To reflect this view, the chairman formulated the following proposal and put it to a

vote.

**The Chairman's Policy Proposal on the Guideline for Money Market Operations:**

1. The guideline for money market operations for the intermeeting period ahead will be as

follows.

The Bank of Japan will encourage the uncollateralized overnight call rate

to remain at around 0 to 0.1 percent.

2. A public statement will be decided separately.

Votes for the proposal: Mr. M. Shirakawa, Mr. H. Yamaguchi, Mr. K. G. Nishimura,

Mr. S. Nakamura, Mr. H. Kamezaki, Mr. R. Miyao, Mr. Y. Morimoto, Ms. S.

Shirai, and Mr. K. Ishida.

Votes against the proposal: None.

**B. Vote on "Amendment to 'Principal Terms and Conditions for the Asset Purchase**

**Program'"**

Members shared the view that, as explained by the staff, it was appropriate to

increase the outstanding amount for each financial asset to be purchased through the

Program by the following amounts: about 2.0 trillion yen for JGBs; about 1.5 trillion yen

for T-Bills; about 0.1 trillion yen for CP; about 0.9 trillion yen for corporate bonds; about

0.5 trillion yen for ETFs; about 0.01 trillion yen for J-REITs; and about 5.0 trillion yen for

the six-month term fixed-rate operation. "Amendment to 'Principal Terms and Conditions

for the Asset Purchase Program'" was then put to a vote. The Policy Board approved the

amendment by a unanimous vote. It was confirmed that the amendment should be made

public after the meeting.

**VII. Discussion on the Public Statement Entitled Enhancement of Monetary Easing**

On the basis of the above discussions, members discussed the statement

Enhancement of Monetary Easing, which included the Bank's monetary policy stance that it

14


-----

would enhance monetary easing by increasing the total size of the Program by about 10

trillion yen, from about 40 trillion yen to about 50 trillion yen, based on the recognition that

the economic outlook entailed high uncertainty and recent developments called for closer

attention to downside risks. The statement was then put to a vote. The Policy Board

decided the text by a unanimous vote. It was confirmed that the statement would be

released immediately after the meeting (see Attachment 1).

**VIII. Approval of the Minutes of the Monetary Policy Meeting**

The Policy Board approved unanimously the minutes of the Monetary Policy

Meeting of July 11 and 12, 2011 for release on August 9, 2011.

15


-----

Attachment 1

August 4, 2011

Bank of Japan

**Enhancement of Monetary Easing**

1. At the Monetary Policy Meeting held today, the Policy Board of the Bank of Japan

decided, by a unanimous vote,[4] to enhance monetary easing by increasing the total size

of the Asset Purchase Program by about 10 trillion yen[5] from about 40 trillion yen to

about 50 trillion yen.

2. The Policy Board also decided, by a unanimous vote,[6] to set the following guideline

for money market operations for the intermeeting period:

The Bank of Japan will encourage the uncollateralized overnight call rate

to remain at around 0 to 0.1 percent.

3. Japan's economic activity has been picking up steadily with an easing of the

supply-side constraints caused by the Great East Japan Earthquake. As for the

outlook, Japan's economy is expected to return to a moderate recovery path with

production regaining traction, backed by an increase in exports and a rise in demand

for restoring capital stock.

4 Voting for the action: Mr. M. Shirakawa, Mr. H. Yamaguchi, Mr. K. G. Nishimura, Mr. S.
Nakamura, Mr. H. Kamezaki, Mr. R. Miyao, Mr. Y. Morimoto, Ms. S. Shirai, and Mr. K. Ishida.
Voting against the action: None.
5 See Attachment 2 for the allocation of the increase in the Program.
6 Voting for the action: Mr. M. Shirakawa, Mr. H. Yamaguchi, Mr. K. G. Nishimura, Mr. S.
Nakamura, Mr. H. Kamezaki, Mr. R. Miyao, Mr. Y. Morimoto, Ms. S. Shirai, and Mr. K. Ishida.
Voting against the action: None.

16


-----

4. However, the above economic outlook entails high uncertainty and recent

developments call for closer attention to downside risks. With regard to overseas

economies, in the United States, concern over fiscal consolidation has not dissipated

in financial markets even after the settlement of the debt ceiling problem and views

on the economic outlook have recently become more cautious. In general, global

financial markets still face strain from the sovereign debt problem in peripheral

European countries. As for emerging and commodity-exporting economies, there

remains a high degree of uncertainty about whether price stability and economic

growth can be realized at the same time. There is a possibility that these

developments in overseas economies and the ensuing fluctuations in the foreign

exchange and financial markets may have adverse effects on business sentiment, and

consequently on economic activity in Japan. Meanwhile, regarding the outlook for

prices, the year-on-year rate of change in the CPI is likely to be revised downward

with the base-year change scheduled this month. Apparently it will still take some

time to achieve price stability.

5. After considering the recent developments in economic activity and prices as described

above, the Bank deemed it necessary to further enhance monetary easing, thereby

ensuring a successful transition from the recovery phase following the earthquake

disaster to a sustainable growth path with price stability.

6. Japan's economy, which has confronted the longstanding challenge of raising its growth

potential amid a rapidly aging population, now faces the additional new challenge of

restoration and rebuilding in the wake of the earthquake disaster. To establish a new

foundation of economic development, various concerned parties both in the private and

government sectors must make vigorous efforts. The Bank will continue to

consistently make contributions as the central bank through the three-pronged approach

of pursuing powerful monetary easing consisting of comprehensive monetary easing,

ensuring financial market stability, and providing support to strengthen the foundations

for economic growth.

17


-----

**Increase in the Asset Purchase Program**

1. Allocation of the Increase


Attachment 2

(trillion yen)

|Col1|Col2|Col3|Col4|(trillion yen)|
|---|---|---|---|---|
|||Program size before the increase|Amount of increase|Program size after the increase|
|Total size||About 40|About +10|About 50|
|Asset Purchases Japanese government bonds[Note 1] Treasury discount bills CP Corporate bonds Exchange traded funds (ETFs)[Note 2] Japan real estate investment trusts (J-REITs)[Note 2]||10.0|+5.0|15.0|
||Japanese government bonds[Note 1]|2.0|+2.0|4.0|
||Treasury discount bills|3.0|+1.5|4.5|
||CP|2.0|+0.1|2.1|
||Corporate bonds|2.0|+0.9|2.9|
||Exchange traded funds (ETFs)[Note 2]|0.9|+0.5|1.4|
||Japan real estate investment trusts (J-REITs)[Note 2]|0.1|+0.01|0.11|
|Fixed-rate funds-supplying operation against pooled collateral Three-month term Six-month term||30.0|+5.0|35.0|
||Three-month term|20.0|―|20.0|
||Six-month term|10.0|+5.0|15.0|


Notes: 1. In addition to the purchase under the Asset Purchase Program, the Bank regularly purchases

Japanese government bonds at the pace of 21.6 trillion yen per year.

2. The increase in the purchases of ETFs and J-REITs are conditional on obtaining authorization

in accordance with the Bank of Japan Act.

2. The Bank intends to complete the increased purchases by around the end of 2012.

18


-----

