Not to be released until 8:50 a.m.
Japan Standard Time on Tuesday,
April 12, 2011.

April 12, 2011

Bank of Japan

# Minutes of the Monetary Policy Meeting
## on March 14, 2011

(English translation prepared by the Bank's staff based on the Japanese original)


-----

Please contact the Bank of Japan at the address below in advance to request permission

when reproducing or copying the content of this document for commercial purposes.

Secretariat of the Policy Board, Bank of Japan

P.O. Box 30, Nihonbashi, Tokyo 103-8660, Japan

Please credit the source when quoting, reproducing, or copying the content of this

document.


-----

A Monetary Policy Meeting of the Bank of Japan Policy Board was held in the

Head Office of the Bank of Japan in Tokyo on Monday, March 14, 2011, from 12:01 p.m. to

2:45 p.m.[1]

**Policy Board Members Present**

**Mr. M. Shirakawa, Chairman, Governor of the Bank of Japan**

**Mr. H. Yamaguchi, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Japan**

**Mr. K. G. Nishimura, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Japan**

**Ms. M. Suda**

**Mr. T. Noda**

**Mr. S. Nakamura**

**Mr. H. Kamezaki**

**Mr. R. Miyao**

**Mr. Y. Morimoto**

Government Representatives Present

Mr. M. Sakurai, Senior Vice Minister of Finance, Ministry of Finance

Mr. Y. Suematsu, Senior Vice Minister for Economic and Fiscal Policy, Cabinet Office

Reporting Staff

Mr. H. Nakaso, Executive Director (Assistant Governor)

Mr. M. Amamiya, Executive Director

Mr. N. Kinoshita, Executive Director

Mr. S. Kushida, Director-General, Monetary Affairs Department

Mr. T. Umemori, Deputy Director-General, Monetary Affairs Department

Mr. T. Kato, Head of Policy Planning Division, Monetary Affairs Department

Mr. H. Toyama, Director-General, Financial Markets Department

Mr. K. Momma, Director-General, Research and Statistics Department

Mr. T. Sekine, Head of Economic Research Division, Research and Statistics Department

1 The minutes of this meeting were approved by the Policy Board at the Monetary Policy Meeting
held on April 6 and 7, 2011 as "a document describing an outline of the discussion at the meeting"
stipulated in Article 20, paragraph 1 of the Bank of Japan Act of 1997. Those present are referred
to by their titles at the time of the meeting.

1


-----

Mr. H. Ono, Director-General, International Department

Secretariat of the Monetary Policy Meeting

Mr. Y. Iino, Director-General, Secretariat of the Policy Board

Mr. T. Tachibana, Director, Deputy Head of Planning and Coordination Division,

Secretariat of the Policy Board

Mr. T. Miyazaki, Secretariat of the Policy Board

Mr. H. Chida, Head of Policy Infrastructure Division, Monetary Affairs Department

Mr. A. Okuno, Senior Economist, Monetary Affairs Department

Mr. M. Nakashima, Senior Economist, Monetary Affairs Department

2


-----

**I. Approval of the Change in Date for the Monetary Policy Meeting**

The chairman began the meeting by expressing the view that, given the

considerable damage from the Tohoku-Pacific Ocean Earthquake on March 11, in order to

ensure stability in public sentiment and financial markets, it was important for the Bank to

examine the effects of the earthquake on Japan's economic and financial developments, as

well as swiftly decide on a monetary policy stance and accordingly make its decision public.

The chairman then proposed that the meeting, which was originally scheduled to be held

over two days, proceed with the intention of concluding within a day. The proposal was

unanimously approved by the members.

**II. Summary of Staff Reports on Economic and Financial Developments[2]**

**A. The Effects of the Tohoku-Pacific Ocean Earthquake on Payment and Settlement**

**Systems and the Financial System**

Following the earthquake, some financial institutions' business premises had been

damaged and some automated teller machines (ATMs) had stopped operating, mainly on the

Pacific coast of the Tohoku region. However, an increasing number of financial

institutions conducted business operations during the weekend as part of their efforts to

maintain financial services, such as repayment of deposits, that served as a lifeline for the

public. In order to support these efforts, the Bank provided cash to the financial

institutions at its Head Office and some of its branches over the weekend. Meanwhile, the

Bank of Japan Financial Network System (BOJ-NET) and the funds settlement system for

major financial institutions had been operating properly, and there had not been any

significant disruptions in the settlement of funds and securities. Immediate challenges for

the Bank included (1) ensuring business continuity arrangements at the Bank's branches

located in the disaster-stricken areas and making preparations for the exchange of damaged

banknotes, and (2) responding to planned blackouts resulting from damage caused to an

electric power company's facilities.

**B. Money Market Operations in the Intermeeting Period**

The Bank, in accordance with the guideline decided at the previous meeting on

February 14 and 15, 2011 and in consideration of the recent formation of market rates,

2 Reports were made based on information available at the time of the meeting.

3


-----

conducted money market operations in a flexible manner.[3] In the Bank's funds-supplying

operations, undersubscription had continued to occur, in that bids fell short of the Bank's

offers. Meanwhile, the uncollateralized overnight call rate had been slightly below the 0.1

percent level.

On March 14, Japanese financial markets opened for the first time since the

earthquake. Given that market participants' precautionary demand for funds had surged,

the Bank, with a view to ensuring financial market stability, decided to conduct

funds-supplying operations totaling 21.8 trillion yen, including same-day funds-supplying

operations totaling 15 trillion yen, from the morning through the afternoon of March 14.

The money market had been regaining stability due in part to the Bank's provision of a large

amount of funds.

**C. Recent Developments in Financial Markets**

With regard to financial market developments prior to the earthquake, the money

market had been stable as a whole. Japanese stock prices fell slightly with some

fluctuations, mainly against the backdrop of heightened uncertainties regarding the situation

in North Africa and the Middle East. Long-term interest rates declined somewhat

reflecting such developments in stock prices.

Turning to financial market developments since the earthquake, stock prices had

declined considerably, and the Nikkei 225 Stock Average had been in the range of

9,500-10,000 yen. The Tokyo Stock Exchange REIT Index had also declined substantially.

While there were few transactions in the secondary market for corporate bonds, selling

pressure looked likely to be high. Japan's sovereign credit default swap (CDS) premiums

and CDS premiums for private firms rose significantly. These developments reflected

investors' heightened risk aversion with respect to financial markets. In the foreign

exchange market, the yen had been volatile against the U.S. dollar, and, after temporarily

appreciating to around the middle of the 80-81 yen range, had moved into the range of

82-83 yen.

3 The guideline was as follows:
The Bank of Japan will encourage the uncollateralized overnight call rate to remain at
around 0 to 0.1 percent.

4


-----

**D. Overseas Economic and Financial Developments**

Regarding global financial markets, flow of capital into emerging economies had

been decelerating recently, reflecting vigilance concerning increased inflationary pressure in

emerging economies and heightened uncertainties regarding the situation in North Africa

and the Middle East. On the other hand, capital had continued to flow into international

commodity markets, and this, as well as concerns about geopolitical risks, had caused crude

oil prices to climb significantly. The rise in international commodity prices had pushed up

inflation rates both in advanced and emerging economies, and had caused income transfers

from resource-consuming countries to resource-producing countries.

In the aftermath of the earthquake in Japan, prices of commodities such as crude

oil and grain had declined somewhat against the backdrop of heightened risk aversion

among investors. In the stock and bond markets as a whole, a wait-and-see stance was

prevailing. Meanwhile, the stock prices of Asian emerging economies that had close

economic ties with Japan had generally been declining.

Many of the economic indicators released in the intermeeting period were

favorable as a whole, suggesting that the world economy had continued to recover.

**E. Economic and Financial Developments in Japan**

1. Economic developments

Regarding recent economic developments, data prior to the earthquake indicated

that exports and production were showing signs of resuming their uptrend and business

fixed investment was picking up. The employment and income situation had remained

severe, but the degree of severity had eased somewhat. Private consumption was showing

signs of picking up. Housing investment had started to pick up. Meanwhile, public

investment was declining.

However, the damage from the earthquake had been widespread, and although it

was difficult to quantitatively assess its effects at this point, Japan's economy was likely to

come under downward pressure, at least in the short term. The Tohoku region had

accounted for a large share of Japan's total production value for information and

communications equipment as well as electronic parts and devices. Production was

expected to be negatively impacted for the time being as many factories -- located both in

and beyond the Tohoku region -- had shut down, partly due to problems caused by

5


-----

supply-chain disruptions, and as the supply of electricity had been constrained. With

regard to private demand, while demand for facility reconstruction and daily necessities

such as food products was likely to increase, there was concern that business sentiment

might deteriorate and household spending might become restrained. As for the outlook,

demand for reconstruction by the public sector was expected, but the scale was highly

uncertain.

As for prices, the three-month rate of change in the domestic corporate goods price

index (CGPI) was rising, mainly due to the increase in international commodity prices.

The year-on-year rate of decline in the consumer price index (CPI) for all items excluding

fresh food had continued to slow, while substantial slack remained in the economy as a

whole.

2. Financial environment

Although financial conditions had continued to ease further, the earthquake could

exert a certain influence over them. Attention should be paid to the following points:

whether financial institutions would tighten lending standards and firms' financial positions

would deteriorate, reflecting a decline in firms' creditworthiness; whether the declining

trend in firms' funding costs would continue; and whether issuing conditions for CP and

corporate bonds would change due to heightened risk aversion among investors.

**III. Summary of Discussions by the Policy Board on Economic and Financial**

**Developments**

Regarding the state of Japan's economy, members agreed that, since there was

insufficient information to quantitatively assess the effects of the Tohoku-Pacific Ocean

Earthquake at this point, it was appropriate to judge that, while maintaining the assessment

that Japan's economy was emerging from the current deceleration phase, uncertainty

regarding the outlook for economic activity and prices was heightening significantly.

Regarding the effects of the earthquake, some members said that considerable

damage had been caused, especially in the Tohoku region, to production and distribution

facilities as well as the social infrastructure. Many members commented that, in addition

to direct damage from the earthquake, constraints on the supply of electricity caused by

damage to power plants were also highly likely to affect economic activity. Some

6


-----

members -- pointing to the fact that many factories producing materials and parts were

located in the disaster-stricken areas -- noted that the effects of sluggish production in these

areas might spread to domestic and overseas economies through the supply chain. On the

other hand, one member said that, considering the present low level of capacity utilization

in Japan, there was a possibility that the extent of decline in production in the economy as a

whole would be relatively small because of a shift of production to other locations and

manufacturers. A different member noted that consumer demand for daily necessities

would likely increase due to, for example, hoarding of goods.

Many members were of the opinion that attention should be paid to the possibility

of deterioration in the sentiment of firms and households due to such factors as the present

grave situation and growing concern over a stable supply of electricity. A few members

commented that downside risks to the economy associated with a possible worsening in the

sentiment of firms and households had increased further given that the earthquake had

occurred amid concerns about deterioration in the terms of trade resulting from a further

rise in international commodity prices. Some members said that, while the money market

had remained stable, stock prices and long-term interest rates had declined reflecting

increased uncertainties regarding the outlook, and risk aversion in financial markets could

heighten further.

With regard to the effects of the earthquake in the medium term, some members

expressed the view that, although public- and private-sector activities aimed at

reconstruction could boost the economy, the scale and timing were highly uncertain.

Based on the above discussion, members concurred that the effects of the

earthquake on Japan's economic activity, particularly production, would be significant, and

that Japan's economic activity could be adversely affected through possible deterioration in

the sentiment of firms and households. Some members added that, although it would take

time, Japan's economy would be able to overcome the adverse effects of the earthquake.

With regard to prices, members were of the view that the year-on-year rate of

decline in the CPI (excluding fresh food) had continued to slow. They concurred that the

year-on-year rate of change was likely to become slightly positive in the near future

considering the fact that, excluding the effects of subsidies for high school tuition, which

started in April 2010, the CPI had already become slightly positive. However, members

shared the view that, with the revision of the base year for the CPI to 2010, which was

7


-----

scheduled to take place in August 2011, it was likely that the year-on-year rate of change in

the CPI would be revised downward. One member pointed out that close attention should

be paid to the risk that the public's medium- to long-term inflation expectations would

decline as a result of the revision. A few members commented that it was important for

the Bank to bear in mind the effects of the revision of the base year on the inflation rate

when communicating with the public.

**IV. Summary of Discussions on Monetary Policy for the Immediate Future**

In recognition of the above economic and financial developments, the chairman

considered it appropriate for the Bank to make monetary policy responses. The chairman

expressed the view that, given the increase in the public's anxiety, deterioration in business

sentiment, and heightening of risk aversion in financial markets observed since the

earthquake, the Bank could increase the amount of the Asset Purchase Program (hereafter

the Program), mainly of the purchases of risk assets. With regard to the increase in the

amount of the Program, the chairman requested that the staff explain which specific

responses could be considered, taking into account such related factors as the market size of

financial assets subject to the Bank's purchases through the Program as well as market

developments, and the Bank's financial soundness.

In response to the chairman's direction, the staff provided the following

explanation.

(1) Taking account of the market size of financial assets subject to purchases through the

Program and the effects of the Bank's purchases on its financial soundness, the staff

considered that if the Bank were to increase the amount of the Program, mainly of the

purchases of risk assets, by about 5 trillion yen -- equivalent to the amount of the

Program previously decided -- it should reverse the respective amounts previously

purchased for each asset category, specifically, about 3.5 trillion yen for Japanese

government bonds (JGBs) and treasury discount bills (T-Bills) combined, and about 1.5

trillion yen for risk assets. In such a case, the Bank should increase the amount for

each asset category as follows: about 0.5 trillion yen for JGBs; about 1.0 trillion yen for

T-Bills; about 1.5 trillion yen for CP and corporate bonds, respectively; about 0.45

trillion yen for exchange-traded funds (ETFs); and about 0.05 trillion yen for Japan real

estate investment trusts (J-REITs). Moreover, increasing the amount of purchases of

8


-----

ETFs and J-REITs was conditional on obtaining authorization once more for the

purchases in accordance with the Bank of Japan Act.

(2) If the Bank increased the amount of the Program by about 5 trillion yen and proceeded

with its purchases, it was likely to take about a year to carry them out, as was the case

with the existing Program, under which purchases had amounted to 5 trillion yen.

Many members shared the view that it would be appropriate to increase the

amount of the Program, mainly of the purchases of risk assets, and further enhance

monetary easing, with a view to preventing any deterioration in the sentiment of firms and

households and heightening of risk aversion in financial markets from adversely affecting

economic activity. One member commented that such action would be consistent with the

Bank's communication to date that an increase in the amount of the Program was one option,

if deemed necessary in light of developments in economic activity and prices. A different

member expressed the opinion that an increase in the purchases of risk assets might have

some negative effects, in that it might impair market functioning and would weigh on the

Bank's financial soundness, but that recent economic developments meant its positive

effects would more than offset the negative effects.

Regarding the extent to which the Bank should increase the amount of the

Program, one member commented that a considerable amount would be necessary to fully

reassure market participants with regard to stability. A few members expressed the

opinion that the Bank should thoroughly communicate its intention, so that its

implementation of such an extraordinary measure would not increase the public's anxiety

about the state of Japan's economy.

Meanwhile, one member expressed the view that the increase in purchases should

be made in risk assets only, given the possibility that if the Bank increased the purchases of

Japanese government securities (JGSs) through the Program when longer-term interest rates

were on a declining trend, this might create suspicion that such an increase was

monetization.

Regarding the guideline for money market operations for the intermeeting period

ahead, members agreed that it was appropriate to maintain the current guideline that the

Bank would encourage the uncollateralized overnight call rate to remain at around 0 to 0.1

percent. Some members said that it was important to reassure market participants about

their funding by providing ample funds flexibly based on this guideline in response to the

9


-----

market situation, in order to ensure market stability.

As for the future conduct of monetary policy, members concurred that, in order for

Japan's economy to overcome deflation and return to a sustainable growth path with price

stability, it was necessary that the Bank continue to consistently make contributions as the

central bank through the three-pronged approach of pursuing powerful monetary easing

consisting of comprehensive monetary easing, ensuring financial market stability, and

providing support to strengthen the foundations for economic growth. They also agreed

that the Bank would continue to carefully examine the outlook for economic activity and

prices, and, if judged necessary, take policy actions in an appropriate manner.

**V. Remarks by Government Representatives**

The representative from the Ministry of Finance made the following remarks.

(1) The Tohoku-Pacific Ocean Earthquake had resulted in extensive damage, centered on

the Tohoku region. The government was exerting every possible effort to provide

emergency disaster responses, including the rescue of disaster victims, and was doing

its utmost to achieve an early recovery in the normal routines of people's lives and of

economic activity. In terms of countermeasures, it was first necessary for the related

ministries and agencies to promptly assess the current situation. As necessary

measures became clear, the government would do its utmost to implement them by

releasing contingency funds and formulating a supplementary budget. The

government, taking into account detailed information about the extent of the damage

and the decisions made by its Headquarters for Emergency Disaster Response, would

continue to promptly take the necessary steps.

(2) The government acknowledged that the Bank would do its utmost to ensure stability in

the financial markets and secure smooth settlement of funds, including the provision of

liquidity. The government regarded the Bank's provision of a large amount of funds,

conducted on March 14, as an appropriate means of responding to the current

conditions in financial markets. Moreover, the government would like to express its

appreciation for the Bank's proposal to further enhance monetary easing by increasing

the amount of purchases of risk assets.

(3) The government would do its utmost to achieve an early recovery in the normal routines

of people's lives and of economic activity, and to provide countermeasures for the

10


-----

disaster. The government expected the Bank to take decisive action without delay in

order to respond to any changes that might occur in economic and financial conditions,

while keeping close contact with the government.

The representative from the Cabinet Office made the following remarks.

(1) The Tohoku-Pacific Ocean Earthquake had resulted in extensive damage to the

disaster-stricken areas. The government would exert every possible effort to provide

emergency disaster responses, including rescuing and providing relief to disaster

victims, and do its utmost to achieve an early recovery in the normal routines of

people's lives and of economic activity.

(2) The government expressed its appreciation for the fact that the Bank had already been

taking swift responses. The government hoped that the Bank would continue to take

all possible measures to support living in the disaster-stricken areas, as well as the

economic activity of small and medium enterprises, and to ensure stability in financial

markets and the financial system while continuing to keep close contact with the

government.

**VI. Votes**

**A. Vote on the Guideline for Money Market Operations**

Based on the above discussions, members shared the view that it was appropriate

to maintain the current guideline for money market operations, which encouraged the

uncollateralized overnight call rate to remain at around 0 to 0.1 percent.

To reflect this view, the chairman formulated the following proposal and put it to a

vote.

**The Chairman's Policy Proposal on the Guideline for Money Market Operations:**

1. The guideline for money market operations for the intermeeting period ahead will be as

follows.

The Bank of Japan will encourage the uncollateralized overnight call rate

to remain at around 0 to 0.1 percent.

11


-----

2. A public statement will be decided separately.

Votes for the proposal: Mr. M. Shirakawa, Mr. H. Yamaguchi, Mr. K. G. Nishimura,

Ms. M. Suda, Mr. T. Noda, Mr. S. Nakamura, Mr. H. Kamezaki, Mr. R. Miyao, and

Mr. Y. Morimoto.

Votes against the proposal: None.

**B. Amendment to "Principal Terms and Conditions for the Asset Purchase**

**Program"**

Many members shared the view that, in line with the staff's explanation provided

above, it was appropriate to increase the maximum outstanding amount for each financial

asset to be purchased through the Program as follows: about 0.5 trillion yen for JGBs; about

1.0 trillion yen for T-Bills; about 1.5 trillion yen for CP and corporate bonds, respectively;

about 0.45 trillion yen for ETFs; and about 0.05 trillion yen for J-REITs. One member,

however, proposed that the increase in purchases be made in risk assets only. As a result,

the following two policy proposals were submitted.

Ms. M. Suda formulated a proposal to increase the maximum outstanding amount

for financial assets to be purchased through the Program by about 5 trillion yen, and to

make such an increase only in purchases of risk assets such as CP, corporate bonds, ETFs,

and J-REITs. The proposal was then put to a vote.

The proposal was defeated by a majority vote.

Votes for the proposal: Ms. M. Suda.

Votes against the proposal: Mr. M. Shirakawa, Mr. H. Yamaguchi, Mr. K. G.

Nishimura, Mr. T. Noda, Mr. S. Nakamura, Mr. H. Kamezaki, Mr. R. Miyao, and

Mr. Y. Morimoto.

To reflect the majority view, the chairman formulated a proposal based on the

staff's explanation, and put it to a vote.

The proposal was decided by a majority vote.

12


-----

Votes for the proposal: Mr. M. Shirakawa, Mr. H. Yamaguchi, Mr. K. G. Nishimura,

Mr. T. Noda, Mr. S. Nakamura, Mr. H. Kamezaki, Mr. R. Miyao, and Mr. Y.

Morimoto.

Votes against the proposal: Ms. M. Suda.

Ms. M. Suda dissented from the chairman's proposal on the following grounds: (1)

in a situation where market participants were becoming more cautious about taking risks, an

increase in the amount of purchases should be made only in risk assets and not in JGSs, for

which interest rates were recently declining; and (2) purchases of JGSs as a response to the

emergency conditions did not fit the purpose of the Program.

**VII. Discussion on the Public Statement Entitled Enhancement of Monetary Easing**

On the basis of the above discussions, members discussed the statement

Enhancement of Monetary Easing, which included the following: (1) the monetary policy

stance that, under the current guideline for money market operations, the Bank would

provide ample funds sufficient to meet demand in financial markets and would do its utmost

to ensure financial market stability, and with a view to preventing any deterioration in

business sentiment and heightening of risk aversion in financial markets from adversely

affecting economic activity, the Bank would increase the amount of the Program, mainly of

the purchases of risk assets, by about 5 trillion yen to about 40 trillion yen in total; and (2)

Ms. M. Suda's dissent regarding asset categories for which an increase in purchases should

be made. The statement was then put to a vote. The Policy Board decided the text by a

unanimous vote. It was confirmed that the statement would be released immediately after

the meeting (see Attachment).

**VIII. Approval of the Minutes of the Monetary Policy Meeting**

The Policy Board approved unanimously the minutes of the Monetary Policy

Meeting of February 14 and 15, 2011 for release on March 17, 2011, one day ahead of

schedule, in accordance with the change in date of this meeting.

13


-----

Attachment

March 14, 2011

Bank of Japan

**Enhancement of Monetary Easing**

1. Since the Tohoku Pacific Earthquake occurred, the Bank of Japan has been trying to

gauge its effects on financial markets and financial institutions' business operations, as

well as taking all possible measures in order to maintain financial intermediation

function and secure smooth fund settlements. In addition, the Bank has been

providing funds flexibly through appropriate money market operations.

2. Japan's economy is emerging from the current deceleration phase. The year-on-year

rate of decline in the CPI (excluding fresh food) has continued to slow. The Bank has

maintained its baseline scenario that Japan's economy is expected to return to a

moderate recovery path. The year-on-year rate of change in the CPI is expected to

become slightly positive in the near future.[4] However, the damage of the earthquake

has been geographically widespread, and thus, for the time being, production is likely

to decline and there is also concern that the sentiment of firms and households might

deteriorate.

3. In recognition of the current situation, at the Monetary Policy Meeting held today, the

Policy Board of the Bank of Japan decided to take the following measures to further

enhance monetary easing.

(1) The Guideline for Money Market Operations for the Intermeeting Period

The Policy Board decided, by a unanimous vote,[5] to set the following guideline for

money market operations for the intermeeting period. Under this guideline, the

4 The year-on-year rate of change in the CPI is likely to be revised downward with the base-year
change scheduled for August 2011.
5 Voting for the action: Mr. M. Shirakawa, Mr. H. Yamaguchi, Mr. K. G. Nishimura, Ms. M. Suda,
Mr. T. Noda, Mr. S. Nakamura, Mr. H. Kamezaki, Mr. R. Miyao, and Mr. Y. Morimoto.
Voting against the action: None.

14


-----

Bank will provide ample funds sufficient to meet demand in financial markets and

will do its utmost to ensure financial market stability.

The Bank of Japan will encourage the uncollateralized overnight call rate to remain

at around 0 to 0.1 percent.

(2) Asset Purchase Program

With a view to preempting a deterioration in business sentiment and an increase in

risk aversion in financial markets from adversely affecting economic activity, the

Policy Board decided to increase the amount of the Asset Purchase Program,

mainly of the purchases of risk assets, by about 5 trillion yen to about 40 trillion

yen in total.[6]

The increase in asset purchases will be made in the following asset categories, and

the Bank intends to complete the increased purchases by around the end of June

2012. It should be noted that the purchases of exchange traded funds (ETFs) and

Japan real estate investment trusts (J-REITs) are conditional on obtaining

authorization in accordance with the Bank of Japan Act.

Japanese government bonds: about 0.5 trillion yen

Treasury discount bills: about 1.0 trillion yen

CP: about 1.5 trillion yen

Corporate bonds: about 1.5 trillion yen

ETFs: about 0.45 trillion yen (conditional on obtaining authorization)

J-REITs: about 0.05 trillion yen (subject to the above condition)

4. In order for Japan's economy to overcome deflation and return to a sustainable growth

path with price stability, the Bank will continue to consistently make contributions as

the central bank through the three-pronged approach of pursuing powerful monetary

easing consisting of comprehensive monetary easing, ensuring financial market

stability, and providing support to strengthen the foundations for economic growth.

The Bank will continue to carefully examine the outlook for economic activity and

prices, and, if judged necessary, take policy actions in an appropriate manner.

6 Ms. Suda dissented from the proposal on the ground that the increase in purchases should be made
in risk assets only.

15


-----

