Not to be released until 8:50 a.m.
Japan Standard Time on Friday,
July 15, 2011.

July 15, 2011

Bank of Japan

# Minutes of the Monetary Policy Meeting
## on June 13 and 14, 2011

(English translation prepared by the Bank's staff based on the Japanese original)


-----

Please contact the Bank of Japan at the address below in advance to request permission

when reproducing or copying the content of this document for commercial purposes.

Secretariat of the Policy Board, Bank of Japan

P.O. Box 30, Nihonbashi, Tokyo 103-8660, Japan

Please credit the source when quoting, reproducing, or copying the content of this

document.


-----

A Monetary Policy Meeting of the Bank of Japan Policy Board was held in the

Head Office of the Bank of Japan in Tokyo on Monday, June 13, 2011, from 2:00 p.m. to

4:32 p.m., and on Tuesday, June 14, from 9:00 a.m. to 12:37 p.m.[1]

**Policy Board Members Present**

**Mr. M. Shirakawa, Chairman, Governor of the Bank of Japan**

**Mr. H. Yamaguchi, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Japan**

**Mr. K. G. Nishimura, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Japan**

**Mr. T. Noda**

**Mr. S. Nakamura**

**Mr. H. Kamezaki**

**Mr. R. Miyao**

**Mr. Y. Morimoto**

**Ms. S. Shirai**

Government Representatives Present

Mr. M. Sakurai, Senior Vice Minister of Finance, Ministry of Finance[2]

Mr. Y. Kinoshita, Deputy Vice Minister for Policy Planning and Coordination, Ministry

of Finance[3]

Mr. Y. Suematsu, Senior Vice Minister for Economic and Fiscal Policy, Cabinet Office[2]

Mr. K. Umetani, Director-General, Economic and Fiscal Management, Cabinet Office[3]

Reporting Staff

Mr. K. Yamamoto, Executive Director

Mr. H. Nakaso, Executive Director (Assistant Governor)

Mr. M. Amamiya, Executive Director

Mr. N. Kinoshita, Executive Director

1 The minutes of this meeting were approved by the Policy Board at the Monetary Policy Meeting
held on July 11 and 12, 2011 as "a document describing an outline of the discussion at the meeting"
stipulated in Article 20, paragraph 1 of the Bank of Japan Act of 1997. Those present are referred
to by their titles at the time of the meeting.
2 Messrs. M. Sakurai and Y. Suematsu were present on June 14.
3 Messrs. Y. Kinoshita and K. Umetani were present on June 13.

1


-----

Mr. K. Momma, Director-General, Monetary Affairs Department

Mr. T. Umemori, Deputy Director-General, Monetary Affairs Department[4]

Mr. T. Kato, Head of Policy Planning Division, Monetary Affairs Department

Mr. S. Aoki, Director-General, Financial Markets Department

Mr. E. Maeda, Director-General, Research and Statistics Department

Mr. T. Sekine, Head of Economic Research Division, Research and Statistics Department

Mr. H. Ono, Director-General, International Department

Secretariat of the Monetary Policy Meeting

Mr. Y. Iino, Director-General, Secretariat of the Policy Board

Mr. T. Tachibana, Director, Deputy Head of Planning and Coordination Division,

Secretariat of the Policy Board

Mr. H. Chida, Head of Policy Infrastructure Division, Monetary Affairs Department

Mr. S. Ohyama, Senior Economist, Monetary Affairs Department

Mr. M. Nakashima, Senior Economist, Monetary Affairs Department

4 Mr. T. Umemori was present on June 14.

2


-----

**I. Summary of Staff Reports on Economic and Financial Developments[5]**

**A. Money Market Operations in the Intermeeting Period**

The Bank, in accordance with the guideline decided at the previous meeting on

May 19 and 20, 2011, had been providing ample funds sufficient to meet demand in

financial markets and was doing its utmost to ensure stability in the markets.[6] In this

situation, the uncollateralized overnight call rate had generally been in the range of

0.06-0.07 percent.

**B. Recent Developments in Financial Markets**

Money market rates had been stable amid the Bank's provision of ample funds.

General collateral (GC) repo rates had been around 0.1 percent. As for interest rates on

term instruments, yields on treasury discount bills (T-Bills), including those with a one-year

maturity, had been slightly above 0.1 percent. Rates on longer-term interbank instruments

had been more or less unchanged.

The benchmark long-term interest rate in Japan had generally been within the

narrow range of 1.10-1.15 percent. Although Japanese stock prices rose temporarily, they

had been somewhat weak due to the decline in U.S. stock prices, reflecting concern about

the economic slowdown in the United States, and to the appreciating trend of the yen. The

Nikkei 225 Stock Average had recently been at around 9,500 yen. In the foreign exchange

market, the yen appreciated against the U.S. dollar, remaining at around 80 yen to the dollar

recently, as U.S. interest rates declined.

**C. Overseas Economic and Financial Developments**

The world economy continued to recover, but the pace of recovery was slowing.

The U.S. economy continued to recover, but the pace of recovery was slowing.

Private consumption continued to increase against the background of a moderate recovery

in the employment situation; nevertheless, in a situation where balance-sheet adjustments

continued to weigh on the economy, the pace of increase had been slowing recently due to a

decline in real purchasing power brought about by the earlier rise in crude oil prices.

5 Reports were made based on information available at the time of the meeting.
6 The guideline was as follows:
The Bank of Japan will encourage the uncollateralized overnight call rate to remain at
around 0 to 0.1 percent.

3


-----

Housing investment remained at a depressed level, while housing prices were weak. On

the other hand, exports continued to increase, and business fixed investment rose

moderately. In such a situation, production remained on an increasing trend, although the

pace of increase was slowing partly due to downward pressure from supply-chain

disruptions associated with the Great East Japan Earthquake. As for prices, the

year-on-year rate of increase in the consumer price index (CPI) for all items moved up as a

result of the earlier rise in international commodity prices; on the other hand, the rate of

increase in the CPI for all items less energy and food, or the core CPI, remained only

moderate due to slack in supply and demand conditions in the goods market and the labor

market.

Economic activity in the euro area as a whole continued to recover moderately,

with some differences in pace by country. Exports continued to increase, especially to

emerging economies, and private consumption and business fixed investment rose gradually.

As for prices, although slack in supply and demand conditions and slower growth in wages

continued to exert downward pressure, the year-on-year rate of increase in the Harmonized

Index of Consumer Prices (HICP) for all items rose due to the effects of the earlier

depreciation of the euro and rise in international commodity prices. Meanwhile, in the

United Kingdom, the economy was on a recovery trend, but the pace of recovery was

slowing.

The Chinese economy continued to show high growth. Although car sales and

production slowed to some extent, domestic demand remained firm overall as fixed asset

investment maintained high growth. The Indian economy also continued to grow at a

relatively rapid pace. Economic conditions in the NIEs and the ASEAN countries

continued to recover, as exports remained on an increasing trend and domestic demand

stayed firm, although the pace of increase in production as a whole was slowing partly due

to the ramifications of a decline in production by Japanese automakers. In many of these

Asian economies, inflationary pressure continued to be strong due to the rise in food and

materials prices, reflecting the effects of the hike in international commodity prices, and to

the increase in utilization of production factors such as labor and capital.

As for global financial markets, in the United States and Europe, as signs of an

economic slowdown were gradually spreading, stock prices had declined from the levels at

the time of the previous meeting, as had long-term interest rates, especially in the United

4


-----

States. Financial markets in some peripheral European countries, however, remained

unstable as the yield spreads of government bonds issued by such countries over those

issued by Germany were hovering in a historically high range reflecting uncertainties

regarding the debt problem in Greece.

**D. Economic and Financial Developments in Japan**

1. Economic developments

Exports had declined sharply since the earthquake. They were expected to turn

upward as supply-side constraints eased further, reflecting the continued improvement in

overseas economic conditions.

The rate of decline in public investment was decelerating gradually. Public

investment was expected to increase gradually, mainly due to the restoration of damaged

social capital.

With regard to domestic private demand, business fixed investment had been weak

since the earthquake, but leading indicators showed that the investment stance of firms was

solid. Business fixed investment was expected to increase gradually, aided partly by the

restoration of disaster-stricken facilities.

The employment and income situation became slightly more severe, partly due to

the effects of the earthquake disaster.

Although private consumption had been weak since the earthquake, it was

showing some signs of picking up as durable goods and services consumption started to

show increases with household sentiment improving somewhat. Private consumption was

expected to pick up as household sentiment improved in line with the recovery in

production.

Housing investment was relatively weak due to the disaster. It was expected to

increase gradually as supply-side constraints eased and disaster-stricken homes were rebuilt.

Production had declined sharply since the earthquake due to supply-side

constraints, but recently was showing some signs of picking up, with supply-side

constraints starting to ease. An increase in production was likely to become more

noticeable as supply-side constraints eased further.

As for prices, international commodity prices were flat at high levels. The

three-month rate of change in the domestic corporate goods price index (CGPI) was rising,

5


-----

mainly due to the increase in international commodity prices. The rate of increase in the

CGPI was expected to slow for the time being, reflecting movements in international

commodity prices. The year-on-year rate of change in the CPI (excluding fresh food) was

slightly positive, and it was expected to remain so.

2. Financial environment

Financial conditions generally continued to ease, although weakness had been

observed in the financial positions of some firms, mainly small ones, since the earthquake.

The overnight call rate remained at an extremely low level, and the declining trend

in firms' funding costs continued. Stimulative effects from low interest rates were still

partly constrained given current developments in economic activity and prices. With

regard to credit supply, firms continued to see financial institutions' lending attitudes as

being on an improving trend. Issuing conditions for CP continued to be favorable, and

those for corporate bonds had improved and become favorable as a whole. As for credit

demand, firms had recently shown signs of increasing their demand for working capital.

Against this backdrop, the year-on-year rate of decline in bank lending was slowing. The

amount outstanding of corporate bonds exceeded the previous year's level and that of CP

was around the year-ago level. In these circumstances, firms retained their recovered

financial positions on the whole, although weakness had been observed in those of some

firms, mainly small ones, since the earthquake. Meanwhile, the year-on-year rate of

change in the money stock had been in the range of 2.5-3.0 percent.

3. The fund-provisioning measure to support strengthening the foundations for economic

growth

On June 8, the Bank carried out the fourth new loan disbursement, amounting to

829.6 billion yen, under the fund-provisioning measure to support strengthening the

foundations for economic growth. This brought the total amount of loans disbursed by the

Bank to 2,942.4 billion yen, nearly reaching the maximum amount of loans allowed under

this measure (3 trillion yen), with a year left before the term of the last disbursement of new

loans. New loan disbursements under the measure had the following characteristics: (1)

the total number of financial institutions granted approval to participate had increased to

153; (2) the total amount of investments and loans planned by financial institutions had

6


-----

reached 8.4 trillion yen, a level nearly three times the maximum amount of loans to be

disbursed by the Bank; (3) financial institutions' investments and loans covered a wide

range of areas beyond the 18 examples listed by the Bank, including the initiatives to

support local industries; (4) the average duration of investments and loans provided by

financial institutions was 6.4 years, exceeding four years, the maximum duration of loans

by the Bank; and (5) many financial institutions that had eased their credit standards for

loans to firms pointed to strengthening efforts to growth areas as the reason behind the

easing. In view of the above, the measure had been sufficiently playing the role of a

catalyst in promoting financial institutions' loans in areas with growth potential.

Regarding equity investments, however, the effects of the measure were limited given the

small amount of such investments made by financial institutions. Moreover, some

financial institutions criticized the measure for having created intensified competition

among financial institutions to lower lending rates. With regard to the future conduct of

the measure, the following issues should be discussed: (1) whether to let the measure stand

unchanged until the term of the last disbursement, in a situation where the Bank had come

close to using up the line of credit; and (2) if the Bank were to increase the amount of loans

to be disbursed through the measure, what possible revisions could be made to it, taking

into account the situation to date.

**II. Summary of Discussions by the Policy Board on Economic and Financial**

**Developments**

**A. Economic Developments**

Members discussed the economic and financial conditions abroad, and shared the

view that, led by high growth in emerging and commodity-exporting economies, overseas

economies continued to recover, although the pace of recovery was slowing, and would

continue to do so. Many members, however, were of the view that downside risks to the

outlook for overseas economies had increased to some extent.

Members concurred that the U.S. economy continued to recover, but the pace of

recovery was slowing. Most members expressed the view that, although private

consumption continued to increase, the pace of increase had been slowing recently due to a

decline in real purchasing power brought about by the earlier rise in crude oil prices in a

situation where balance-sheet adjustments continued to weigh on the economy. Many

7


-----

members said that housing prices were weak and housing investment was at a depressed

level. Some members noted that, although production was on an increasing trend, the pace

of increase was slowing partly due to downward pressure from supply-chain disruptions

associated with the disaster in Japan. As for the outlook, members agreed that, as the rise

in crude oil prices came to a halt, the U.S. economy was likely to continue to recover

supported by high growth in emerging economies and the accommodative financial

conditions, if the effects of supply-chain disruptions were eliminated. Some members,

however, pointed out that the pace of recovery in the U.S. economy was modest and

downside risks warranted attention, considering that the household sector was burdened by

balance-sheet adjustments, the adjustment pressure in the housing market was strong, and

an uncertainty with regard to developments in crude oil prices was high. Some members

made an assessment that market participants' views on the outlook for the U.S. economy

had again leaned toward pessimism recently, as evidenced, for example, by the slight

decline in long-term interest rates and weak stock prices following the release of

weaker-than-expected economic indicators. In this situation, some members said that

large fluctuations between optimism and pessimism regarding the outlook for the U.S.

economy themselves could increase uncertainty and thereby depress U.S. firms' and

households' growth expectations.

Members shared the view that the euro area economy as a whole continued to

recover moderately, albeit with large disparities between core countries, such as Germany,

and some peripheral countries, which faced sovereign risk problems. A few members,

however, noted that the pace of recovery in the euro area economy was likely to remain

moderate, considering that fiscal consolidation measures in each euro area country were

likely to weigh on the economy. In relation to the sovereign risk problem in Greece, many

members said that uncertainties regarding the outlook remained high in financial and

foreign exchange markets, mainly due to differences in the stance toward debt restructuring

among governments and the European Central Bank (ECB). Some members said that

Greece might be able to obtain necessary liquidity for the time being, but this did not mean

that the government debt problem itself was being solved. Some members then expressed

the view that the ECB faced difficulty in terms of its conduct of monetary policy because,

on the one hand, it needed to address rising inflationary pressure, and, on the other, it was

required to take measures to respond to demand for liquidity from banks.

8


-----

Members agreed that the Chinese economy continued to show high growth.

Many members pointed out that, although car sales and production had slowed to some

extent, domestic demand remained firm overall as fixed asset investment maintained high

growth. Most members made the assessment that some deceleration in the growth of the

Chinese economy, due mainly to the effects of monetary tightening implemented thus far,

was a positive development because this could increase the possibility of the economy

moving toward a sustainable growth path. With regard to prices, some members expressed

the concern that inflationary pressure remained high despite monetary tightening. A few

of these members said that attention should be paid to the possibility that China was

entering the phase of an inflationary spiral of prices and wages. As for the risks to the

outlook for the Chinese economy, some members expressed the view that, while lagged

responses in monetary policy could accelerate growth in the short run, attention should

continue to be paid to the possibility that such responses could lead to increased fluctuations

in economic activity in the longer run and might undermine sustainable growth. One

member added that, for the Chinese economy to achieve sustainable growth, not only were

monetary policy responses required, but also fiscal policy and macro-prudential policy

responses.

Some members expressed the view that in the NIEs and the ASEAN countries,

domestic and external demand was firm on the whole, although production of some goods

was adversely affected by the delays in shipment of parts from Japan.

Based on the above deliberations on economic and financial conditions abroad,

members discussed the state of Japan's economy. They agreed that the economy continued

to face downward pressure, mainly on the production side, due to the effects of the disaster,

but was showing some signs of picking up.

Regarding recent developments in the economy, members agreed that economic

indicators released after the previous meeting showed that the plunge immediately

following the earthquake, in March and April, had been substantial, but production and

domestic private demand had recently been showing some signs of picking up, with

supply-side constraints starting to ease and household and business sentiment improving

somewhat. Most members said that such recovery in production was proceeding at a

somewhat faster pace than had been projected immediately after the earthquake. Many

members cited the fact that industrial production had turned slightly positive in April on a

9


-----

month-on-month basis, reflecting an easing of electric power supply constraints and the

restoration of supply chains, and viewed this as a favorable development. Many members

noted that automakers were making full-scale moves toward raising the level of production,

based on sources such as information obtained from business contacts. Some members

said that firms' growth expectations were unchanged and leading indicators of business

fixed investment, such as machinery orders and construction starts, remained firm. With

regard to the household sector, many members said that household sentiment was

recovering to some extent, as were indicators related to private consumption, such as sales

at department stores and sales in the food service industry, as well as the number of new

passenger-car registrations. Some members, however, expressed concern that the pace of

recovery in indicators related to travel remained sluggish, due partly to the decrease in the

number of foreign visitors to Japan. One member said that many economic indicators

were recovering recently, but the underlying activity levels remained low.

As for the outlook for the economy, members shared the view that the economy

was likely to continue facing downward pressure for the time being, mainly on the

production side; thereafter, it was likely to return to a moderate recovery path as production

would probably regain traction with further easing of supply-side constraints, backed by an

increase in exports reflecting the improvement in overseas economic conditions and by a

rise in demand for restoring capital stock. Many members saw an increasing probability of

production returning to the level before the earthquake in the July-September quarter of

2011, given the increasing views that the restoration of supply chains would progress and

the degree of constraints on economic activity due to electricity shortages this summer

would be less significant than had been anticipated. Some members expressed the view

that, with a pick-up in production, exports were likely to turn upward reflecting the

improvement in overseas economic conditions. Members expressed the recognition that

the aforementioned outlook was broadly in line with the Bank's baseline scenario presented

in the April 2011 Outlook for Economic Activity and Prices (hereafter the Outlook Report).

With regard to risks to the outlook for Japan's economy, members shared the view

that attention should be paid for the time being to the downside risks to economic activity,

especially the possible effects of the disaster. As for risks to overseas economies, some

members said that heightened uncertainty regarding the outlook for the U.S. and European

economies and the possible consequences of the sovereign risk problems in Europe

10


-----

warranted attention. Many members said that the possibility of accelerated economic

growth in emerging and commodity-exporting economies called for continued monitoring,

although these economies had recently shown signs of deceleration. Many members

pointed to the possibility that the low level of economic activity compared with the period

before the earthquake would exert downward pressure on household incomes. A few

members expressed concern about the effects of the yen's appreciating trend on the

sentiment of Japan's exporting firms. One member noted the risk that if political tension in

the Middle East and North Africa intensified, international commodity prices might rise

further and thereby depress domestic private demand. Most members pointed to the risk

that, in the longer run, firms' medium- to long-term growth expectations might decline due

to a possible prolongation of severe supply constraints, if the resumption of operations at

nuclear power plants around Japan were to be delayed following regular inspections. One

of these members continued that it might be necessary to make a somewhat conservative

estimation of Japan's potential economic growth rate, taking into account that, in addition to

the problems related to severe supply constraints, the economy faced issues related to

demographic changes even before the disaster. Some members expressed the view that, in

the process of restructuring and diversification of supply chains, the share of Japanese

products in global markets might decline, and/or that the shift of Japanese firms' production

sites to overseas, as well as changes in the procurement of materials and parts from Japan to

other countries, might accelerate. On the other hand, one member noted that an increasing

number of Japanese firms were recently acquiring foreign firms, prompted by the

appreciation of the yen. One member said that the salient point was whether the current

recovery momentum would remain intact in and after the latter half of fiscal 2011. This

member continued that there was a high likelihood that the recovery path would deviate

downward, in terms of the level of economic activity, from that projected prior to the

earthquake, and acknowledged having an increasing concern about the downside risks to the

economy.

Members agreed that the year-on-year rate of change in the CPI (excluding fresh

food) had been in line with the forecast presented in the April 2011 Outlook Report and was

likely to remain slightly positive as the aggregate supply and demand balance improved as a

trend. A few members, however, noted that the rate of change in the CPI turned positive in

April because the effects of subsidies for high school tuition had come to an end, a year

11


-----

after their introduction, and energy prices had risen. They continued that, excluding such

factors, the underlying trend of the CPI remained weak and more time would be needed to

confirm that price stability was in sight on the basis of the "understanding of medium- to

long-term price stability." Members concurred that the assessment of risks to the outlook

for prices was unchanged from that presented in the April 2011 Outlook Report. They

also shared the view that the year-on-year rate of change in the CPI was likely to be revised

downward with the change in the base year for the CPI, scheduled to take place in August

2011.

**B. Financial Developments**

Members agreed that financial conditions generally continued to ease, although

weakness had been observed in the financial positions of some firms, mainly small ones.

Members shared the view that money market rates had been stable amid the Bank's

provision of ample funds. Many members expressed the view that the declining trend in

firms' funding costs continued and that firms still saw financial institutions' lending attitudes

as being on an improving trend. As for corporate financing, many members commented

that issuing conditions for CP were favorable and issuance rates had returned to levels seen

just before the earthquake. Regarding the corporate bond market, most members noted

that issuing conditions had improved and become favorable as a whole, as seen, for

example, in the steady increase in the amount of corporate bonds issued, although electric

power companies had been unable to issue bonds. With regard to issuance rates on

corporate bonds, a few members said that they had returned to more or less the same levels

as just before the earthquake. Most members said that close attention should continue to

be paid to the weakness observed in the financial positions of some firms, mainly small

ones, since the earthquake.

**III. Summary of Discussions on Monetary Policy for the Immediate Future and the**

**Conduct of the Fund-Provisioning Measure to Support Strengthening the**

**Foundations for Economic Growth**

**A. Monetary Policy for the Immediate Future**

Regarding the guideline for money market operations for the intermeeting period

ahead, members agreed that it was appropriate to maintain the current guideline that the

12


-----

Bank would encourage the uncollateralized overnight call rate to remain at around 0 to 0.1

percent.

As for the future conduct of monetary policy, members concurred that, in order for

Japan's economy to overcome deflation and return to a sustainable growth path with price

stability, it was necessary that the Bank continue to consistently make contributions as the

central bank through the three-pronged approach of pursuing powerful monetary easing

consisting of comprehensive monetary easing, ensuring financial market stability, and

providing support to strengthen the foundations for economic growth. They confirmed

that the Bank would continue to carefully examine the outlook for economic activity and

prices, including the effects of the disaster, and take appropriate policy actions as necessary.

With regard to the operation of the Asset Purchase Program (hereafter the

Program), one member said that, considering the recent pick-up in the economy, there was

no urgent need to influence market sentiment by increasing the amount of the Program at

this stage. This member, however, continued that the potential need for additional

monetary easing by affecting long-term interest rates had not decreased, given that there

was a risk that the time necessary to achieve price stability would be prolonged. A

different member expressed the opinion that, in view of the current outlook for economic

activity and prices, the need for additional monetary easing had not declined from the

standpoint of the necessity to maintain the momentum for economic recovery, and it was

important to consider the appropriate timing to implement additional measures.

Meanwhile, most members expressed the view that it would be appropriate to continue

steadily conducting purchases of various financial assets under the framework for additional

monetary easing decided immediately after the earthquake, and monitor how the effects of

the easing were spreading.

As for the funds-supplying operation to support financial institutions in disaster

areas, one member said that it was necessary to examine the policy effects, taking into

consideration financial institutions' responses, including their bids for the Bank's second and

subsequent funds-supplying operations.

**B. The Conduct of the Fund-Provisioning Measure to Support Strengthening the**

**Foundations for Economic Growth**

In view of their assessment of the fund-provisioning measure to support

13


-----

strengthening the foundations for economic growth, members agreed that it had played the

role of a catalyst in promoting financial institutions' own initiatives toward strengthening

the foundations for economic growth. In relation to this, many members noted the

following developments: the number of financial institutions granted approval to participate

in the measure increased; the total amount of investments and loans planned by financial

institutions largely exceeded the maximum amount of loans to be disbursed by the Bank;

and the average duration of loans provided by financial institutions exceeded the maximum

duration of loans by the Bank. Some members said that the measure also played a

significant role in raising public awareness of the need to boost the overall growth potential

of Japan's economy. On the other hand, many members pointed to criticism that there was

a side effect of the measure; namely, that it had encouraged competition among financial

institutions to lower lending rates and induced a takeover of lending from other financial

institutions. On this point, one member noted that, amid the Bank's continued conduct of

monetary easing, it was a one-sided argument to single out the measure as the only reason

behind intensifying competition among financial institutions to lower lending rates. A

different member expressed the view that financial institutions' competitive efforts to tap

new growth areas while making use of the measure in themselves should not be interpreted

negatively, and that encouraging such efforts was in fact part of the aim of the policy

measure. Some members pointed to the possibility that criticism of the measure for having

encouraged competition suggested that the catalytic effects of the measure were diminishing

given the slowdowns in the rates of increase in the number of financial institutions granted

approval to participate and the total amount of investments and loans planned by financial

institutions. In some members' assessment, the measure produced only limited effects as a

catalyst for equity investments made in growth areas, as evidenced by the number and

amount of investments.

With regard to the future conduct of the fund-provisioning measure, given that the

Bank had almost used up the 3 trillion yen line of credit and might not be able to disburse

new loans, members shared the view that it would be appropriate to take a policy action

with a view to supporting financial institutions' efforts to strengthen the foundations for

economic growth through the use of a wider range of financial techniques. Some members

said that it was important for the Bank to implement additional measures partly because this

would enable it to continue to communicate the message that raising the growth potential

14


-----

was vital for Japan's economy.

As for the direction to be taken in adopting additional measures, many members

said that it would not be appropriate for the Bank to simply increase the amount of loans set

in the existing framework, considering that its effects had been waning. These members

continued that it would be more appropriate for the Bank to devise ways to encourage

provision of equity-like funds, such as equity investments, and of loans without

conventional collateral or guarantees.

Given the above considerations, the chairman, with the aim of proceeding with a

more specific discussion, requested that the staff -- taking into account the members' views

expressed so far -- present a supplementary explanation on what kind of framework might

be considered if the Bank were to take some kind of policy action with regard to the

existing fund-provisioning measure.

The staff provided the following supplementary explanation.

(1) Taking into account the members' views, it might be appropriate for the Bank to

establish a new line of credit, separate from the existing one, for provision of

equity-like funds and loans without conventional collateral or guarantees.

(2) Eligible investments and loans could encompass investments and loans with equity-like

features and loans without real estate collateral or guarantees (including asset-based

lending, or ABL). The provision of equity-like funds would provide growth

opportunities for firms constrained by a lack of capital despite their high growth

potential. ABL would facilitate (1) smooth financing, particularly of small and

emerging firms with insufficient real estate collateral and/or guarantees, and (2) the

strengthening of financial institutions' function to assess firms' growth potential and

profitability.

(3) The duration of each loan could be set at two years -- which would be twice as long as

that for the existing fund-provisioning measure -- in order to keep a good balance

between the objective of supporting financial institutions' investments and loans and

factors such as the financial soundness of the Bank. It would be appropriate to allow

loans to be rolled over once and to set the maximum duration of loans at four years, the

same as the existing fund-provisioning measure.

(4) The total amount of loans could be set at 500 billion yen given the actual amount of

equity investments and loans including ABL made by financial institutions to date. In

15


-----

this case, the maximum amount of loans to each financial institution that had been

granted approval to participate in the measure could be set at 50 billion yen in order to

prevent an extreme concentration of loans at particular institutions.

(5) With a view to making it easier for financial institutions to use a new line of credit,

revisions could be made to such factors as the duration of eligible investments and loans

and the required minimum amount per investment and loan.

Members further discussed the specifics of a new line of credit for the

fund-provisioning measure to support strengthening the foundations for economic growth,

and shared the view that it would be appropriate to implement an additional measure based

broadly on the aforementioned framework explained by the staff. One member

commented that it was not necessary to set the total amount of loans at a significantly large

amount given that the actual amount of equity investments covered by the existing

fund-provisioning measure had been small. In response to this view, some members

expressed the opinion that it was necessary to set the total amount of loans at about 500

billion yen to clearly indicate the Bank's commitment to this measure, and it did not matter

if the actual amount of equity investments and loans including ABL turned out to be

substantially below the maximum amount. One member said that it would be appropriate

to set the duration of the Bank's loans at two years from the viewpoint of supporting

financial institutions' investments and loans, but it was necessary to bear in mind that such

duration would be extraordinarily long compared with the Bank's funds-supplying

operations conducted to date. Many members expressed the view that it would be

appropriate to set the deadline for applications for new loans as March 31, 2012, the same

as the existing fund-provisioning measure, given that equity investments and loans

including ABL had not been excluded under the existing framework for the measure.

Some members commented that, in light of the situation of equity investments and loans

including ABL, it was necessary to make revisions to the existing terms and conditions of

the measure; for example, reduce the required minimum amount per investment and loan,

keep track of the amount outstanding of individual investments and loans to be covered by

the new line of credit, and include equity investments in funds even if the details of

investment plans were not yet fully determined. Some members said that it was necessary

for the Bank and other related parties to make efforts to accumulate further expertise

regarding the assessment of collateral other than real estate and improve the environment

16


-----

surrounding ABL, with a view to increasing its use in Japan.

Regarding the relevance of the new line of credit for the fund-provisioning

measure to the Bank's efforts to support restoration and rebuilding, some members noted a

high likelihood that it would take some time before demand for funds related to rebuilding

became full-fledged. Based on this view, a few members commented that it would be

appropriate for the Bank to examine how it could make contributions as the central bank to

support restoration and rebuilding separately from the measure while taking the

followinginto consideration: how demand for funds for rebuilding would emerge; how such

demand would be met by financial institutions; and how much progress had been made in

terms of the government's support.

Based on the above considerations, the chairman expressed the view that a

consensus had basically been reached among members with regard to the future conduct of

the funds-supplying operation to support strengthening the foundations for economic

growth. Since all other members were in agreement with his view, members decided to

determine at this meeting the specifics of the new line of credit for the fund-provisioning

measure, including principal terms and conditions. In response, the staff drafted principal

terms and conditions and provided an explanation. Members then discussed the draft and

finalized it as the following proposal: "Establishment of 'Special Rules for Equity

Investments and Asset-Based Lending to Enhance the Fund-Provisioning Measure to

Support Strengthening the Foundations for Economic Growth.'"

**IV. Remarks by Government Representatives**

The representative from the Ministry of Finance made the following remarks.

(1) The Japanese economy was showing weakness due to the effects of the disaster, and this

was expected to continue for a while. Uncertainty was extremely high, including that

over the possibility of a further deterioration in sentiment reflecting the effects of the

developments at nuclear power plants. In addition, due attention needed to be paid to

the downside risks to the economy stemming mainly from developments in overseas

economies and fluctuations in foreign exchange rates.

(2) With the first supplementary budget for fiscal 2011, the government was making its

utmost efforts to support the living conditions of disaster victims -- for example, by

constructing temporary housing and securing employment -- and to remove debris and

17


-----

restore infrastructure. Furthermore, the government would carefully examine, in

tandem with the formulation of the second supplementary budget, whether there was

anything more that it should do at this point, and how reconstruction could be achieved.

(3) The government would steadily proceed with ensuring the sustainability of public

finance and social security, as well as maintaining confidence in such institutions.

With regard to the integrated reform of the social security and tax systems, which was

currently being discussed, the Council for Intensive Discussion on Social Security

Reform, at its meeting held on June 2, compiled a proposal for social security reform

that presented a vision for maintaining and strengthening the social security system as

well as securing the necessary fiscal resources. And with a view to finalizing the draft

by the end of June, it would proceed with discussions on such reform. In addition, the

government would revise the "Medium-Term Fiscal Framework" around the middle of

2011, thereby steadily pursuing fiscal consolidation in an integrated manner with

economic growth and the reform of the social security system. Moreover, it would

examine innovative energy and environmental strategies from short-, medium-, and

long-term perspectives in addition to overcoming constraints on electric power supply

and strengthening safety measures.

(4) The Bank indicated that it would take appropriate policy actions as necessary. The

government expected the Bank to continue taking decisive monetary policy actions

while considering the effects of the disaster on the economy and financial markets, the

progress of rebuilding, and developments in overseas economies. The government

considered that the Bank's establishment of a new line of credit for the

fund-provisioning measure to support strengthening the foundations for economic

growth, which was proposed at this meeting, would not only encourage the

government's initiatives for achieving new growth but also contribute to revitalizing the

Japanese economy through the use of a wider range of financial techniques.

The representative from the Cabinet Office made the following remarks.

(1) The real GDP growth rate for the January-March quarter registered a decrease of 3.5

percent on an annualized basis. After showing weakness for a while, the Japanese

economy was expected to pick up as production recovered in line with the continuing

steady restoration of supply chains. However, due attention needed to be paid to the

18


-----

downside risks to the economy stemming mainly from constraints on electric power

supply, the developments at nuclear power plants, and developments in overseas

economies.

(2) The economy was still in a mild deflationary situation, as evidenced, for example, by

the continued fall in price trends, excluding energy prices and other special factors.

Amid concerns that weakness in the economy might continue for the time being, due to

the effects of the disaster, close attention should be paid to the effects on economic

activity of the upward pressure on costs exerted by the supply-side constraints and sharp

rise in energy prices.

(3) With a view to achieving a prompt recovery from the disaster, the government was

swiftly implementing the first supplementary budget for fiscal 2011 and, taking into

account the principles behind reconstruction, steadily considering formulating

additional supplementary budgets while determining the necessity and urgency of

implementing additional measures. At the same time, based on the "Guideline on

Policy Promotion," the government would strengthen the initiatives to restore the

growth potential of the Japanese economy. Regarding the integrated reform of the

social security and tax systems, the government and the ruling parties would finalize the

draft by June 20.

(4) The government expected the Bank to continue steadily carrying out the

funds-supplying operation to support financial institutions in disaster areas, in order to

support restoration and rebuilding of the disaster areas from the financial side. It

welcomed the Bank's proposal made at this meeting to establish a new line of credit for

the fund-provisioning measure to support strengthening the foundations for economic

growth, as a timely and appropriate action. The government hoped that the Bank

would share with it the basic perspectives with regard to the macroeconomic

management indicated within the "Guideline on Policy Promotion," and continue to

underpin the economy through appropriate and flexible conduct of monetary policy

while continuing to sufficiently exchange views and keep close contact with the

government.

19


-----

**V. Votes**

**A. Vote on the Guideline for Money Market Operations**

Based on the above discussions, members shared the view that it was appropriate

to maintain the current guideline for money market operations, which encouraged the

uncollateralized overnight call rate to remain at around 0 to 0.1 percent.

To reflect this view, the chairman formulated the following proposal and put it to a

vote.

**The Chairman's Policy Proposal on the Guideline for Money Market Operations:**

1. The guideline for money market operations for the intermeeting period ahead will be as

follows.

The Bank of Japan will encourage the uncollateralized overnight call rate

to remain at around 0 to 0.1 percent.

2. A public statement will be decided separately.

Votes for the proposal: Mr. M. Shirakawa, Mr. H. Yamaguchi, Mr. K. G. Nishimura,

Mr. T. Noda, Mr. S. Nakamura, Mr. H. Kamezaki, Mr. R. Miyao, Mr. Y. Morimoto,

and Ms. S. Shirai.

Votes against the proposal: None.

**B. Vote on "Establishment of 'Special Rules for Equity Investments and Asset-Based**

**Lending to Enhance the Fund-Provisioning Measure to Support Strengthening**

**the Foundations for Economic Growth'"**

"Establishment of 'Special Rules for Equity Investments and Asset-Based Lending

to Enhance the Fund-Provisioning Measure to Support Strengthening the Foundations for

Economic Growth'" was put to a vote. Members voted unanimously to approve the

establishment and agreed that the decision should be made public.

**VI. Discussion on the Statement on Monetary Policy**

Members discussed the Statement on Monetary Policy, and it was put to a vote.

20


-----

The Policy Board decided the text by a unanimous vote. It was confirmed that the

statement would be released immediately after the meeting (see Attachment 1).

**VII. Approval of the Minutes of the Monetary Policy Meeting**

The Policy Board approved unanimously the minutes of the Monetary Policy

Meeting of May 19 and 20, 2011 for release on June 17, 2011.

**VIII. Approval of the Scheduled Dates of the Monetary Policy Meetings in July**

**2011-June 2012**

At the end of the meeting, the Policy Board approved the dates of the Monetary

Policy Meetings to be held in the period July 2011-June 2012 for immediate release (see

Attachment 3).

21


-----

Attachment 1

June 14, 2011

Bank of Japan

**Statement on Monetary Policy**

1. At the Monetary Policy Meeting held today, the Policy Board of the Bank of Japan

decided, by a unanimous vote,[7] to set the following guideline for money market

operations for the intermeeting period:

The Bank of Japan will encourage the uncollateralized overnight call rate

to remain at around 0 to 0.1 percent.

2. Japan's economy continues to face downward pressure, mainly on the production side,

due to the effects of the earthquake disaster, but is showing some signs of picking up.

After the earthquake, production and exports declined sharply and domestic private

demand also weakened. Although such downward pressure remains, production and

domestic private demand have recently been showing some signs of picking up, with

supply-side constraints starting to ease and household and business sentiment

improving somewhat. Meanwhile, financial conditions have generally continued to

ease, although weakness has been observed in the financial positions of some firms,

mainly small ones, since the earthquake. The year-on-year rate of change in the CPI

(excluding fresh food) is slightly positive.

3. Japan's economy is likely to continue facing downward pressure for the time being,

mainly on the production side. Thereafter, production is likely to regain traction with

7 Voting for the action: Mr. M. Shirakawa, Mr. H. Yamaguchi, Mr. K. G. Nishimura, Mr. T. Noda,
Mr. S. Nakamura, Mr. H. Kamezaki, Mr. R. Miyao, Mr. Y. Morimoto, and Ms. S. Shirai.
Voting against the action: None.

22


-----

further easing of supply-side constraints. From the second half of fiscal 2011, the

economy is expected to return to a moderate recovery path, backed by an increase in

exports reflecting the improvement in overseas economic conditions and by a rise in

demand for restoring capital stock. The year-on-year rate of change in the CPI is

expected to remain slightly positive.[8] Based on these assessments, Japan's economy is

expected to return to a sustainable growth path with price stability in the longer run.

4. Regarding risks to the economic outlook, there is a high degree of uncertainty about the

effects of the earthquake disaster on Japan's economy. With regard to overseas

economies, the effects of balance-sheet adjustments on the U.S. economy and the

possible consequences of the sovereign risk problems in Europe continue to warrant

attention. Despite some signs of deceleration, there is still upside risk to the growth

prospect of emerging and commodity-exporting economies. Meanwhile, turning to

the implications of the rise in international commodity prices, on the one hand, the high

growth in emerging and commodity-exporting economies that lies behind the price rise

is likely to provide a boost to Japan's exports; on the other hand, the decline in real

purchasing power resulting from the deterioration in the terms of trade could reduce

domestic private demand in Japan. While there are various risk factors to be

considered, attention should be paid for the time being to the downside risks to

economic activity, especially the possible effects of the disaster. Regarding risks to

the price outlook, inflation could rise more than expected if international commodity

prices increase further, while there is also a possibility that the rate of inflation will

deviate downward from the Bank's baseline scenario due, for example, to a decline in

medium- to long-term inflation expectations.

5. The Fund-Provisioning Measure to Support Strengthening the Foundations for Economic

Growth, which was introduced in the summer of last year, has been playing the role of a

catalyst in promoting financial institutions' own initiatives. With a view to further

encouraging financial institutions' efforts, the Bank deems it appropriate to focus on

supporting their provision of equity-like funds and loans without conventional collateral

8 The year-on-year rate of change in the CPI is likely to be revised downward with the base-year
change scheduled for August 2011.

23


-----

or guarantees. Based on such consideration, the Bank decided at today's meeting to

establish a new line of credit for equity investments and the so-called ABL, or

asset-based lending (see Attachment 2). The Bank expects that today's decision will

further enhance financial institutions' efforts to strengthen the foundations for economic

growth through the use of a wider range of financial techniques.

6. In order for Japan's economy to overcome deflation and return to a sustainable growth

path with price stability, the Bank will continue to consistently make contributions as

the central bank through the three-pronged approach of pursuing powerful monetary

easing consisting of comprehensive monetary easing, ensuring financial market

stability, and providing support to strengthen the foundations for economic growth.

The Bank will continue to carefully examine the outlook for economic activity and

prices, including the effects of the disaster, and take appropriate policy actions as

necessary.

24


-----

Attachment 2

**Outline of New Line of Credit Established for the "Fund-Provisioning Measure to Support**

**Strengthening the Foundations for Economic Growth"**

1. Eligible Investments and Loans

(1) Equity investments (investments and loans with equity-like features)

(2) Loans without real estate collateral or guarantees (including the so-called ABL, or

asset-based lending)

2. Eligible Counterparties

Counterparties for the Fund-Provisioning Measure to Support Strengthening the Foundations

for Economic Growth

3. Form of Loans

Loans against pooled collateral

4. Duration of Loans

The duration of each loan shall be two years in principle. Loans could be rolled over only

once and, consequently, the maximum duration of loans could be effectively four years.

New loans are scheduled to be disbursed quarterly.

5. Loan Rates

0.1 percent per annum

6. Total Amount of Loans

500 billion yen

set separate from the 3 trillion yen ceiling in the existing framework

25


-----

7. Maximum Amount of Loans per Counterparty

(1) The maximum amount outstanding of loans to each counterparty

50 billion yen

set separate from the 150 billion yen ceiling in the existing framework

(2) The maximum amount to be lent to each counterparty at each loan disbursement

The amount outstanding of eligible equity investments and loans including ABL made

from April 2010

 There is no specific requirement with regard to the maturity of individual investments and

loans to be covered by the new credit line (The maturity of one year or more is required in

the existing framework). The requirement for the minimum amount per investment and

loan shall be one million yen, reduced from 10 million yen in the existing framework.

 As for the treatment of investment funds, counterparties shall be able to receive loans

from the Bank when they make investments to the funds, even if the details of investment

plans are undecided. Around one year after that, the Bank will check whether the funds

have made investments and, if not, counterparties must make repayments before maturity.

8. Deadline for Applications for New Loans

March 31, 2012

The last disbursement of new loans shall take place by June 30, 2012.

26


-----

**Scheduled Dates of Monetary Policy Meetings in July 2011-June 2012**


Attachment 3

June 14, 2011

Bank of Japan

(Reference)

Publication of


Publication of
Date of MPM

MPM Minutes


Publication of

Outlook Report

(The Bank's View)


Monthly Report


July 2011 11 (Mon.), 12 (Tues.) Aug. 10 (Wed.) -- 13 (Wed.)

Aug. 4 (Thurs.), 5 (Fri.) Sep. 12 (Mon.) -- 8 (Mon.)

Sep. 6 (Tues.), 7 (Wed.) Oct. 13 (Thurs.) -- 8 (Thurs.)

Oct. 6 (Thurs.), 7 (Fri.) Nov. 1 (Tues.) -- 11 (Tues.)

27 (Thurs.) Nov. 21 (Mon.) 27 (Thurs.) -
Nov. 15 (Tues.), 16 (Wed.) Dec. 27 (Tues.) -- 17 (Thurs.)

Dec. 20 (Tues.), 21 (Wed.) Jan. 27 (Fri.) -- 22 (Thurs.)

Jan. 2012 23 (Mon.), 24 (Tues.) Feb. 17 (Fri.) -- 25 (Wed.)

Feb. 13 (Mon.), 14 (Tues.) Mar. 16 (Fri.) -- 15 (Wed.)

Mar. 12 (Mon.), 13 (Tues.) Apr. 13 (Fri.) -- 14 (Wed.)

Apr. 9 (Mon.), 10 (Tues.) May 7 (Mon.) -- 11 (Wed.)

27 (Fri.) May 28 (Mon.) 27 (Fri.) -
May 22 (Tues.), 23 (Wed.) June 20 (Wed.) -- 24 (Thurs.)

June 14 (Thurs.), 15 (Fri.) To be announced -- 18 (Mon.)

Note: The time of release will be, in principle, as follows.
MPM Minutes will be released at 8:50 a.m.
_Outlook for Economic Activity and Prices (Outlook Report):_
"The Bank's View" in the Outlook Report will be released at 3:00 p.m., and the full text at 2:00 p.m. on the next
business day. As an exception to this principle, the full text of the _April 2012_ _Outlook Report will be released at 2:00_
p.m. on April 28 (Sat.), 2012.
_Monthly Report of Recent Economic and Financial Developments (Monthly Report):_
The Japanese original and the English translation for summary will be released at 2:00 p.m. (the English translation for
the full text will be published at 4:30 p.m. on the next business day).

27


-----

