Not to be released until 8:50 a.m.
Japan Standard Time on Friday,
February 18, 2011.

February 18, 2011

Bank of Japan

# Minutes of the Monetary Policy Meeting
## on January 24 and 25, 2011

(English translation prepared by the Bank's staff based on the Japanese original)


-----

Please contact the Bank of Japan at the address below in advance to request permission

when reproducing or copying the content of this document for commercial purposes.

Secretariat of the Policy Board, Bank of Japan

P.O. Box 30, Nihonbashi, Tokyo 103-8660, Japan

Please credit the source when quoting, reproducing, or copying the content of this

document.


-----

A Monetary Policy Meeting of the Bank of Japan Policy Board was held in the

Head Office of the Bank of Japan in Tokyo on Monday, January 24, 2011, from 2:00 p.m. to

4:31 p.m., and on Tuesday, January 25, from 9:02 a.m. to 12:24 p.m.[1]

**Policy Board Members Present**

**Mr. M. Shirakawa, Chairman, Governor of the Bank of Japan**

**Mr. H. Yamaguchi, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Japan**

**Mr. K. G. Nishimura, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Japan**

**Ms. M. Suda**

**Mr. T. Noda**

**Mr. S. Nakamura**

**Mr. H. Kamezaki**

**Mr. R. Miyao**

**Mr. Y. Morimoto**

Government Representatives Present

Mr. M. Sakurai, Senior Vice Minister of Finance, Ministry of Finance[2]

Mr. Y. Kinoshita, Deputy Vice Minister for Policy Planning and Coordination, Ministry

of Finance[3]

Mr. Y. Suematsu, Senior Vice Minister for Economic and Fiscal Policy, Cabinet Office[2]

Mr. K. Umetani, Director-General, Economic and Fiscal Management, Cabinet Office[3]

Reporting Staff

Mr. K. Yamamoto, Executive Director

Mr. H. Nakaso, Executive Director (Assistant Governor)

Mr. M. Amamiya, Executive Director

Mr. N. Kinoshita, Executive Director

1 The minutes of this meeting were approved by the Policy Board at the Monetary Policy Meeting
held on February 14 and 15, 2011 as "a document describing an outline of the discussion at the
meeting" stipulated in Article 20, paragraph 1 of the Bank of Japan Act of 1997. Those present are
referred to by their titles at the time of the meeting.
2 Messrs. M. Sakurai and Y. Suematsu were present on January 25.
3 Messrs. Y. Kinoshita and K. Umetani were present on January 24.

1


-----

Mr. S. Kushida, Director-General, Monetary Affairs Department

Mr. T. Kato, Head of Policy Planning Division, Monetary Affairs Department

Mr. H. Toyama, Director-General, Financial Markets Department

Mr. K. Momma, Director-General, Research and Statistics Department

Mr. T. Sekine, Head of Economic Research Division, Research and Statistics Department

Mr. H. Ono, Director-General, International Department

Secretariat of the Monetary Policy Meeting

Mr. Y. Iino, Director-General, Secretariat of the Policy Board

Mr. T. Tachibana, Director, Deputy Head of Planning and Coordination Division,

Secretariat of the Policy Board

Mr. A. Okuno, Senior Economist, Monetary Affairs Department

Mr. M. Minegishi, Senior Economist, Monetary Affairs Department

2


-----

**I. Summary of Staff Reports on Economic and Financial Developments[4]**

**A. Money Market Operations in the Intermeeting Period**

The Bank, in accordance with the guideline decided at the previous meeting on

December 20 and 21, 2010 and in consideration of the recent formation of market rates,

conducted money market operations in a flexible manner.[5] In the Bank's funds-supplying

operation, undersubscription had occurred, in that bids fell short of the Bank's offers. The

uncollateralized overnight call rate had been slightly below the 0.1 percent level.

**B. Recent Developments in Financial Markets**

Money market rates had been stable as a whole, against the background of the

Bank's provision of ample funds. General collateral (GC) repo rates had been stable at

around 0.1 percent. As for interest rates on term instruments, yields on treasury discount

bills (T-Bills) had decreased somewhat, and, including those with a one-year maturity, had

recently been in the range of 0.10-0.15 percent. Longer-term interbank rates had been

more or less unchanged.

Long-term interest rates in Japan had fallen temporarily -- as the rise in U.S.

long-term interest rates had paused and position adjustments made by investors had abated

-- and then increased somewhat; the benchmark rate had been in the range of 1.2-1.3

percent. Yield spreads between corporate bonds and Japanese government bonds (JGBs)

had been more or less flat at low levels. Stock prices had risen, partly due to the continued

purchases of Japanese stocks by foreign investors in a situation where U.S. stock prices

were steady, and the Nikkei 225 Stock Average had been at around 10,500 yen. In the

foreign exchange market, the yen, after appreciating to some extent against the U.S. dollar

during the period around the turn of the year, had depreciated somewhat and had recently

been in the range of 82-83 yen.

**C. Overseas Economic and Financial Developments**

The world economy had continued to recover.

The U.S. economy had continued to recover at a moderate pace. Exports were

4 Reports were made based on information available at the time of the meeting.
5 The guideline was as follows:
The Bank of Japan will encourage the uncollateralized overnight call rate to remain at
around 0 to 0.1 percent.

3


-----

continuing to increase and business fixed investment was rising moderately. Private

consumption had continued to increase, but the pace of recovery remained moderate as a

trend in a situation where the employment situation had not improved noticeably, as seen in

the high unemployment rate, for example. Housing investment remained at a depressed

level. As for prices, although the effects of the rise in international commodity prices had

been observed, the year-on-year rate of increase in the consumer price index (CPI) for all

items less energy and food, or the core CPI, had been moderating due to slack in supply and

demand conditions and a decline in unit labor costs.

Economic activity in the euro area as a whole was recovering moderately, with

some differences in pace by country. Exports had continued to increase, although the pace

was slowing, and domestic demand components such as private consumption had been

rising gradually. As for prices, although the effects of the earlier depreciation of the euro

and of the rise in international commodity prices had been observed, slack in supply and

demand conditions and slower growth in wages were exerting downward pressure on the

year-on-year rate of increase in the Harmonized Index of Consumer Prices (HICP)

excluding energy and unprocessed food. U.K. economic conditions were recovering at a

moderate pace.

The Chinese economy continued to show relatively high growth. Growth in

private consumption had been firm due mainly to households' higher income levels, and

fixed asset investment had continued to show high growth. Exports were on a rising trend,

and the pace of increase in production was accelerating again. Economic conditions in the

NIEs and the ASEAN countries had been on a recovery trend. As domestic and external

demand continued to be on an increasing trend, the shipment-inventory balance had

improved and the deceleration phase for production was coming to an end. The Indian

economy had also continued to grow at a relatively rapid pace. In many of these Asian

economies, upward pressure on prices had been increasing gradually due to higher food and

materials prices, reflecting the effects of the rise in international commodity prices and

greater utilization of production factors such as labor and capital.

As for global financial markets, although stock prices had weakened temporarily

due to uncertainty regarding fiscal problems in some peripheral European countries, stock

prices rose compared with the levels at the previous meeting due to the improvement in the

economic outlook and expectations for higher corporate profits. While long-term interest

4


-----

rates in the United States had been more or less unchanged, those in Germany had risen

somewhat compared with the levels at the previous meeting, reflecting further improvement

in economic sentiment. Although the yield spreads of government bonds issued by some

peripheral European countries over those issued by Germany remained unstable at high

levels, they had narrowed somewhat against the background of successful bond auctions,

partly reflecting expectations for a further support package by the European Union and for

an increase in the amount of purchases of government bonds by the European Central Bank.

**D. Economic and Financial Developments in Japan**

1. Economic developments

Exports had been somewhat weak. They were expected to increase moderately

again, reflecting the improvement in overseas economic conditions.

Public investment was declining, and this trend was likely to continue.

With regard to domestic private demand, business fixed investment had started to

pick up. Signs of picking up in business fixed investment were expected to gradually

become more evident as the improvement in corporate profits continued. However, with

firms' persistent sense of excessive capital stock, the pace of improvement in business fixed

investment was likely to remain moderate.

The employment and income situation had remained severe, but the degree of

severity had eased somewhat.

With regard to private consumption, demand for some goods had suffered a

reverse after the sharp increase seen previously. Private consumption was expected to

pick up again as the reverse following the sharp increase in demand became less

pronounced.

Housing investment was showing signs of picking up, and was expected to pick up

gradually, considering the number of housing starts.

Production had declined slightly, but was expected to resume a moderate

increasing trend.

As for prices, international commodity prices had increased. The three-month

rate of change in the domestic corporate goods price index (CGPI) was rising moderately,

mainly due to the increase in international commodity prices. The CGPI was expected to

remain on an uptrend for the time being, reflecting movements in international commodity

5


-----

prices. The CPI (excluding fresh food) was declining on a year-on-year basis due to the

substantial slack in the economy as a whole, but the slowing trend in the pace of decline had

continued. The year-on-year pace of decline in the CPI was likely to slow as a trend as the

aggregate supply and demand balance improved gradually.

2. Financial environment

Financial conditions had continued to ease further. The overnight call rate had

remained at an extremely low level, and the declining trend in firms' funding costs had

continued. While stimulative effects from low interest rates were still partly constrained

given current developments in economic activity and prices, such effects were beginning to

strengthen in light of improved corporate profits. With regard to credit supply, firms had

continued to see financial institutions' lending attitudes as improving. Issuing conditions

for CP and corporate bonds had become more favorable, as seen in an increased variety of

corporate bond issuers. As for credit demand, firms' need to fund working capital and

fixed investment had declined, and some firms had reduced the on-hand liquidity that they

had accumulated. Against this backdrop, bank lending had declined on a year-on-year

basis. On the other hand, the outstanding amount of corporate bonds had exceeded the

previous year's level, and the pace of decline in that of CP had been on a decelerating trend.

In these circumstances, firms' financial positions had been improving as a whole.

Meanwhile, the year-on-year rate of increase in the money stock had been in the range of

2.0-2.5 percent.

**II. Summary of Discussions by the Policy Board on Economic and Financial**

**Developments**

**A. Economic Developments**

Members discussed the economic and financial conditions abroad, and agreed that

overseas economies had continued to recover, led by high growth in emerging and

commodity-exporting economies, and that the growth rates of overseas economies had

started increasing again.

Members shared the view that the U.S. economy had continued to recover at a

moderate pace. Most members said that private consumption had been firm recently, as

seen in the moderate increase in car sales and the favorable year-end sales results. As

6


-----

background to this view, some members pointed to the wealth effects stemming from the

rise in stock prices. With regard to developments in the corporate sector, some members

commented that exports were continuing to increase, supported by demand from emerging

economies, and that business fixed investment was rising moderately. Many members

were of the view that concerns about the outlook for the U.S. economy had subsided

somewhat, as many economic indicators had been steady recently and policy actions such

as the Federal Reserve's further monetary easing measures and the U.S. government's

extension of tax cuts had been taken toward the 2010 year-end. However, many members

noted that the housing market remained sluggish and the employment and income situation

had not improved noticeably, as seen in the slow pace of increase in the number of

employees in the private sector and the high unemployment rate. Many members

expressed the view that improvement in the employment and income situation and a

repairing of balance sheets were vital to achieving a full-fledged recovery in consumption,

and therefore the pace of recovery in the U.S. economy would likely remain moderate for

the time being.

Members agreed that economic activity in the euro area as a whole was recovering

moderately, with some differences in pace by country. Many members pointed to the

favorable economic conditions, supported by exports in core countries in particular, such as

Germany. However, many members expressed the view that, due partly to the effects of

fiscal austerity, severe conditions continued in some peripheral countries that were facing

fiscal problems, and disparities between these peripheral countries and core countries were

becoming noticeable. One member was of the opinion that, amid the noticeable disparities

in the euro area, it was becoming increasingly difficult to conduct monetary policy for the

euro area as a whole.

Members concurred that the Chinese economy had continued to show relatively

high growth. Some members expressed the view that, amid a continued solid increase in

domestic demand, exports were on a rising trend and the pace of increase in production was

accelerating again, suggesting that China's growth rate had been accelerating again recently.

Most members expressed the opinion that, despite the rises in renminbi benchmark rates

and the reserve requirement ratio, the financial environment seemed to remain extremely

accommodative and inflationary pressure had not been contained sufficiently. On this

point, one member expressed the view that the effects of monetary easing in advanced

7


-----

economies had begun to spread through China as inflationary pressure under a relatively

inflexible foreign exchange rate regime.

Some members were of the opinion that the NIEs and the ASEAN economies had

begun to move out of the production adjustment phase, as the Purchasing Managers' Index

(PMI) for new export orders had recently shown some improvements and exports,

particularly to China, were rising again. In this situation, a few members expressed the

view that, like China, inflationary pressure had been increasing because the financial

environment in these economies remained extremely accommodative.

Most members were of the view that global financial markets had been stable as a

whole, on the back of improving market perceptions of the outlook for the U.S. economy,

but there was still instability in Europe due to the sovereign risk problem. One member

said that it would take some time for this problem to be solved, but that a worsening had

been curbed because a further deterioration in fiscal conditions in peripheral European

countries had been avoided and policy actions such as the establishment of the European

Financial Stability Facility had been taken. Nevertheless, some members said that market

participants were anxious about the large amount of government bonds due for redemption

in the spring in some countries. In relation to this, a few members expressed the view that,

if governments were forced to roll over at a higher interest rate, this could have a significant

influence on current plans to achieve sound public finance.

With regard to international commodity prices, members discussed the continuing

price rises in a wide range of items such as crude oil, nonferrous metals, and grain. As

background to the recent rise in international commodity prices, many members expressed

the view that this was in essence due to the increase in demand underpinned by growth in

emerging economies, while also pointing to temporary factors such as heightened concerns

about supply owing to adverse weather. In addition to the actual demand, a few members

expressed the view that the increase in the inflow of speculative funds to the commodity

markets was a factor behind the rise in commodity prices, amid financialization of

commodities and accommodative monetary conditions in advanced economies. In support

of this view, one member commented that the current phase showed the correlation between

stock prices and international commodity prices had become extremely high. Some

members were of the view that international commodity prices would continue to be on an

uptrend supported by demand in emerging economies, but at the same time were likely to

8


-----

continue to be highly volatile reflecting the increasing effects of the inflow of speculative

funds. One member expressed the view that, given these circumstances, it was important

to closely examine whether the rise in international commodity prices was in line with the

developments in economic fundamentals. One member said that, as a channel through

which the effects of monetary easing in advanced economies spread, the rise in commodity

prices -- leading to upswings in commodity-exporting economies and thereby influencing

business performance and stock prices of multinational companies operating in those

economies -- seemed to play not a small role.

Based on the above deliberations on economic and financial conditions abroad,

members discussed the state of Japan's economy. They concurred that the economy still

showed signs of a moderate recovery, but the recovery seemed to be pausing at present.

As for the outlook, however, members shared the view that Japan's economy was likely to

gradually overcome the deceleration in the pace of improvement and return to a moderate

recovery path. Many members raised the following as factors behind this outlook: (1)

exports were likely to increase moderately again as the growth rate of the global economy

was starting to increase again; and (2) the effects of the reverse following the sharp increase

in demand for cars on consumption and production would wane. Many members

expressed the view that it had become more likely that the economy would return to a

moderate recovery path. Regarding the timing of such a development, one member said

that -- although some uncertainty remained -- it could occur around the spring given that the

risk of a significant delay had subsided. One member also commented that, based on

anecdotal information from firms, it was quite possible to envisage the economy returning

to a moderate recovery path sometime during the January-March quarter of 2011.

Nevertheless, some members expressed the view that, even though the probability of the

economy returning to a moderate recovery path had increased, subsequent economic

developments remained uncertain.

Turning to developments in each demand component, members agreed that exports

had been somewhat weak due to the effects of the yen's appreciation to date, in addition to

developments in inventory adjustments in some IT-related goods. Nevertheless, regarding

the outlook, they shared the view that exports were likely to increase moderately again, as

the growth rate of the global economy was starting to increase again and inventory

adjustments in IT-related goods seemed to be making progress underpinned by steady final

9


-----

demand.

Members concurred that business fixed investment had started to pick up. They

agreed that signs of picking up in business fixed investment were likely to gradually

become more evident as the improvement in corporate profits continued, but the pace of

improvement in business fixed investment was likely to remain moderate with firms'

persistent sense of excessive capital stock.

Members shared the view that the employment and income situation had remained

severe, but the degree of severity had eased somewhat. In this situation, with regard to

private consumption, members agreed that demand for some goods such as cars had

suffered a reverse after the sharp increase seen previously. A few members, however, said

that domestic car sales had recovered somewhat at the 2010 year-end, and the effects of the

reverse following the sharp increase in demand were gradually becoming less pronounced.

A few members expressed the view that sales at retail stores, such as department stores, had

been firm, possibly reflecting the rise in stock prices. One member said that, although

there had been large fluctuations in consumption of durable consumer goods recently,

private consumption seemed to have been solid as a trend, considering that the year-on-year

rate of change in winter bonus payments appeared to have turned positive and stock prices

were rising. Members shared the view that private consumption was likely to pick up

again as the reverse following the sharp increase in demand became less pronounced. A

few members, however, expressed concern that the outlook for private consumption

remained highly uncertain, since demand in durable consumer goods had been partly

brought forward by various demand-boosting policy measures. Members shared the view

that housing investment was showing signs of picking up. One member commented that

construction starts of owner-occupied homes and houses for sale were increasing, due partly

to the effects of various measures to promote housing purchases.

Members agreed that production had declined slightly, partly because domestic car

sales, in light of the expiration of subsidies for purchasers of environmentally friendly cars,

had decreased following the sharp increase in a situation where exports had been weak.

They concurred that production was likely to resume a moderate increasing trend, as

exports were likely to increase moderately again and the effects of the reverse following the

sharp increase in demand for cars were likely to become less pronounced. On this point,

some members expressed the view that, based on developments in the production forecast

10


-----

index and anecdotal information from firms, there was an increasing probability of

production turning upward in the January-March quarter.

Members concurred that the CPI (excluding fresh food) was declining on a

year-on-year basis due to the substantial slack in the economy as a whole, but the slowing

trend in the pace of decline had continued and was likely to be maintained. Many

members raised the possibility that the effects of the recent rise in international commodity

prices would spill over to consumer prices. One member commented that it was likely that

the rise in international commodity prices would cause an increase in food and energy

prices, and that this in turn would affect prices of other goods and services through the

input-output structure of Japanese industries. On the other hand, some members expressed

the view that, even if the rise in international commodity prices were to be passed through

to prices of final consumer goods, the extent to which this could be done was likely to be

limited given the prolonged substantial slack in the economy as a whole. Some members

said that they continued to hold a cautious view regarding the momentum in terms of

bringing the inflation rate closer to the level of medium- to long-term inflation expectations.

As background to this view, one member commented that the slope of the Phillips curve

had become more flat and the labor share would likely remain at a low level as a trend.

**B. Financial Developments**

Members shared the view that financial conditions had continued to ease further.

A few members expressed the view that, considering the present financial conditions as a

whole, there were areas that could be judged as having already reached the state of being

accommodative and those that still could not be described as accommodative. They

continued that the latter nevertheless had been improving and were closer to becoming

accommodative. On this point, one member expressed the view that financial conditions

overall had continued to ease further, although there remained areas that could not be

described as accommodative, as the stimulative effects from low interest rates were still

constrained, given current developments in prices, and financial conditions for some small

firms continued to be severe. Many members said that the money market had been stable

against the background of the Bank's provision of more ample funds. Some members

were of the view that Japanese long-term interest rates, while rising somewhat toward the

2010 year-end, had been regaining stability in a situation where U.S. long-term interest rates

11


-----

had been more or less unchanged. A few members pointed to the possibility that the rise

in stock prices and pause in the appreciation of the yen were positively affecting business

sentiment. Some members commented that it was necessary to carefully examine the

effects on small firms' funding conditions of the expiration of the emergency guarantee

program, scheduled at the end of March 2011.

**C. Interim Assessment**

Given the above assessment of recent developments, members agreed that,

compared with the projections presented in the October 2010 Outlook for Economic Activity

_and Prices (hereafter the Outlook Report), growth prospects would likely be higher for_

fiscal 2010, mainly due to (1) a larger carry-over effect from fiscal 2009 on GDP growth for

fiscal 2010 reflecting the revision of past GDP statistics and (2) somewhat stronger GDP

figures for the first half of fiscal 2010, but remain broadly unchanged from the October

projections for fiscal 2011 and 2012.

With regard to prices, members concurred that the year-on-year rates of change in

the CGPI and the CPI (excluding fresh food) would likely be somewhat higher in fiscal

2011, mainly due to the rise in international commodity prices, but broadly in line with the

October projections for fiscal 2012. One member, however, added that the extent of the

upward revision in the CPI forecast for fiscal 2011 was marginal, and therefore this upward

revision should not be overly emphasized at this point given the high uncertainty about the

outlook.

Regarding risks for economic activity, many members expressed the view that

upside and downside risks were broadly balanced. Most members pointed to some upside

risks, such as faster growth in emerging and commodity-exporting economies due to robust

domestic demand and capital inflows from overseas. Many members were of the opinion

that attention should continue to be paid to an upside risk of faster growth in emerging

economies in the short term, but also to a risk in the longer term that a delay in the

implementation of monetary tightening measures would aggravate the swings in economic

activity and consequently undermine the sustainable growth of these economies.

Most members cited future developments in advanced economies as downside

risks. As for the U.S. economy, many members expressed the view that, although

concerns about the outlook for the economy had subsided, economic activity still looked

12


-----

unlikely to accelerate and remained vulnerable to the downside due to the downward

pressure from balance-sheet adjustments. A few members noted that, given that the

economy continued to be burdened with balance-sheet adjustments, the prevailing view

among market participants about the economic outlook might be somewhat too optimistic,

as had been the case in the first half of 2010. A few members said that, since market views

regarding the outlook for the U.S. economy would likely continue to fluctuate between

optimism and pessimism, due attention should continue to be paid to the effects on Japan's

economy of future developments in U.S. economic activity, and of the associated changes in

U.S. long-term interest rates and foreign exchange rates as well as market sentiment.

Regarding European economies, many members said that risks had relatively increased.

Some members expressed the opinion that due attention should be paid to the possibility

that further intensification of the sovereign risk problem would bring about more severe

fiscal austerity and instability in the financial system, thereby exerting downward pressure

on economic activity and causing an adverse feedback loop among fiscal conditions, the

financial system, and the real economy. A few members expressed the view that, if global

financial markets and the financial system became unstable, triggered by the intensification

of the sovereign risk problem, the adverse effects of such instability would spill over to

Japan's economy to a considerable extent. One member expressed the view that the

market's perception of Japan's fiscal problem warranted attention. A few members were of

the opinion that attention should also be paid to the possibility that a continued rise in

international commodity prices would have negative effects on Japanese firms' profits

through a deterioration in the terms of trade. However, one member said that, if the

further rise in international commodity prices had been caused by faster growth in emerging

and commodity-exporting economies, this would have positive effects on Japan's economy

-- for example, an increase in exports. A different member added that the recent slight

appreciation of the yen would partly offset the adverse impact from the rise in international

commodity prices on Japan's terms of trade. One member expressed the opinion that there

was a risk that the rise in international commodity prices might increase protectionist

actions, such as the imposing of export restrictions by commodity-exporting economies.

As for risks to the outlook for prices, many members said that there was a

possibility that inflation would rise more than expected if international commodity prices

increased further due to high growth rates in emerging economies, while there was also a

13


-----

risk that the rate of inflation would deviate downward from the Bank's baseline scenario due,

for example, to a decline in medium- to long-term inflation expectations. Regarding the

latter risk, a few members referred to the Bank's December 2010 _Opinion Survey on the_

_General Public's Views and Behavior, which suggested that households' inflation_

expectations for the next five years had decreased slightly from the September survey, and

said that future developments in the public's inflation expectations warranted more careful

examination. Many members commented on the revision of the base year for the CPI,

which was scheduled to take place in summer 2011. Some members expressed the view

that the Bank should examine price developments by acknowledging the likelihood that the

year-on-year rate of change in the CPI would be revised downward due to the revision of

the base year. A few members expressed the opinion that the revision was merely a

technical change, and it was more important to carefully examine changes in the aggregate

supply and demand balance in order to determine whether there were any prospects for

Japan's economy to overcome deflation. A few members were of the view that, if a

downward revision of the year-on-year rate of change in the CPI did happen due to the

revision of the base year for the CPI, attention needed to be paid to whether such a revision

affected the inflation expectations of economic entities.

**III. Summary of Discussions on Monetary Policy for the Immediate Future**

Regarding the guideline for money market operations for the intermeeting period

ahead, members agreed that, given the above assessment of economic activity and prices, it

was appropriate to maintain the current guideline that the Bank would encourage the

uncollateralized overnight call rate to remain at around 0 to 0.1 percent.

As for the future conduct of monetary policy, members concurred that, in order for

Japan's economy to overcome deflation and return to a sustainable growth path with price

stability, it was necessary that the Bank continue to consistently make contributions as the

central bank through the three-pronged approach of pursuing powerful monetary easing

consisting of comprehensive monetary easing, ensuring financial market stability, and

providing support to strengthen the foundations for economic growth. They also agreed

that the Bank would continue to carefully examine the outlook for economic activity and

prices, and take policy actions in an appropriate manner.

Members discussed the effects of the Bank's comprehensive monetary easing. As

14


-----

for the effects of encouraging a decline in risk premiums, many members cited the

narrowing of credit spreads on corporate bonds and the increase in prices for Japan real

estate investment trusts (J-REITs). Adding to this, some members expressed the opinion

that the comprehensive monetary easing had been acting as a catalyst for an increase in the

transaction volume of J-REITs and exchange-traded funds (ETFs), and for an increasing

variety of corporate bond issuers. With regard to the effects of encouraging a decline in

longer-term interest rates, one member expressed the view that the effects of the

comprehensive monetary easing were difficult to see at present given that the level of

long-term interest rates had risen somewhat. This member continued, however, that since

the degree of the rise in Japanese long-term interest rates -- even amid the rise in stock

prices -- was marginal compared with that in U.S. and European long-term interest rates, the

comprehensive monetary easing had been effective in constraining the rise in interest rates.

In relation to one of the purposes of the policy -- that is, to influence longer-term interest

rates -- some members were of the view that it was important for the Bank to secure market

confidence in its policy time horizon, and in doing so, explain consistently to the public that

it would maintain the virtually zero interest rate policy until it judged that price stability was

in sight. One member expressed the opinion that, since the Bank had taken a step to

implement extraordinary measures as the central bank, the public was gradually becoming

more aware of a long-term downtrend in the growth potential, which was the fundamental

problem facing Japan's economy, and this was broadly considered one of the policy effects.

A few members, while acknowledging that it was important for the Bank to continue

conducting money market operations in a flexible manner in response to changes in the

market situation, commented that the guideline for money market operations was decided at

Monetary Policy Meetings, and that the Bank's communication regarding its conduct of

monetary policy was not made through the daily market operations or the changes in the

outstanding balance of current accounts at the Bank.

**IV. Remarks by Government Representatives**

The representative from the Ministry of Finance made the following remarks.

(1) Although economic movements in Japan appeared to be pausing, there were some

movements toward a pick-up. However, the situation remained difficult, as evidenced

by the high unemployment rate, and there was also a risk that the economy might be

15


-----

depressed by a possible slowdown in overseas economies as well as fluctuations in

global financial markets. It should also be noted that there was still a risk of deflation

adversely influencing the economy and a concern about a possible deterioration of the

employment situation.

(2) Based on the "Three-Step Economic Measures for the Realization of the New Growth

Strategy" (hereafter "Three-Step Economic Measures"), the government -- in order to

seamlessly implement the third step, comprising mainly the budget for fiscal 2011,

which placed emphasis on economic growth and employment -- had submitted the

budget to the Diet on January 24. The government would work to promptly obtain the

Diet's approval of the budget.

(3) In order to achieve economic growth in the international community, it was important

for Japan to tap the increasingly vigorous growth of Asia, for example. The

government would promote mutual efforts by the public and private sectors toward

encouraging overseas developments in infrastructure-related business, as well as

strengthen the functions of the Japan Bank for International Cooperation. The

government would also work to support small firms seeking to develop their overseas

business.

(4) Restoring fiscal health had become a critical challenge, and therefore the government -
in line with the measures set forth in the "Fiscal Management Strategy" -- would

continue to work on halving the primary balance deficit relative to GDP by fiscal 2015

and achieving a surplus by fiscal 2020. With regard to the basic policy on reform of

the social security system decided by the Cabinet in December 2010, the government

would conduct an examination in an integrated manner on the reform of the social

security system as well as that of the tax system, in which it would simultaneously

manage to secure the necessary fiscal resources for the social security reform and

restore fiscal health. Together with the timetable for these reforms, the government

would formulate a concrete plan by the middle of 2011, aim to secure public consensus,

and subsequently carry out these reforms.

(5) The government expected that the Bank would conduct money market operations, with

consideration given to firms' concerns about their funding conditions toward the fiscal

year-end, and support the economy from the financial side by continuing to actively

16


-----

conduct monetary policy in an appropriate and flexible manner while keeping close

contact with the government.

The representative from the Cabinet Office made the following remarks.

(1) In the "Fiscal 2011 Economic Outlook and Basic Stance for Economic and Fiscal

Management," which was decided by the Cabinet on January 24, the Japanese economy

was expected to pick up in fiscal 2011 amid expectations of a modest recovery of the

world economy. Real and nominal GDP growth rates were expected to be around 1.5

and 1.0 percent, respectively, while the rate of increase in the CPI was forecasted to be

approximately 0.0 percent.

(2) The Japanese economy remained in a difficult situation. As for risks to the outlook,

attention should be paid to a possible slowdown in overseas economies and movements

in the foreign exchange markets.

(3) In order for the Japanese economy to emerge from its current economic pause, and to

ensure the overcoming of deflation as well as secure steps toward economic recovery,

the present period is crucial. Therefore, based on the "Three-Step Economic

Measures," the government had been supporting the economy from both the economic

and employment sides by implementing the first and the second steps. It would

continue to further promote these economic measures and work to seamlessly

implement the third step, comprising largely the budget and the tax-system revision for

fiscal 2011, which placed emphasis on economic growth and employment. The

government would also work toward overcoming deflation, as set out in the "New

Growth Strategy," by making the CPI inflation rate positive by the end of fiscal 2011

and quickly achieving a stable positive inflation rate.

(4) The Bank's interim assessment of the October 2010 Outlook Report was discussed at

this meeting, and the government deemed that the Bank and the government broadly

shared the same view on current economic conditions. It expected the Bank to

continue to aim at overcoming deflation swiftly and underpin the economy, by

conducting monetary policy in an appropriate and flexible manner while sufficiently

exchanging views and working closely with the government.

17


-----

**V. Votes**

Based on the above discussions, members shared the view that it was appropriate

to maintain the current guideline for money market operations, which encouraged the

uncollateralized overnight call rate to remain at around 0 to 0.1 percent.

To reflect this view, the chairman formulated the following proposal and put it to a

vote.

**The Chairman's Policy Proposal on the Guideline for Money Market Operations:**

1. The guideline for money market operations for the intermeeting period ahead will be as

follows.

The Bank of Japan will encourage the uncollateralized overnight call rate

to remain at around 0 to 0.1 percent.

2. A public statement will be decided separately.

Votes for the proposal: Mr. M. Shirakawa, Mr. H. Yamaguchi, Mr. K. G. Nishimura,

Ms. M. Suda, Mr. T. Noda, Mr. S. Nakamura, Mr. H. Kamezaki, Mr. R. Miyao, and

Mr. Y. Morimoto.

Votes against the proposal: None.

**VI. Discussion on the Statement on Monetary Policy**

Members discussed the Statement on Monetary Policy, and put it to a vote. The

Policy Board decided the text by a unanimous vote. It was confirmed that the statement

would be released immediately after the meeting (see Attachment).

**VII. Approval of the Minutes of the Monetary Policy Meeting**

The Policy Board approved unanimously the minutes of the Monetary Policy

Meeting of December 20 and 21, 2010 for release on January 28, 2011.

18


-----

Attachment

January 25, 2011

Bank of Japan

**Statement on Monetary Policy**

1. At the Monetary Policy Meeting held today, the Policy Board of the Bank of Japan

decided, by a unanimous vote,[6] to set the following guideline for money market

operations for the intermeeting period:

The Bank of Japan will encourage the uncollateralized overnight call rate

to remain at around 0 to 0.1 percent.

2. Japan's economy still shows signs of a moderate recovery, but the recovery seems to be

pausing. Business fixed investment has started to pick up. The employment and

income situation has remained severe, but the degree of severity has eased somewhat.

As for private consumption, demand for some goods has suffered a reverse after the

sharp increase seen previously. Housing investment is showing signs of picking up.

On the other hand, exports have been somewhat weak. With these developments in

demand both at home and abroad, production has declined slightly. Meanwhile,

financial conditions have continued to ease further. The CPI (excluding fresh food) is

declining on a year-on-year basis due to the substantial slack in the economy as a whole,

but the slowing trend in the pace of decline has continued.

3. The Bank's baseline scenario projects that Japan's economy is expected to gradually

overcome the deceleration in the pace of improvement and return to a moderate

6 Voting for the action: Mr. M. Shirakawa, Mr. H. Yamaguchi, Mr. K. G. Nishimura, Ms. M. Suda,
Mr. T. Noda, Mr. S. Nakamura, Mr. H. Kamezaki, Mr. R. Miyao, and Mr. Y. Morimoto.
Voting against the action: None.

19


-----

recovery path as the growth rate of the global economy is likely to start increasing

again led by emerging and commodity-exporting economies. As for prices, the

year-on-year rate of decline in the CPI is expected to continue slowing.

4. Compared with the projections presented in the October 2010 _Outlook for Economic_

_Activity and Prices, growth prospects will likely be higher for fiscal 2010 mainly due to_

the revision of past GDP statistics, but remain broadly unchanged for fiscal 2011 and

2012. With regard to prices, the year-on-year rates of change in the domestic

corporate goods price index and the CPI (excluding fresh food) will likely be somewhat

higher in fiscal 2011 mainly due to the rise in commodity prices, but broadly in line

with the October projections for fiscal 2012.

5. In the area of economic activity, there are some upside risks such as faster growth in

emerging and commodity-exporting economies due to robust domestic demand and

capital inflows from overseas. However, although concerns about the U.S. economy

have subsided, there are downside risks associated with uncertainties about the outlook

for the U.S. and European economies and developments in global financial markets.

Regarding the outlook for prices, there is a possibility that inflation will rise more than

expected if commodity prices increase further due to high growth rates in emerging and

commodity-exporting economies, while there is also a risk that the rate of inflation will

deviate downward from the Bank's baseline scenario due, for example, to a decline in

medium- to long-term inflation expectations.

6. In order for Japan's economy to overcome deflation and return to a sustainable growth

path with price stability, the Bank will continue to consistently make contributions as

the central bank through the three-pronged approach of pursuing powerful monetary

easing consisting of comprehensive monetary easing, ensuring financial market

stability, and providing support to strengthen the foundations for economic growth.

The Bank will continue to carefully examine the outlook for economic activity and

prices, and take policy actions in an appropriate manner.

20


-----

Appendix 1

**Forecasts of the Majority of Policy Board Members**
y/y % chg.

Real GDP Domestic CGPI CPI (excluding fresh food)

+3.3 to +3.4 +0.5 to +0.6 -0.4 to -0.3
Fiscal 2010

[+3.3] [+0.5] [-0.3]

Forecasts made in +2.0 to +2.3 +0.7 to +0.9 -0.5 to -0.3
October 2010 [+2.1] [+0.9] [-0.4]

+1.4 to +1.7 +0.7 to +1.2 0.0 to +0.4
Fiscal 2011

[+1.6] [+1.0] [+0.3]

Forecasts made in +1.5 to +1.9 +0.4 to +0.7 0.0 to +0.3
October 2010 [+1.8] [+0.5] [+0.1]

+1.9 to +2.2 +0.5 to +0.8 +0.2 to +0.8
Fiscal 2012

[+2.0] [+0.7] [+0.6]

Forecasts made in +2.0 to +2.4 +0.3 to +0.8 +0.2 to +0.8
October 2010 [+2.1] [+0.6] [+0.6]

Notes: 1. Figures in brackets indicate the median of the Policy Board members' forecasts (point estimates).
2. The forecasts of the majority of the Policy Board members are constructed as follows: each Policy
Board member's forecast takes the form of a point estimate, namely, the figure to which he or she
attaches the highest probability of realization. These forecasts are then shown as a range, with
the highest figure and the lowest figure excluded. The range does not indicate the forecast
errors.
3. Individual Policy Board members make their forecasts with reference to the view of market
participants regarding the future course of the policy interest rate -- a view that is incorporated in
market interest rates.
4. The revised forecasts for real GDP in fiscal 2010 are largely attributable to the revision of past
GDP statistics.
5. The CPI forecasts for fiscal 2010 exclude the effects of subsidies for high school tuition, a factor
that will significantly push down the year-on-year rate of change in the index for twelve months.
This measure is estimated to push down the CPI (excluding fresh food) by about 0.5 percentage
points.
6. The CPI forecasts are predicated on the 2005-base CPI. The statistics authority has announced
that the base year for the CPI is scheduled to be changed to 2010 in August 2011, and
year-on-year figures as far back as January 2011 are scheduled to be revised retroactively. This
rebasing is likely to cause the year-on-year rate of increase in the CPI to be revised downward.
7. The range shown below includes the forecasts of all Policy Board members.
y/y % chg.

Real GDP Domestic CGPI CPI (excluding fresh food)

Fiscal 2010 +3.2 to +3.5 +0.4 to +0.6 -0.4 to -0.2

Forecasts made in
+2.0 to +2.3 +0.5 to +0.9 -0.5 to -0.2
October 2010

Fiscal 2011 +1.4 to +1.8 +0.6 to +1.2 -0.1 to +0.4

Forecasts made in
+1.5 to +1.9 +0.4 to +1.0 -0.2 to +0.4
October 2010

Fiscal 2012 +1.8 to +2.4 +0.3 to +1.0 0.0 to +0.8

Forecasts made in
+2.0 to +2.4 +0.3 to +1.0 0.0 to +0.8
October 2010

21

|Col1|Col2|Col3|Col4|y/y % chg.|
|---|---|---|---|---|
|||Real GDP|Domestic CGPI|CPI (excluding fresh food)|
|Fiscal 2010 Forecasts made in October 2010||+3.3 to +3.4 [+3.3]|+0.5 to +0.6 [+0.5]|-0.4 to -0.3 [-0.3]|
||Forecasts made in October 2010|+2.0 to +2.3 [+2.1]|+0.7 to +0.9 [+0.9]|-0.5 to -0.3 [-0.4]|
|Fiscal 2011 Forecasts made in October 2010||+1.4 to +1.7 [+1.6]|+0.7 to +1.2 [+1.0]|0.0 to +0.4 [+0.3]|
||Forecasts made in October 2010|+1.5 to +1.9 [+1.8]|+0.4 to +0.7 [+0.5]|0.0 to +0.3 [+0.1]|
|Fiscal 2012 Forecasts made in October 2010||+1.9 to +2.2 [+2.0]|+0.5 to +0.8 [+0.7]|+0.2 to +0.8 [+0.6]|
||Forecasts made in October 2010|+2.0 to +2.4 [+2.1]|+0.3 to +0.8 [+0.6]|+0.2 to +0.8 [+0.6]|

|Col1|Col2|Col3|Col4|y/y % chg.|
|---|---|---|---|---|
|||Real GDP|Domestic CGPI|CPI (excluding fresh food)|
|Fiscal 2010 Forecasts made in October 2010||+3.2 to +3.5|+0.4 to +0.6|-0.4 to -0.2|
||Forecasts made in October 2010|+2.0 to +2.3|+0.5 to +0.9|-0.5 to -0.2|
|Fiscal 2011 Forecasts made in October 2010||+1.4 to +1.8|+0.6 to +1.2|-0.1 to +0.4|
||Forecasts made in October 2010|+1.5 to +1.9|+0.4 to +1.0|-0.2 to +0.4|
|Fiscal 2012 Forecasts made in October 2010||+1.8 to +2.4|+0.3 to +1.0|0.0 to +0.8|
||Forecasts made in October 2010|+2.0 to +2.4|+0.3 to +1.0|0.0 to +0.8|


-----

Appendix 2
### Risk Balance Charts

(1) Real GDP (2) CPI (Excluding Fresh Food)
FY2010 FY2010


50

45

40

35

30

25

20

15

10

5

0


0

FY2011 FY2011


30

|Col1|Col2|30 25 20 15 10 5|Col4|
|---|---|---|---|


50

45

40

35

30

25

20

15

10

5

0

|Col1|30 25 20 15 10 5|Col3|
|---|---|---|


0

FY2012 FY2012


30


50

45

40

35

30

25

20

15

10

5

0


30

25

20

15

10

5

0

Notes: 1. Vertical axes in the charts represent probability (%), while horizontal axes represent the year-on-year percentage
changes in the respective indicators. Bar charts represent the probability distributions in January 2011, and
solid lines represent those in October 2010.
2. Vertical dashed heavy lines indicate the median of the Policy Board members' forecasts (point estimates).
indicates the range of the forecasts of the majority of Policy Board members.           indicates
the range of the forecasts of all Policy Board members.
3. Vertical dashed thin lines indicate the median of the Policy Board members' forecasts (point estimates) in October 2010.
4. For the process of compilation of the Risk Balance Charts, see the box on page 9 of the April 2008 Outlook for
_Economic Activity and Prices._

|Col1|Col2|30 25 20 15 10 5|Col4|
|---|---|---|---|


22


-----

