Not to be released until 8:50 a.m.
Japan Standard Time on Monday,
November 21, 2011.

November 21, 2011

Bank of Japan

# Minutes of the Monetary Policy Meeting
## on October 27, 2011

(English translation prepared by the Bank's staff based on the Japanese original)


-----

Please contact the Bank of Japan at the address below in advance to request permission

when reproducing or copying the content of this document for commercial purposes.

Secretariat of the Policy Board, Bank of Japan

P.O. Box 30, Nihonbashi, Tokyo 103-8660, Japan

Please credit the source when quoting, reproducing, or copying the content of this

document.


-----

A Monetary Policy Meeting of the Bank of Japan Policy Board was held in the

Head Office of the Bank of Japan in Tokyo on Thursday, October 27, 2011, from 9:00 a.m.

to 1:26 p.m.[1]

**Policy Board Members Present**

**Mr. M. Shirakawa, Chairman, Governor of the Bank of Japan**

**Mr. H. Yamaguchi, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Japan**

**Mr. K. G. Nishimura, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Japan**

**Mr. S. Nakamura**

**Mr. H. Kamezaki**

**Mr. R. Miyao**

**Mr. Y. Morimoto**

**Ms. S. Shirai**

**Mr. K. Ishida**

Government Representatives Present

Mr. Y. Fujita, Senior Vice Minister of Finance, Ministry of Finance

Mr. H. Ogushi, Parliamentary Secretary of Cabinet Office, Cabinet Office

Reporting Staff

Mr. K. Yamamoto, Executive Director

Mr. H. Nakaso, Executive Director (Assistant Governor)

Mr. M. Amamiya, Executive Director

Mr. N. Kinoshita, Executive Director

Mr. K. Momma, Director-General, Monetary Affairs Department

Mr. T. Umemori, Deputy Director-General, Monetary Affairs Department

Mr. K. Kamiyama, Head of Policy Planning Division, Monetary Affairs Department

Mr. S. Aoki, Director-General, Financial Markets Department

Mr. E. Maeda, Director-General, Research and Statistics Department

1 The minutes of this meeting were approved by the Policy Board at the Monetary Policy Meeting
held on November 15 and 16, 2011 as "a document describing an outline of the discussion at the
meeting" stipulated in Article 20, paragraph 1 of the Bank of Japan Act of 1997. Those present are
referred to by their titles at the time of the meeting.

1


-----

Mr. T. Sekine, Head of Economic Research Division, Research and Statistics Department

Mr. H. Ono, Director-General, International Department

Secretariat of the Monetary Policy Meeting

Mr. Y. Iino, Director-General, Secretariat of the Policy Board

Mr. T. Tachibana, Director, Deputy Head of Planning and Coordination Division,

Secretariat of the Policy Board

Mr. H. Chida, Head of Policy Infrastructure Division, Monetary Affairs Department

Mr. M. Minegishi, Senior Economist, Monetary Affairs Department

Mr. T. Kawamoto, Senior Economist, Monetary Affairs Department

2


-----

**I. Summary of Staff Reports on Economic and Financial Developments[2]**

**A. Money Market Operations in the Intermeeting Period**

The Bank, in accordance with the guideline decided at the previous meeting on

October 6 and 7, 2011, had been providing ample funds sufficient to meet demand in

financial markets and was doing its utmost to ensure stability in the markets.[3] In this

situation, the uncollateralized overnight call rate had been in the range of 0.075 to around

0.095 percent.

**B. Recent Developments in Financial Markets**

Money market rates had been stable amid the Bank's provision of ample funds.

General collateral (GC) repo rates had been at around 0.1 percent. As for interest rates on

term instruments, yields on treasury discount bills (T-Bills) had been stable at around 0.1

percent on the whole, although those with longer maturities in particular rose marginally in

some instances. Rates on longer-term interbank instruments had been more or less

unchanged.

The benchmark long-term interest rate had been at around 1.0 percent. Japanese

stock prices rose reflecting a rebound in U.S. and European stock prices, and the Nikkei 225

Stock Average had recently been in the range of 8,500-9,000 yen. In the foreign exchange

market, while the interest rate differential between Japan and the United States had widened

somewhat, the yen had generally moved within a narrow range against the U.S. dollar as

market participants paid heed to yen-buying by Japanese exporters. It had recently been in

the range of 76-77 yen to the dollar.

**C. Overseas Economic and Financial Developments**

The world economy continued to recover, but the pace of recovery was slowing.

The U.S. economy continued to recover, but the pace of recovery remained only

moderate. In a situation where balance-sheet adjustments were weighing on it, private

consumption continued to improve at only a moderate pace, reflecting a slowdown in the

improvement in the employment situation and a deterioration in household sentiment.

2 Reports were made based on information available at the time of the meeting.
3 The guideline was as follows:
The Bank of Japan will encourage the uncollateralized overnight call rate to remain at
around 0 to 0.1 percent.

3


-----

Housing investment remained at a depressed level with housing prices exhibiting weakness.

On the other hand, exports and business fixed investment rose moderately. In this

situation, production remained on an increasing trend. As for prices, although slack in

supply and demand conditions in the goods and labor markets continued to exert downward

pressure on prices, factors such as the earlier rise in international commodity prices

continued to push up inflation rates.

The level of economic activity in the euro area was more or less unchanged.

Growth in exports was sluggish owing to the deceleration in the pace of recovery of the

world economy, and private consumption was more or less unchanged. A deterioration in

consumer sentiment had also spread to major countries such as Germany due to the

worsening of the sovereign debt problems in Europe. Under these circumstances, the rate

of increase in production was decelerating. As for prices, slack in supply and demand

conditions, as well as the slow growth in wages, continued to exert downward pressure on

prices, while there was inflationary pressure from the rise in prices of, for example,

processed food. Meanwhile, the level of economic activity in the United Kingdom was

also more or less unchanged.

With regard to Asia, the Chinese economy continued to show high growth as a

whole. Although the rate of increase in exports was slowing somewhat and that in private

consumption was decelerating to some extent, due in part to the effects of the rise in prices,

fixed asset investment maintained high growth. The Indian economy also continued to

grow at a relatively rapid pace, although its growth rate had decelerated somewhat recently.

Economic conditions in the NIEs and the ASEAN countries continued to recover since

domestic demand was firm and exports and production were increasing, albeit moderately.

In many of these Asian economies, inflationary pressure continued to be strong, reflecting

the earlier rise in food and materials prices and the higher wage inflation due to tight labor

market conditions.

As for global financial markets, U.S. and European stock prices were rising mainly

because risk aversion among investors had moderated somewhat following a

comprehensive set of measures by the European Union to address the sovereign debt

problems in the region, and because a relatively large number of U.S. economic indicators

turned out to be better than expected. With regard to the credit market, yield spreads

between corporate bonds and government bonds had narrowed slightly. On the other hand,

4


-----

the yield spreads of government bonds issued by European countries over those issued by

Germany remained at elevated levels, partly due to the effects of the downgrading of some

government bonds and financial institutions in the region, amid concerns about an adverse

feedback loop between the fiscal situation and the financial system. As for the interbank

market, interest rates on term instruments had been at high levels, reflecting continued

concerns over counterparty risk. Regarding financial markets in emerging economies,

stock prices rose and currencies stopped depreciating as capital outflow paused with

investors' preference for safe assets easing somewhat.

**D. Economic and Financial Developments in Japan**

1. Economic developments

Japan's economic activity continued picking up. At the same time, however,

improvement in business sentiment seemed to be pausing, mainly due to an adverse effect

from a slowdown in overseas economies and the appreciation of the yen.

Public investment had almost stopped declining recently, as seen in the fact that

the value of contracted public works -- an indicator of the amount of public works orders -
had increased for two consecutive months.

Exports moved up marginally in July and August on a month-on-month basis,

followed by a large increase in September, particularly in those of motor vehicles and

related goods. In the July-September quarter, exports registered a substantial increase of

8.7 percent from the previous quarter.

The damage caused by the flooding in Thailand had been spreading to Japanese

firms' factories in the country. Although it was difficult to judge at present how this

damage would affect Japan's economy, attention should be paid to future developments as it

could reduce the consolidated profits of Japanese firms as well as Japan's exports and

production in the short term.

With regard to business fixed investment, machinery orders -- a leading indicator

of machinery investment -- remained on an increasing trend in the July-August period, as in

the April-June quarter.

With regard to private consumption, sales at department stores and chain stores

declined somewhat in September from the previous month, due to adverse weather

conditions such as typhoons. On the other hand, outlays for travel increased substantially

5


-----

in August, recovering to their pre-quake levels, while the pace of recovery had been

sluggish following the quake-induced plunge.

As for prices, international commodity prices had declined. The three-month rate

of change in the domestic corporate goods price index (CGPI) showed that it had been

somewhat weak, due in part to movements in international commodity prices and the effects

of the yen's appreciation. The CGPI was expected to remain somewhat weak for the time

being. The year-on-year rate of decline in the corporate services price index (CSPI) for all

items excluding international transportation tended to slow, reflecting improvement in

corporate activity from a relatively long-term perspective.

2. Financial environment

Financial conditions continued to ease, albeit with weakness still being observed in

the financial positions of some firms, mainly small ones.

The overnight call rate remained at an extremely low level and firms' funding costs

declined moderately. Issuing conditions for CP and corporate bonds continued to be

favorable. With regard to firms' funding conditions, the pace of decline in bank lending

tended to be slowing. Firms continued to see financial institutions' lending attitudes as

being on an improving trend, and financial institutions also maintained a positive stance on

lending. Firms retained their recovered financial positions on the whole, albeit with

weakness still being observed at some firms, mainly small ones.

**II. Summary of Discussions by the Policy Board on Economic and Financial**

**Developments and the October 2011 Outlook for Economic Activity and Prices**

**A. Economic Developments**

Members agreed that, although actions had been initiated to promote financial

system stability in Europe, global financial markets continued to come under stress against

the backdrop of remaining uncertainty about the implementation of such measures. Many

members expressed the view that the sovereign debt problems in Europe -- which were

spreading to large-scale economies such as Spain and Italy -- had caused a deterioration in

the funding conditions of European financial institutions, and therefore concerns over the

European financial system as a whole were intensifying further. Some members noted that

risk aversion among global investors persisted and the yen remained susceptible to upward

6


-----

pressure, as it was considered a relatively safe currency. Members shared the view that, in

order to fully resolve the sovereign debt problems in Europe, the countries concerned

should make steady progress with fiscal consolidation by making adjustments to their

revenues and expenditures, and tackle structural reforms that would raise the medium- to

long-term growth potential of these economies by, for example, enhancing industrial

competitiveness. They also recognized that this would take a long time.

Regarding the economic conditions abroad, members agreed that, although the

pace of growth had moderated, particularly in advanced economies, overseas economies as

a whole continued to be on a modest recovery trend, led by relatively strong growth in

emerging and commodity-exporting economies. As for the outlook, they shared the view

that the growth pace of overseas economies, especially that of advanced economies, was

likely to remain slow for the time being against a backdrop of continued global financial

strains but subsequently pick up led by emerging and commodity-exporting economies.

Members shared the view that the U.S. economy continued to recover, but the pace

of recovery remained only moderate against the background of the prolonged adjustment in

excessive household debt and the housing market, as well as slow recovery in employment.

Many members commented that, while indicators for the corporate sector such as

production, corporate profits, and business fixed investment had been firm, there had

recently been noticeable developments such as the deterioration in consumer sentiment

against the backdrop of strains in financial markets, as well as the decline in housing prices

reflecting sluggish demand for housing. As for the outlook, members concurred that the

pace of growth in the U.S. economy was likely to remain modest against the background of

the limited room for further fiscal and monetary stimulus and the persistent strains from

balance-sheet adjustments.

Members shared the view that the euro area economy had shown clear signs of

deceleration in growth, as household and business sentiment had deteriorated reflecting

growing concerns about financial system stability triggered by the sovereign debt problems.

As for the outlook, they shared the view that economic recovery was likely to be restrained

in a situation where the adverse feedback loop among the fiscal situation, the financial

system, and economic activity operated as financial markets would come under persistent

stress stemming from the sovereign debt problems, and therefore European financial

institutions would intensify the reduction of their assets and tightening of lending attitudes.

7


-----

Members agreed that, although the pace of growth in emerging and

commodity-exporting economies had moderated somewhat, mainly due to waning real

purchasing power caused by inflation, the effects of monetary tightening, and the impact of

a decline in exports induced by a slowdown in advanced economies, these economies

generally continued to see relatively strong growth as the autonomous positive feedback

loop among production, income, and expenditures was basically maintained. They also

shared the recognition that inflationary pressure had not been sufficiently contained in many

emerging and commodity-exporting economies. As for the outlook, they shared the view

that, as a gradual decline in inflationary pressure restored the real purchasing power of

households, these economies were likely to achieve relatively strong growth, although many

would continue to see a slowdown in growth for the time being. Some members

commented that, in a situation where financial markets would come under persistent stress

stemming from the sovereign debt problems, due attention should be paid to the possibility

that global investors' withdrawal of funds from emerging economies would become

widespread as a result of their intensified risk aversion.

Members agreed that Japan's financial conditions continued to ease, as evidenced

by the fact that issuing conditions for CP and corporate bonds remained favorable and firms'

funding costs had declined moderately. They shared the view that the easing trend in

financial conditions would likely continue as the effects of the Bank's significant monetary

easing spread further, and this would support momentum toward a self-sustained recovery

in domestic private demand. One member, commenting that inflation expectations for the

short and medium term had recently declined somewhat, said that attention should be paid

to the possibility that this would exert upward pressure on short- and medium-term real

interest rates and thereby intensify upward pressure on the yen and downward pressure on

stock prices.

Based on the above deliberations on economic and financial conditions abroad, as

well as Japan's financial conditions, members discussed the state of Japan's economy.

They agreed that economic activity continued picking up as supply-side constraints had

been mostly resolved and the economy was shifting to a phase in which it would be

particularly constrained by developments on the demand side. They also shared the view

that production and exports continued to increase, particularly for firms in the

automobile-related sectors that were accelerating their inventory restocking both at home

8


-----

and abroad, although the rate of increase in production and exports moderated after going

through the recovery phase immediately following the quake-induced plunge. Some

members added that improvement in business sentiment seemed to be pausing, mainly due

to an adverse effect from a slowdown in overseas economies and the appreciation of the yen.

A few members said that the slowdown in overseas economies had started to have a

negative effect on developments in exports of IT-related goods, and that the effects of the

yen's appreciation were observed in the sluggish recovery in the number of foreign visitors

to Japan. Many members noted that, although it was difficult to judge at present the

overall picture of how Japan's economy would be affected by the damage caused by the

flooding in Thailand, attention needed to be paid to the risk that this would temporarily

reduce the profits, exports, and production of Japanese firms, particularly those in the

automobile sector and some segments of the electrical machinery sector, for which Thailand

was an important production base.

**B. Outlook for Economic Activity and Prices**

With regard to the baseline scenario of the outlook for Japan's economic activity,

members agreed that growth rates for fiscal 2011 and 2012 were likely to be somewhat

lower than the forecasts in the July 2011 interim assessment, reflecting the adverse effects

of a slowdown in overseas economies and the appreciation of the yen. They shared the

view that, under the condition that financial market shocks with possible significant impacts

on economic activity were avoided, Japan's economy was likely to return to a moderate

recovery path because the pace of recovery in overseas economies would pick up and

because demand related to reconstruction after the earthquake disaster would gradually

materialize.

Regarding economic developments in the second half of fiscal 2011, members

agreed that a slowdown in overseas economies and the appreciation of the yen would have

an adverse effect on the economy, especially on the export and production front, while

reconstruction-related demand associated with the restoration of capital stock would

gradually materialize in a variety of channels, such as public investment, business fixed

investment, housing investment, and demand for durable consumer goods. With regard to

economic developments in fiscal 2012, members shared the view that, in addition to the

continued support from reconstruction-related demand throughout the fiscal year, as the

9


-----

growth rates of overseas economies gradually picked up, Japan's economy was likely to

register a relatively high rate of growth supported by the transmission mechanism by which

the strength in exports and production fed through into income and spending. They shared

the view that, in fiscal 2013, the economy was likely to grow at a pace above its potential

led by robust demand from overseas economies, especially emerging and

commodity-exporting economies, although the growth rate was likely to be lower than that

in fiscal 2012 because the contribution from reconstruction-related demand would gradually

diminish.

Regarding the outlook for the consumer price index (CPI) for all items less fresh

food, members agreed that, with an improvement in the aggregate supply and demand

balance and stable medium- to long-term inflation expectations, the year-on-year rate of

change in the CPI would remain at around 0 percent for the time being but gradually rise to

around 0.5 percent toward the latter half of the projection period, which covered fiscal 2011

through fiscal 2013. They shared the view that international commodity prices, which

formed the basis for the outlook for the CPI, had recently softened reflecting the global

economic slowdown, and that they were likely to increase moderately over the relatively

long term led by food and energy prices amid the continued high growth in emerging

economies. They concurred that, while their forecasts of the year-on-year rate of change

in the CPI (all items less fresh food) were made based on the fixed-weighted CPI, the

year-on-year rate of change in the chain-weighted CPI around 2013 might be slightly lower.

Members also discussed upside and downside risk factors to the baseline scenario.

Regarding economic activity, members noted the following upside and downside

risk factors: (1) developments in global financial markets, especially those related to the

sovereign debt problems in Europe; (2) developments in overseas economies; (3)

developments in the demand related to reconstruction after the earthquake disaster; and (4)

firms' and households' medium- to long-term growth expectations. Some members said

that, in addition to these factors, uncertainty regarding the timing of resumed operations at

the nuclear power plants and electric power supply constraints should be borne in mind.

One member pointed out that the financial system and financial condition of firms in Japan

remained sound compared with those in the United States and Europe, and that this might

become an upside risk factor for economic activity in Japan.

Members concurred that there was high uncertainty regarding the possible

10


-----

outcome of the sovereign debt problems in Europe, including its impact on the global

economy. They shared the view that, if global investors' risk-averse behavior further

intensified in financial and foreign exchange markets, thereby resulting in further

appreciation of the yen and a stock price fall, such events could cause Japan's growth

outlook to deviate downward partly through a deterioration in business and household

sentiment. Some members commented that, if the profitability of exporting firms

deteriorated due to a substantial appreciation of the yen, attention needed to be paid in

particular to the possibility that corporate profits would be dampened, which consequently

would have an adverse effect on the employment and income conditions. One member

expressed concern that, in a situation where financial markets continued to come under

stress stemming from the sovereign debt problems, if the trend of substantial appreciation of

the yen persisted, thereby leading to the shift of Japanese firms' key factories and research

and development bases to overseas, this could induce substantial declines in domestic

investment and employment.

With regard to overseas economies, members shared the view that due attention

needed to be paid to (1) how balance-sheet adjustments would affect the U.S. economy; (2)

whether the adverse feedback loop among the fiscal situation, the financial system, and

economic activity would intensify in Europe against the backdrop of the sovereign debt

problems; and (3) whether price stability and economic growth could be achieved at the

same time in emerging and commodity-exporting economies. Many members said that

attention should be paid to the risk that, depending on future policy responses to the

sovereign debt problems, European financial institutions might further intensify the

reduction of their assets or lending cuts.

A few members expressed concern over the risk that firms' and households' growth

expectations would decline and the growth outlook for the projection period would worsen

as Japan's economy, in the course of recovering from the disaster, faced such negative

shocks as a slowdown in overseas economies, the appreciation of the yen, and electric

power supply constraints.

Members pointed to the following as upside and downside risk factors to the

outlook for prices: (1) possible effects of the materialization of upside or downside risks to

economic activity; (2) possible changes in firms' and households' medium- to long-term

inflation expectations; and (3) developments in import prices. With regard to the second

11


-----

risk factor, one member said that attention should be paid to the risk that inflation and

growth expectations would not rise if the expected timing of an exit from deflation were to

be pushed further back, thereby causing the private sector to postpone spending.

Based on the above considerations, members assessed the economic and price

situation from two perspectives.

Members made an assessment in terms of the first perspective; that is, they

comprehensively assessed the baseline scenario of the outlook for economic activity and

prices considered to be the most likely through fiscal 2013. They shared the view that the

forecasts of growth rates for fiscal 2011 and 2012 were likely to be somewhat lower than

those in the July 2011 interim assessment, and that some more time would be needed to

confirm that price stability was in sight for Japan's economy based on the "understanding of

medium- to long-term price stability" (hereafter "understanding").

Members then made an assessment in terms of the second perspective; namely,

they examined the risks considered most relevant to the conduct of monetary policy,

including risks that had a longer time horizon than the first perspective. In terms of

economic activity, they shared the view that there was a need to carefully examine how

Japan's economy would be affected by the uncertainty regarding developments in overseas

economies and ensuing disturbances in financial and foreign exchange markets. Some

members commented that, in a situation where global financial markets continued to come

under stress stemming from the sovereign debt problems in Europe, it should also be noted

that there was a risk that financial market shocks akin to the Lehman shock could hit Japan's

economy with possible significant impact, although the probability of such a risk arising

was low. On the price front, members concurred that considerable uncertainty surrounded

the outlook for international commodity prices with potential for movement in either

direction, and that there was also a risk that inflation rates would deviate downward from

the projection as a result of a decline in medium- to long-term inflation expectations.

Based on the examination from the two perspectives described above, members

shared the view that some more time would be needed to confirm that price stability was in

sight, and that due attention should be paid to the risk that the economic and price outlook

would further deteriorate depending on developments in global financial markets and

overseas economies. In light of this view, they agreed that, if they reached an agreement at

this meeting on further enhancing monetary easing, the Bank's projection that Japan's

12


-----

economy would eventually return to a sustainable growth path with price stability in the

longer run could be maintained.

**III. Summary of Discussions on Monetary Policy for the Immediate Future**

Members agreed that the Bank, while steadily implementing the Asset Purchase

Program (hereafter the Program) mainly through the purchase of financial assets in

accordance with its decision in August to enhance monetary easing, should further enhance

easing by increasing the total size of the Program so as to ensure a successful transition to a

sustainable growth path with price stability.

Based on the members' view that an increase in the total size of the Program was

appropriate, the chairman requested that the staff explain developments in markets for

financial assets that were being purchased through the Program, the room left for additional

purchases of these assets, and issues with respect to the Bank's financial soundness.

In response to the chairman's direction, the staff provided the following

explanation.

(1) In view of the current market size of financial assets being purchased through the

Program, constraints on additional purchases seemed unlikely to be particularly

significant for the time being with regard to T-Bills and Japanese government bonds

(JGBs) with a remaining maturity of about one to two years, whereas constraints on

additional purchases could be larger with regard to CP, corporate bonds, and particularly

Japan real estate investment trusts (J-REITs).

(2) With regard to market developments, although room for a further decline in yields on

T-Bills was limited, there was still some room left for a decline in yields on JGBs with a

remaining maturity of about one to two years. Credit spreads between CP at issuance

and T-Bills as well as yield spreads between corporate bonds and JGBs remained stable

at low levels.

(3) In terms of the Bank's financial soundness, due attention should be paid to the fact that

additional purchases of exchange-traded funds (ETFs) entailed a high risk of price

volatility. Constraints on additional purchases of T-Bills, JGBs, CP, and corporate

bonds in view of ensuring the Bank's financial soundness seemed unlikely to be

particularly significant for the time being.

In response to the staff's explanation, members held discussions and shared the

13


-----

view that it was appropriate to designate the increase in the Program for the purchase of

JGBs and thereby encourage a further spread of the effects of monetary easing throughout

financial markets, given that financial conditions continued to ease with smooth corporate

funding in Japan despite unstable global financial markets.

Members concurred that, as the financing term used by Japanese firms was mainly

in the range of around three years or less, it would be effective in further enhancing

monetary easing to encourage a decline in interest rates of a roughly equivalent financing

term, and therefore it was appropriate to continue to purchase JGBs with a remaining

maturity of up to two years. A few members commented that the purchase of JGBs with a

remaining maturity of one to two years was also effective in terms of ensuring stability in

the foreign exchange market, considering the current situation where the correlation of the

yen-dollar exchange rate with the two-year interest rate differential between Japan and the

United States was high relative to its correlation with the interest rate differential of other

maturities.

With regard to the possible amount of the Program's expansion, most members

expressed the view that it was appropriate that the Bank increase the total size by about 5

trillion yen given that it had decided on a significant increase of about 10 trillion yen in

August, taking full account in advance of various potential downside risks to the economy,

and was currently in the process of steadily implementing the Program mainly through the

purchase of financial assets in accordance with this decision. With regard to the schedule

for completing all purchases after increasing the Program's size, some members expressed

the opinion that it was appropriate for the Bank to maintain its decision to complete them by

around the end of 2012 and thereby accelerate the pace of JGB purchases.

On this point, one member expressed the opinion that, as downside risks to

economic activity and prices for the projection period were increasing with the decline in

firms' and households' inflation and growth expectations, the amount of increase in the

Program should be of enough size -- namely, about 10 trillion yen -- to have a notable

impact akin to the August decision to enhance monetary easing.

Regarding the guideline for money market operations for the intermeeting period

ahead, members agreed that it was appropriate to maintain the current guideline that the

Bank would encourage the uncollateralized overnight call rate to remain at around 0 to 0.1

percent. A few members said that it was important to clearly present the Bank's strong

14


-----

determination to overcome deflation, and to explain consistently to the public that it would

maintain the virtually zero interest rate policy until it judged that price stability was in sight.

As for the future conduct of monetary policy, members concurred that, in order for

Japan's economy to overcome deflation and return to a sustainable growth path with price

stability, the Bank would continue to consistently make contributions as the central bank

through the three-pronged approach of pursuing powerful monetary easing consisting of

comprehensive monetary easing, ensuring financial market stability, and providing support

to strengthen the foundations for economic growth. They also shared the view that, for

these measures by the Bank to contribute to the strengthening of Japan's growth potential in

the medium to long term, it was important for concerned parties in both the private and

government sectors to continue making efforts in their respective roles while making use of

the extremely accommodative financial conditions at present.

**IV. Remarks by Government Representatives**

The representative from the Ministry of Finance made the following remarks.

(1) The Japanese economy had been picking up, but the pace was decelerating. In this

situation, the one-sided movement of the yen's appreciation had intensified in the

foreign exchange market as the yen appreciated rapidly and registered a historical high

against the U.S. dollar. Moreover, the government was highly concerned that anxiety

over debt problems in Europe had resurfaced, and that the slowdown in overseas

economies was posing significant downside risks to the Japanese economy.

(2) With a view to appropriately responding without delay to the recent appreciation of the

yen and the rapidly heightening risk of a hollowing-out of domestic industries, the

Cabinet decided on October 21 the "Comprehensive Package Responding to the Yen

Appreciation," which focused on the following: (1) further enhancement of financial

support to small firms; (2) an increase in location subsidies to firms; and (3) the

maximum use of merits of the yen's appreciation through Japanese firms' acquisitions of

foreign firms and natural resources.

(3) The Cabinet decided the third supplementary budget for fiscal 2011. In the budget,

funds were appropriated by priority for measures related to rebuilding following the

disaster, as well as for measures to prevent the hollowing-out of domestic industries.

15


-----

The government would make its utmost efforts to obtain the Diet's approval for the third

supplementary budget.

(4) The government welcomed the Bank's proposal made at this meeting of further

monetary easing as an appropriate response to the current severe economic conditions.

It hoped that the Bank would continue taking decisive monetary policy actions while

considering the effects on the Japanese economy of the developments in overseas

economies and disturbances in the financial markets, including the foreign exchange

market.

The representative from the Cabinet Office made the following remarks.

(1) The Japanese economy had been picking up, but the pace was decelerating. As for the

outlook, although the economy was expected to continue to pick up, there were

significant downside risks to the economy such as unstable international financial

developments, concerns over a slowdown in overseas economies, and the rapid

appreciation of the yen. The effects of the damage caused by the flooding in Thailand

also warranted careful attention.

(2) The Cabinet decided the "Comprehensive Package Responding to the Yen

Appreciation" in order to respond to the downside risks to the economy and the risk of a

hollowing-out of domestic industries, both stemming from the rapid appreciation of the

yen. The government would make efforts to promptly obtain the Diet's approval for

the third supplementary budget for fiscal 2011. In addition, for the package to quickly

produce visible results, an intergovernmental taskforce -- consisting of senior

vice-ministers and appointed agency officials -- would examine and manage the

progress of implementation of the measures in the package based on

Plan-Do-Check-Act (PDCA). The government asked for the Bank's cooperation in

this regard.

(3) In the October 2011 Outlook for Economic Activity and Prices, the Bank projected that

the year-on-year rate of change in the CPI would remain at around 0 percent for the

time being and at around 0.5 percent through fiscal 2013. These projected figures

were considered to be low compared to the "understanding." Since its introduction in

2006, the "understanding" had only been achieved in 2008. As the Japanese economy

was still in a mild deflationary situation, it was important to prevent the economy from

16


-----

falling into a vicious circle of appreciation of the yen and deflation, and the government

and the Bank had been sharing the view that overcoming deflation was a policy priority.

The government welcomed the Bank's proposal made at this meeting to enhance

monetary easing as a timely action. It expected the Bank to continue to sufficiently

exchange views and keep close contact with the government to underpin the economy

through appropriate and decisive conduct of monetary policy.

**V. Votes**

**A. Vote on the Guideline for Money Market Operations**

Members shared the view that it was appropriate to maintain the current guideline

for money market operations, which encouraged the uncollateralized overnight call rate to

remain at around 0 to 0.1 percent.

To reflect this view, the chairman formulated the following proposal and put it to a

vote.

**The Chairman's Policy Proposal on the Guideline for Money Market Operations:**

1. The guideline for money market operations for the intermeeting period ahead will be as

follows.

The Bank of Japan will encourage the uncollateralized overnight call rate

to remain at around 0 to 0.1 percent.

2. A public statement will be decided separately.

Votes for the proposal: Mr. M. Shirakawa, Mr. H. Yamaguchi, Mr. K. G. Nishimura,

Mr. S. Nakamura, Mr. H. Kamezaki, Mr. R. Miyao, Mr. Y. Morimoto, Ms. S.

Shirai, and Mr. K. Ishida.

Votes against the proposal: None.

**B. Vote on "Amendment to 'Principal Terms and Conditions for the Asset Purchase**

**Program'"**

Most members expressed the view that it was appropriate to increase the total size

17


-----

of the Program by about 5 trillion yen, and to designate such an increase for the purchase of

JGBs. One member, however, proposed to increase the amount of the Program by about

10 trillion yen. As a result, the following two policy proposals were submitted.

Mr. R. Miyao formulated a proposal to increase the total size of the Program by

about 10 trillion yen, and to designate such an increase for the purchase of JGBs. The

proposal was then put to a vote.

The proposal was defeated by a majority vote.

Votes for the proposal: Mr. R. Miyao.

Votes against the proposal: Mr. M. Shirakawa, Mr. H. Yamaguchi, Mr. K. G.

Nishimura, Mr. S. Nakamura, Mr. H. Kamezaki, Mr. Y. Morimoto, Ms. S. Shirai,

and Mr. K. Ishida.

To reflect the majority view, the chairman formulated a proposal to increase the

total size of the Program by about 5 trillion yen, and to designate such an increase for the

purchase of JGBs. The proposal was then put to a vote.

The proposal was decided by a majority vote.

Votes for the proposal: Mr. M. Shirakawa, Mr. H. Yamaguchi, Mr. K. G. Nishimura,

Mr. S. Nakamura, Mr. H. Kamezaki, Mr. Y. Morimoto, Ms. S. Shirai, and Mr. K.

Ishida.

Votes against the proposal: Mr. R. Miyao.

Mr. R. Miyao dissented from the chairman's proposal, arguing that, as downside

risks to economic activity and prices for the projection period were increasing with the

decline in firms' and households' inflation and growth expectations, the amount of increase

in the Program should be significant -- namely, about 10 trillion yen -- akin to the August

decision.

18


-----

**VI. Discussion on the Public Statement Entitled Enhancement of Monetary Easing**

On the basis of the above discussions, members discussed the statement

Enhancement of Monetary Easing, which included the following: (1) the Bank's monetary

policy stance that it would further enhance monetary easing by increasing the total size of

the Program by about 5 trillion yen -- from about 50 trillion yen to about 55 trillion yen -
so as to ensure a successful transition to a sustainable growth path with price stability, based

on the recognition that some more time would be needed to confirm that price stability was

in sight, and that due attention should be paid to the risk that the economic and price

outlook would further deteriorate depending on developments in global financial markets

and overseas economies; and (2) the proposal formulated by Mr. R. Miyao. The statement

was then put to a vote. The Policy Board decided the text by a unanimous vote. It was

confirmed that the statement would be released immediately after the meeting (see

Attachment 1).

**VII. Decision regarding the Outlook for Economic Activity and Prices**

Members discussed the draft of the _Outlook for Economic Activity and Prices_

(consisting of "The Bank's View" and "The Background"), and put "The Bank's View" to a

vote. The Policy Board decided, by a unanimous vote, the text of "The Bank's View." It

was confirmed that "The Bank's View" would be made public on October 27, 2011 and the

whole report on October 28, 2011.

Votes for the proposal: Mr. M. Shirakawa, Mr. H. Yamaguchi, Mr. K. G. Nishimura,

Mr. S. Nakamura, Mr. H. Kamezaki, Mr. R. Miyao, Mr. Y. Morimoto, Ms. S.

Shirai, and Mr. K. Ishida.

Votes against the proposal: None.

**VIII. Approval of the Minutes of the Monetary Policy Meeting**

The Policy Board approved unanimously the minutes of the Monetary Policy

Meeting of October 6 and 7, 2011 for release on November 1, 2011.

19


-----

Attachment 1

October 27, 2011

Bank of Japan

**Enhancement of Monetary Easing**

1. At the Monetary Policy Meeting held today, the Policy Board of the Bank of Japan

decided, by an 8-1 majority vote,[4] to enhance monetary easing by increasing the total

size of the Asset Purchase Program by about 5 trillion yen, from about 50 trillion yen to

about 55 trillion yen.[5] The increase in the Program is designated for the purchase of

Japanese government bonds.[6]

2. The Policy Board also decided, by a unanimous vote,[7] to set the following guideline

for money market operations for the intermeeting period:

The Bank of Japan will encourage the uncollateralized overnight call rate

to remain at around 0 to 0.1 percent.

3. Japan's economic activity has continued picking up while the supply-side constraints

have been gradually resolved. Meanwhile, financial conditions have continued to

ease as issuing conditions for CP and corporate bonds have remained favorable and

4 Voting for the action: Mr. M. Shirakawa, Mr. H. Yamaguchi, Mr. K. G. Nishimura, Mr. S.
Nakamura, Mr. H. Kamezaki, Mr. Y. Morimoto, Ms. S. Shirai, and Mr. K. Ishida.
Voting against the action: Mr. R. Miyao.
5 At today's meeting, Mr. Miyao proposed to increase the amount of the Asset Purchase Program by
about 10 trillion yen, which would bring the total volume of the Program to about 60 trillion yen.
The proposal was defeated by a majority vote. Voting for the proposal: Mr. R. Miyao. Voting
against the proposal: Mr. M. Shirakawa, Mr. H. Yamaguchi, Mr. K. G. Nishimura, Mr. S.
Nakamura, Mr. H. Kamezaki, Mr. Y. Morimoto, Ms. S. Shirai, and Mr. K. Ishida.
6 See Attachment 2 for the allocation of the increase in the Program.
7 Voting for the action: Mr. M. Shirakawa, Mr. H. Yamaguchi, Mr. K. G. Nishimura, Mr. S.
Nakamura, Mr. H. Kamezaki, Mr. R. Miyao, Mr. Y. Morimoto, Ms. S. Shirai, and Mr. K. Ishida.
Voting against the action: None.

20


-----

firms' funding costs have declined moderately. As for the outlook, although an

adverse effect from a slowdown in overseas economies and the appreciation of the yen

will continue for the time being, Japan's economy is expected to return to a moderate

recovery path because the pace of recovery in overseas economies will subsequently

pick up and the demand related to reconstruction after the earthquake disaster will

gradually materialize.

4. However, some more time will be needed to confirm that price stability is in sight and

due attention is needed for the risk that the economic and price outlook will further

deteriorate depending on developments in global financial markets and overseas

economies. While steadily implementing its decision in August to enhance monetary

easing, especially through the purchase of financial assets, the Bank deemed it

necessary to further enhance monetary easing so as to ensure a successful transition to a

sustainable growth path with price stability.

5. For the purpose of further enhancing the spread of monetary easing effect throughout

financial markets, the Bank judged it appropriate to designate the 5 trillion yen increase

in the Asset Purchase Program for the purchase of Japanese government bonds in

consideration of the aforementioned current financial conditions with generally smooth

corporate funding. In addition to purchases under the Program, the Bank regularly

purchases Japanese government bonds at the pace of 21.6 trillion yen per year with the

aim of providing funds in a stable manner broadly consistent with a trend increase in

banknote demand.

6. The Bank will continue to consistently make contributions as the central bank through

the three-pronged approach of pursuing powerful monetary easing consisting of

comprehensive monetary easing, ensuring financial market stability, and providing

support to strengthen the foundations for economic growth. For these measures by the

Bank to contribute to the strengthening of Japan's growth potential in the medium to

long term, it is important for concerned parties in both the private and government

sectors to continue making efforts in their respective roles while making use of

accommodative financial conditions.

21


-----

Attachment 2

**Increase in the Asset Purchase Program**

1. Allocation of the Increase

(trillion yen)

Program size Program size

Amount of

before after

increase

the increase the increase

**Total size** **About 50** **About +5** **About 55**

Asset Purchases 15.0 +5.0 20.0

Japanese government
4.0 +5.0 9.0
bonds[[Note]]

Treasury discount bills 4.5 ― 4.5

CP 2.1 ― 2.1

Corporate bonds 2.9 ― 2.9

Exchange traded
1.4 ― 1.4
funds (ETFs)

Japan real estate
investment trusts 0.11 ― 0.11
(J-REITs)

Fixed-rate funds-supplying
operation against pooled 35.0 ― 35.0
collateral

Three-month term 20.0 ― 20.0

Six-month term 15.0 ― 15.0

Note: In addition to purchases under the Asset Purchase Program, the Bank regularly purchases

Japanese government bonds at the pace of 21.6 trillion yen per year.

2. The Bank intends to complete the increased purchases by around the end of 2012.

22

|Col1|Col2|Col3|Col4|(trillion yen)|
|---|---|---|---|---|
|||Program size before the increase|Amount of increase|Program size after the increase|
|Total size||About 50|About +5|About 55|
|Asset Purchases Japanese government bonds[Note] Treasury discount bills CP Corporate bonds Exchange traded funds (ETFs) Japan real estate investment trusts (J-REITs)||15.0|+5.0|20.0|
||Japanese government bonds[Note]|4.0|+5.0|9.0|
||Treasury discount bills|4.5|―|4.5|
||CP|2.1|―|2.1|
||Corporate bonds|2.9|―|2.9|
||Exchange traded funds (ETFs)|1.4|―|1.4|
||Japan real estate investment trusts (J-REITs)|0.11|―|0.11|
|Fixed-rate funds-supplying operation against pooled collateral Three-month term Six-month term||35.0|―|35.0|
||Three-month term|20.0|―|20.0|
||Six-month term|15.0|―|15.0|


-----

