Not to be released until 8:50 a.m.
Japan Standard Time on Tuesday,
December 27, 2011.

December 27, 2011

Bank of Japan

# Minutes of the Monetary Policy Meeting
## on November 30, 2011

(English translation prepared by the Bank's staff based on the Japanese original)


-----

Please contact the Bank of Japan at the address below in advance to request permission

when reproducing or copying the content of this document for commercial purposes.

Secretariat of the Policy Board, Bank of Japan

P.O. Box 30, Nihonbashi, Tokyo 103-8660, Japan

Please credit the source when quoting, reproducing, or copying the content of this

document.


-----

A Monetary Policy Meeting of the Bank of Japan Policy Board was held in the

Head Office of the Bank of Japan in Tokyo on Wednesday, November 30, 2011, from 8:31

p.m. to 9:43 p.m.[1]

**Policy Board Members Present[2]**

**Mr. M. Shirakawa, Chairman, Governor of the Bank of Japan**

**Mr. H. Yamaguchi, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Japan**

**Mr. K. G. Nishimura, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Japan**

**Mr. S. Nakamura**

**Mr. H. Kamezaki**

**Mr. Y. Morimoto**

**Ms. S. Shirai**

**Mr. K. Ishida**

Government Representatives Present

Mr. Y. Fujita, Senior Vice Minister of Finance, Ministry of Finance

Mr. H. Ogushi, Parliamentary Secretary of Cabinet Office, Cabinet Office

Reporting Staff

Mr. K. Yamamoto, Executive Director

Mr. H. Nakaso, Executive Director (Assistant Governor)

Mr. M. Amamiya, Executive Director

Mr. N. Kinoshita, Executive Director

Mr. K. Momma, Director-General, Monetary Affairs Department

Mr. T. Umemori, Deputy Director-General, Monetary Affairs Department

Mr. K. Kamiyama, Head of Policy Planning Division, Monetary Affairs Department

1 The minutes of this meeting were approved by the Policy Board at the Monetary Policy Meeting
held on December 20 and 21, 2011 as "a document describing an outline of the discussion at the
meeting" stipulated in Article 20, paragraph 1 of the Bank of Japan Act of 1997. Those present are
referred to by their titles at the time of the meeting.
2 An absent member of the Policy Board, Mr. R. Miyao, submitted via the chairman his written
opinion on matters related to the meeting's agenda, in accordance with Article 5, paragraph 2 of the
Rules concerning Policy Board Meetings.

1


-----

Mr. S. Aoki, Director-General, Financial Markets Department

Mr. E. Maeda, Director-General, Research and Statistics Department

Mr. T. Sekine, Head of Economic Research Division, Research and Statistics Department

Mr. H. Ono, Director-General, International Department

Secretariat of the Monetary Policy Meeting

Mr. Y. Iino, Director-General, Secretariat of the Policy Board

Mr. T. Tachibana, Director, Deputy Head of Planning and Coordination Division,

Secretariat of the Policy Board

Mr. H. Chida, Head of Policy Infrastructure Division, Monetary Affairs Department

Mr. M. Minegishi, Senior Economist, Monetary Affairs Department

Mr. T. Kawamoto, Senior Economist, Monetary Affairs Department

2


-----

**I. Remarks on the Purpose of the Unscheduled Monetary Policy Meeting**

The chairman first provided the following explanation for calling an unscheduled

Monetary Policy Meeting.

(1) Global financial markets were under heavy strain on the back of the sovereign debt

problems in Europe, and central banks had been exchanging views on how to respond to

this situation. As a result of these discussions, central banks had judged that it was

desirable to take coordinated action consisting of the following: lowering the interest

rates on the U.S. dollar funds-supplying operations and extending the effective period of

such operations, as well as expanding the network of currency swap agreements to

include non-domestic currencies other than the U.S. dollar. The coordinated action

would be made public today, November 30, 2011.

(2) Financial conditions in Japan continued to ease and Japanese financial institutions were

not facing difficulty with funding in foreign currencies. However, with a correlation

between domestic and overseas markets increasing, the possibility could not be ruled

out that Japan's financial system, and consequently financial conditions, would be

adversely affected should conditions in global financial markets deteriorate further. In

this situation, it would be appropriate for the Bank to take coordinated action to address

pressures in financial markets together with other central banks.

**II. Summary of Staff Reports on Financial Market Developments**

Global financial markets continued to be under heavy strain since the previous

Monetary Policy Meeting held on November 15 and 16, 2011, on the back of the sovereign

debt problems in Europe.

Long-term interest rates and sovereign credit default swap (CDS) premiums in

Europe had been rising even for countries other than those peripheral ones facing serious

fiscal concerns. Long-term interest rates in the Unites States remained more or less flat

due mainly to firm demand for U.S. government bonds that were regarded as safe assets,

despite the fact that an increasing number of economic indicators turned out to be better

than the market had expected. Long-term interest rates in Japan had been rising somewhat,

reflecting the effects of financial institutions' profit-taking sales of Japanese government

bonds.

3


-----

With regard to U.S. dollar funding conditions through foreign exchange swap

markets, the three-month cost of swapping euros into U.S. dollars had risen to the 1.5-2.0

percent range, significantly exceeding interest rates on the U.S. dollar funds-supplying

operations, as there were concerns about counterparty risks in relation to European financial

institutions that held a large amount of government bonds issued by those countries facing

serious fiscal concerns. Japanese financial institutions were not facing difficulty with

funding in foreign currencies despite the gradual rise in the three-month cost of swapping

yen into U.S. dollars.

Stock prices were picking up somewhat in Japan, the United States, and Europe

reflecting expectations of policy responses by the European authorities. In the foreign

exchange market, however, the nominal effective exchange rate of the euro had been

somewhat weak on the back of the sovereign debt problems in Europe.

**III. Summary of Staff Reports on Coordinated Central Bank Action and the Bank of**

**Japan's Action**

The staff explained that the Bank's decision at this meeting to take the following

three actions, in cooperation with the Bank of Canada, the Bank of England, the European

Central Bank, the Federal Reserve, and the Swiss National Bank, could be deemed effective

in maintaining financial market stability at home and abroad through the enhancement of

the central banks' capacity to provide liquidity to the global financial system.

The first action would involve lowering the rates on the U.S. dollar liquidity swap

arrangements and on the U.S. dollar funds-supplying operations by 0.5 percentage point for

operations to be conducted from December 5, 2011. The new lending rate on the

operations would therefore be the prevailing U.S. dollar overnight index swap (OIS) market

rate that corresponds to the lending duration, plus 0.5 percentage point. It had been

pointed out that, in some countries abroad, since the spread between interest rates on the

U.S. dollar funds-supplying operations and market rates was relatively wide, not a few

financial institutions were reluctant to use the operations for fear of incurring reputational

risk, namely, that their creditworthiness might be regarded as having deteriorated to the

extent that they would have difficulty with funding in markets should it be revealed that

they had participated in the bidding of the operations. In view of such developments

abroad, the aim of lowering the interest rates on the U.S. dollar funds-supplying operations

4


-----

would be to strengthen their effectiveness in stabilizing the U.S. dollar funding rates, by

enhancing their role as a backstop.

The second action would be to extend the effective period of the U.S. dollar

liquidity swap arrangements, due to expire on August 1, 2012, by six months through to

February 1, 2013. In order to do so, it was necessary for the Bank to make amendments at

this meeting to relevant principal terms and conditions, including those for its U.S. dollar

funds-supplying operation against pooled collateral.

The third action, as a contingency measure, would be to expand currency swap

arrangements to include U.S. dollars, Canadian dollars, pounds sterling, yen, euros, and

Swiss francs, and thereby establish bilateral liquidity swap arrangements among the six

central banks -- that is, the aforementioned five central banks and the Bank of Japan. Such

arrangements would enable the Bank to provide yen to the five central banks if required.

They would also allow the Bank to receive liquidity, should it be needed, in the five foreign

currencies including the already available U.S. dollar. At present, there was no need to

offer liquidity in non-domestic currencies other than the U.S. dollar, but it was deemed

prudent to make the necessary swap arrangements so that liquidity support operations could

be put into place quickly should the need arise. The Bank would work to establish the

swap arrangements with the other five central banks, taking into account the market

conditions.

**IV. Summary of Discussions by the Policy Board**

**A. Discussions on Coordinated Central Bank Action and the Bank of Japan's Action**

Members agreed that global financial markets were under heavy strain on the back

of the sovereign debt problems in Europe, and that the funding conditions of European

financial institutions were deteriorating. They shared the view that, considering the

difficulty in solving the sovereign debt problems in Europe, it was likely that pressures in

the markets would persist over a protracted period. Members were of the view that

financial conditions in Japan continued to ease and Japanese financial institutions were not

facing difficulty with funding in foreign currencies. They continued that, with an

increasing correlation between domestic and overseas markets, the possibility could not be

ruled out that Japan's financial system, and consequently financial conditions, would be

adversely affected should conditions in global financial markets deteriorate further. Based

5


-----

on this discussion, members concurred that, in order to maintain financial market stability at

home and abroad, it was appropriate at this time for central banks to take coordinated action

to enhance their capacity to provide liquidity to the global financial system before the

year-end, when demand for funds tended to increase. A few members said that the Bank

should take great care in its communication with markets, so that the announcement of

coordinated action would not arouse unnecessary suspicions regarding foreign currency

funding conditions for Japanese financial institutions.

Members agreed that the lowering of interest rates on the U.S. dollar

funds-supplying operations would strengthen the operations' ability to stabilize the U.S.

dollar funding rates and enhance their role as a backstop. With regard to the problem that

not a few financial institutions overseas were reluctant to make use of such operations by

central banks for fear of reputational risk, a few members were of the view that the lowering

of interest rates on the operations would make financial institutions less reluctant to use

them, because the merits of doing so would increase even for those financial institutions

that did not face problems in terms of creditworthiness. In response, some members

expressed the view that reputational risk associated with the use of the operations was likely

to diminish to some extent, but that the degree was highly uncertain. A different member

noted that it was also necessary to pay attention to the possibility that financial institutions

would become casually dependent on the operations with the lowering of interest rates on

them.

Regarding the extensions of the effective periods of the U.S. dollar liquidity swap

arrangements and the U.S. dollar funds-supplying operations, some members said that they

would have a certain effect in terms of relieving funding concerns in the market because

they would enable the financial institutions to continue to use the operations for more than a

year.

Regarding the establishment of bilateral liquidity swap arrangements among the

central banks that would enable the provision of liquidity in any of their currencies in

addition to the already available U.S. dollar, members shared the view that at present there

was no need in Japan for the Bank to offer liquidity in foreign currencies other than the U.S.

dollar, such as the euro, nor was there a need for overseas central banks to offer liquidity in

yen. They continued that there was in fact no demand from market participants for such

funds provision. Members then shared the view that establishing bilateral liquidity swap

6


-----

arrangements among the central banks would help to maintain market stability as a

contingency measure.

**B. Discussions on Monetary Policy for the Immediate Future**

Regarding the guideline for money market operations for the intermeeting period

ahead, members agreed that it was appropriate to maintain the current guideline that the

Bank would encourage the uncollateralized overnight call rate to remain at around 0 to 0.1

percent. They shared the view that it would be appropriate to hold thorough discussions

on the economic and price situation at the next Monetary Policy Meeting to be held on

December 20 and 21, 2011, after closely examining important indicators to be released such

as the _Financial Statements Statistics of Corporations by Industry, Quarterly, the revised_

estimates of GDP, and the Tankan (Short-Term Economic Survey of Enterprises in Japan).

**V. Remarks by Government Representatives**

The representative from the Ministry of Finance made the following remarks.

(1) The government was highly concerned that the rise in anxiety over debt problems in

Europe was posing significant downside risks to the Japanese economy.

(2) The government welcomed the Bank's proposal made at this meeting to enhance the

U.S. dollar funds-supplying operation against pooled collateral as an appropriate

measure that would form part of central banks' coordinated action to ensure financial

stability, in view of the current situation where strains in U.S. dollar short-term funding

markets in Europe were intensifying.

(3) The government hoped that the Bank would continue taking decisive actions while

paying close attention to developments in the financial markets at home and abroad, as

well as considering the effects on the Japanese economy of the developments in

overseas economies and the foreign exchange market.

The representative from the Cabinet Office made the following remarks.

(1) Taking into account the recent fiscal problems in Europe and the situation in global

financial markets, the government viewed the proposed coordinated action by the six

central banks as appropriate measures that would contribute to maintaining market

stability. The government deemed it important that the Bank provide a sufficient

7


-----

explanation to the market of the background to the decision on the coordinated action

and its aim.

(2) The government would continue to pay close attention to the developments in global

financial markets as well as their effects on the Japanese economy, and would respond

appropriately as necessary.

(3) The government also expected the Bank to underpin the economy through appropriate

and decisive conduct of monetary policy while sharing concerns with it regarding the

situation as well as sufficiently exchanging views and keeping close contact.

**VI. Votes**

**A. Vote on "Amendment to 'Principal Terms and Conditions for U.S. Dollar**

**Funds-Supplying Operations against Pooled Collateral'"**

Based on the above discussions, "Amendment to 'Principal Terms and Conditions

for U.S. Dollar Funds-Supplying Operations against Pooled Collateral,'" which was

necessary to extend the effective periods of the existing U.S. dollar liquidity swap

arrangement with the Federal Reserve and the U.S. dollar funds-supplying operation against

pooled collateral, was put to a vote. Members voted unanimously to approve the

amendment and agreed that the decision should be made public.

**B. Discussion on the Public Statement Entitled Coordinated Central Bank Action to**

**Address Pressures in Global Money Markets**

Members discussed the statement Coordinated Central Bank Action to Address

Pressures in Global Money Markets, which included a description of the coordinated central

bank action and the Bank's action, and put it to a vote. The Policy Board decided the text

by a unanimous vote. It was confirmed that the statement would be released at the same

time as those by the other central banks (see Attachment 1).

**C. Vote on the Guideline for Money Market Operations**

To reflect the view of members, the chairman formulated the following proposal

and put it to a vote:

8


-----

**The Chairman's Policy Proposal on the Guideline for Money Market Operations:**

The guideline for money market operations for the intermeeting period ahead will be as

follows, and will be made public by the attached statement (see Attachment 2).

The Bank of Japan will encourage the uncollateralized overnight call rate

to remain at around 0 to 0.1 percent.

Votes for the proposal: Mr. M. Shirakawa, Mr. H. Yamaguchi, Mr. K. G. Nishimura,

Mr. S. Nakamura, Mr. H. Kamezaki, Mr. Y. Morimoto, Ms. S. Shirai, and Mr. K.

Ishida.

Votes against the proposal: None.

Absent: Mr. R. Miyao.

**VII. Timing for Approval of the Minutes of the Monetary Policy Meeting**

The minutes of this meeting would be approved at and released after the Monetary

Policy Meeting to be held on December 20 and 21, 2011. The Policy Board confirmed

that the minutes of the previous Monetary Policy Meeting held on November 15 and 16,

2011 would also be approved at and released after the Monetary Policy Meeting to be held

on December 20 and 21, 2011, as originally scheduled.

9


-----

Attachment 1

November 30, 2011

Bank of Japan

**Coordinated Central Bank Action to Address Pressures in Global Money Markets**

The Bank of Canada, the Bank of England, the Bank of Japan, the European Central Bank,

the Federal Reserve, and the Swiss National Bank are today announcing coordinated actions

to enhance their capacity to provide liquidity support to the global financial system. The

purpose of these actions is to ease strains in financial markets and thereby mitigate the

effects of such strains on the supply of credit to households and businesses and so help

foster economic activity.

These central banks have agreed to lower the pricing on the existing temporary U.S. dollar

liquidity swap arrangements by 50 basis points so that the new rate will be the U.S. dollar

overnight index swap (OIS) rate plus 50 basis points.[3] This pricing will be applied to all

operations conducted from December 5, 2011. The authorization of these swap

arrangements has been extended to February 1, 2013. In addition, the Bank of England,

the Bank of Japan, the European Central Bank, and the Swiss National Bank will continue

to offer three-month tenders until further notice.

As a contingency measure, these central banks have also agreed to establish temporary

bilateral liquidity swap arrangements so that liquidity can be provided in each jurisdiction in

any of their currencies should market conditions so warrant. At present, there is no need

to offer liquidity in non-domestic currencies other than the U.S. dollar, but the central banks

judge it prudent to make the necessary arrangements so that liquidity support operations

could be put into place quickly should the need arise. These swap lines are authorized

through February 1, 2013.

3 Overnight index swap is a type of swap arrangement that exchanges the overnight interest rate
over a specified period for a certain fixed rate. Its rate reflects market perception of the future
overnight interest rates over the corresponding period on average.

10


-----

Bank of Japan Action

At the unscheduled Monetary Policy Meeting held today, the Bank of Japan, in cooperation

with the aforementioned central banks, decided to take measures to address recent pressures

in global money markets. Specifically, interest rates on the fixed-rate U.S. Dollar

funds-supplying operations currently conducted by the Bank of Japan will be reduced by

0.5 percentage points, for operations conducted from December 5. The new rate will be a

prevailing U.S. dollar overnight index swap market rate that corresponds to the duration of

the loan plus 0.5 percentage points.[4] The expiration of the existing U.S. dollar liquidity

swap arrangement with the Federal Reserve and the concomitant U.S. Dollar

funds-supplying operations has been extended by six months through to February 1, 2013.

In addition, the Bank of Japan will establish reciprocal currency swap arrangements with

these central banks that will be available until February 1, 2013. Such arrangements will

enable the Bank of Japan to provide Japanese yen to these five central banks if required.

They will also allow the Bank of Japan to receive liquidity, should it be needed, in five

currencies including the already available U.S. dollars.

Financial conditions in Japan have continued to ease and Japanese financial institutions do

not face difficulty with funding in foreign currencies. There is, however, a possibility that

Japan will be adversely affected, should conditions in global financial markets deteriorate

further. The Bank of Japan will continue to maintain financial market stability in close

cooperation with other central banks.

Information on Related Actions Being Taken by Other Central Banks

Information on the actions to be taken by other central banks is available on the following

websites:
Bank of Canada (http://www.bankofcanada.ca)
Bank of England (http://www.bankofengland.co.uk)
European Central Bank (http://www.ecb.int)
Federal Reserve (http://www.federalreserve.gov)
Swiss National Bank (http://www.snb.ch)

4 Interest rates on fixed-rate U.S. Dollar funds-supplying operations are set by the Federal Reserve
Bank of New York taking account of a prevailing U.S. dollar overnight index swap market rate that
corresponds to the duration of the loan. These are the same interest rates that apply to the
aforementioned swap agreement.

11


-----

Attachment 2

November 30, 2011

Bank of Japan

**Statement on Monetary Policy**

At the Monetary Policy Meeting held today, the Policy Board of the Bank of Japan

decided, by a unanimous vote,[5] to set the following guideline for money market operations

for the intermeeting period:

The Bank of Japan will encourage the uncollateralized overnight call rate

to remain at around 0 to 0.1 percent.

5 Voting for the action: Mr. M. Shirakawa, Mr. H. Yamaguchi, Mr. K. G. Nishimura, Mr. S.
Nakamura, Mr. H. Kamezaki, Mr. Y. Morimoto, Ms. S. Shirai, and Mr. K. Ishida.
Voting against the action: None.
Absent: Mr. R. Miyao.

12


-----

