-----

**Date:** May 15[th] and 16[th], 2018

**Place:** BCB Headquarters’ meeting rooms on the 8[th] floor (May 15[th]) and 20[th] floor ((May 16[th]) – Brazil –
Brasília – DF

**Starting and ending time: May 15[th]: 10:08 am – 12:16 am; 2:42 pm - 4:44 pm**

May 16[th]: 2:00 pm – 6:00 pm

**In attendance:**
**Members of the Copom**
Ilan Goldfajn – Governor
Carlos Viana de Carvalho
Carolina de Assis Barros
Maurício Costa de Moura
Otávio Ribeiro Damaso
Paulo Sérgio Neves de Souza
Reinaldo Le Grazie
Sidnei Corrêa Marques
Tiago Couto Berriel

**Department Heads in charge of technical presentations (present on May 15[th])**
Alan da Silva Andrade Mendes - Department of Foreign Reserves
André Minella - Research Department (also present on May 16[th])
Flávio Túlio Vilela – Department of Banking Operations and Payments System
João Barata Ribeiro Blanco Barroso – Department of International Affairs
João Henrique de Paula Freitas Simão – Department of Open Market Operations
Tulio José Lenti Maciel – Department of Economics

**Other participants (present on May 15[th])**
Adalberto Felinto da Cruz Júnior – Executive Secretary
Daniela Pires Ramos de Alcântara – Head of the Deputy Governor for International Affairs and Corporate
Risk Management’s office
Enrico Bezerra Ximenes de Vasconcelos – Secretary of the Financial Stability Committee and Advisor to
the Board
Eugênio Pacceli Ribeiro – Head of the Deputy Governor for Economic Policy’s office
Fábio Araújo – Economic Advisory to the President
Fernando Alberto Sampaio Rocha – Head of the Department of Statistics
Gilneu Francisco Astolfi Vivan – Head of the Financial System Monitoring Department
Gustavo Paul Kurrle – Press Officer
Leonardo Martins Nogueira – Head of the Governor’s Office
Rogério Antônio Lucca – Head of the Deputy Governor for Monetary Policy’s office
Sílvia Marques de Brito e Silva – Head of the Deputy Governor for Regulation’s office (present only in the
_afternoon session)._

The members of Copom analyzed the recent performance and prospects for the Brazilian and
international economies, under the monetary policy framework, whose objective is to comply with the
inflation targets established by the National Monetary Council.


-----

# B) Risks around baseline inflation
 A) Update of economic outlook and
 scenario
 Copom’s baseline scenario[1]

8. The Committee emphasizes that risks around its

1. The latest indicators show softening of economic

baseline scenario remain in both directions.

activity in the context of a consistent, albeit gradual,
recovery of the Brazilian economy.

9. On the one hand, (i) the possible propagation,
through inertial mechanisms, of low inflation levels

2. The economy continues to operate with a high

may lead to a lower-than-expected prospective

level of economic slack, as reflected in the low

inflation trajectory.

industrial capacity utilization indexes and, mainly, in
the unemployment rate.

10. On the other hand, (ii) frustration of expectations
regarding the continuation of reforms and necessary

3. The global outlook has become more challenging

adjustments in the Brazilian economy may affect risk

and showed volatility. The evolution of risks

_premia and increase the path for inflation over the_

associated, to a large extent, with normalization of

relevant horizon for the conduct of monetary policy.

interest rates in some advanced economies led to

This risk intensifies in the case of (iii) further changes

adjustments in international financial markets. As a

in the global outlook for emerging economies. The

result, risk appetite towards emerging economies

latter risk has intensified since the last Copom

has diminished.

meeting.

4. Inflation developments remain favorable, with
various measures of underlying inflation running still
at low levels. This includes the components that are
most sensitive to the business cycle and monetary **C) Discussion about the conduct of**
policy. **monetary policy**

5. Inflation expectations for 2018 collected by the 11. The Committee members discussed the evolution
Focus survey are around 3.5%. Expectations for 2019 of the economic activity in light of available data.
and 2020 are around 4.0%. They agreed that the pace of the economic activity

has softened, at the margin. This movement occurs

6. The Copom's inflation projections in the scenario amidst a process of consistent recovery, albeit at a
with interest rate and exchange rate paths extracted gradual pace, of the Brazilian economy. In this
from the Focus survey stand around 3.6% for 2018, context, Committee members believe that, as
and 3.9% for 2019. This scenario assumes a path for economic activity recovers, inflation tends to
the policy interest rate that ends 2018 at 6.25% p.a., gradually return to target. They reaffirmed the view
and 2019 at 8.0% p.a., and a path for the exchange that, as a result of current levels of slack in the
rate that ends both 2018 and 2019 at R$/US$ 3.40. In economy, marginal revisions in the intensity of
the same scenario, the inflation projections for recovery would not lead to material revisions in the
administered prices for 2018 and 2019 are 5.7% and expected path for inflation.
4.2%, respectively.

12. Regarding the global outlook, the Committee

7. In the scenario with a constant interest rate, at considered that the scenario has become more
6.50% p.a., and a constant exchange rate, at challenging. The risk of a faster normalization of
R$3.60/US$[2], the projections for both 2018 and 2019 interest rates in some advanced economies induced
stand around 4.0%. In the same scenario, the inflation changes in assets prices and volatility of financial
projections for administered prices for 2018 and conditions in international markets. The baseline
2019 are 6.3% and 4.4%, respectively. scenario comprises a gradual normalization of

monetary policy in central economies, but is
dependent on the prospective path of price and
wage inflation in these economies. The Committee
members also mentioned the geopolitical risks and
the risks associated to the continued expansion of
international trade, with possible impacts on global
growth. In this context, the Copom members once

1 Unless explicitly stated otherwise, this update takes into 2 Value obtained according to the usual procedure of
account changes occurred since the March Copom meeting rounding the average R$/US$ exchange rate observed on
(213[th] meeting). the five business days ending on the Friday prior to the

Copom meeting.


-----

again highlighted the Brazilian’s economy capacity to relative prices, monetary policy should focus on their
withstand a setback in the international scenario, second-round effects only. The Copom highlights
given its robust balance of payments, low inflation that its reaction to possible changes in relative prices
environment, anchored expectations and prospects will be symmetrical, i.e., monetary policy will follow
of economic recovery. Nevertheless, the Copom the same principles, whether in the face of
pondered the risks derived from possible inflationary shocks (as in the case of an external
continuation of the reversal in the outlook for shock leading to a devaluation of the exchange rate),
emerging economies, in a context of frustration of or in the face of disinflationary shocks (as in the case
the expectations regarding the necessary reforms of a favorable food price shock).
and adjustments in the Brazilian economy. In this
context, they consider that, should the evolution of 16. Having established how monetary policy should
the global outlook produce relative price changes, its react to shocks that induce changes in relative prices,
impact on monetary policy will be circumscribed by Copom members discussed the extent of exchange-
its second-round effects on inflation (i.e., on the rate pass-through in the Brazilian economy. They
prices of economy not directly affected by the concluded that the intensity of pass-through
shock). depends on several factors, such as the level of slack

in the economy and the degree of anchoring of

13. The Copom analyzed the inflation trajectory inflation expectations. The Committee decided to
throughout the current and subsequent years. All monitor the different measures of exchange-rate
members agreed that inflation developments remain pass-through to both inflation and underlying
favorable, with several measures of underlying inflation.
inflation running still at low levels. This includes the
components that are most sensitive to the business 17. The Copom members reaffirmed their
cycle and monetary policy. They also discussed to understanding that economic conditions with
what extent these trajectories are compatible with anchored inflation expectations, underlying inflation
the convergence of inflation to the target, in the measures at low levels, inflation projections below
relevant horizon for the conduct of monetary policy. target for 2018, and slightly below target for 2019,
On the one hand, persistence of underlying inflation and high level of slack in the economy prescribes
measures at low levels poses downward risks for the accommodative monetary policy, i.e., interest rates
prospective inflation path. On the other hand, the below the structural interest level. Although
recovery in economic activity is still expected to estimates of this rate imply a high degree of
contribute to bring underlying inflation towards the uncertainty, Committee members expressed the
target in the relevant horizon. Additionally, risks view that current ex-ante real interest rates provide
associated with continuation of the reversal in the stimulus to the economy. Over time, this should
outlook for emerging economies, in a context of contribute to the convergence of inflation to its
frustration of the expectations regarding the targets.
necessary reforms and adjustments in the Brazilian
economy, still remain. The Copom judges that the

18. The Copom understands that the process of

recent evolution of these dimensions as a whole, has

reforms and necessary adjustments in the Brazilian

mitigated the risk of delayed convergence of

economy contributes to the reduction of its

inflation towards the targets.

structural interest rate. The Committee will continue
to reassess estimates of this rate over time.

14. The Committee members also discussed the
conditional projections for inflation in different

19. The Committee members then discussed the

scenarios. In the scenario with interest and exchange

evolution of the baseline scenario and the balance of

rates extracted from the Focus survey, the

risks since its March meeting (213th meeting) and the

projections showed slight decreases when compared

appropriate monetary policy decision in light of such

to the projections produced at the time of the March

evolution.

Copom meeting. In the scenario with constant
interest and exchange rates, as detailed in paragraph

20. Firstly, they evaluated the alternative of reducing

7 of these Minutes, 2018 and 2019 projections are

the basic interest rate by 0.25 percentage point (p.p.)

around 4.0% - slightly above the levels observed in

to 6.25% p.a. in order to mitigate the risk of delayed

the aforementioned scenario. The Copom sees these

convergence of inflation towards the targets. Some

levels as comfortable and, taking into account the

factors were in favor of this alternative, namely the

current balance of risks, deems that the odds that

low levels of inflation and underlying inflation and

inflation remains below target in the relevant

the gradual pace of recovery of the economy and its

horizon have diminished.

recent softening. They then assessed the alternative
of keeping the Selic rate at 6.50% p.a. In favor of this

15. The Committee reaffirmed the understanding

option, weighed the change in the balance of risks for

that, with anchored inflation expectations, in the

inflation due to the external shock, which reduced

face of occasional shocks that lead to changes in


-----

the chances of inflation remaining below target in 26. The Committee reaffirmed its preference for
the relevant horizon, through possible second-round communicating conditionalities on the evolution of
effects on inflation. This made it unnecessary to monetary policy, which better transmits the
mitigate the risk of an overly slow convergence of economic rationality that guides its decisions. This
inflation to targets. Weighing the baseline scenario contributes to increase transparency and improve
and the balance of risks, the Committee concluded Copom communication. In this context, the members
that the decision to keep the interest rate at the reaffirmed that the next steps in the conduct of the
current level was the most appropriate. monetary policy will continue to depend on the

evolution of economic activity, the balance of risks,

21. The members also evaluated the fact that recent and on inflation projections and expectations.
communication by Copom members appears to have
been interpreted by the public as indicative of a 27. All Committee members once again emphasized
decision to further reduce the interest rate. In the that the approval and implementation of reforms –
end, the understanding prevailed that the focus on notably those of a fiscal nature – and adjustments in
the best possible decision, given the set of the Brazilian economy are fundamental for the
information available at the time, results, over time, sustainability of the environment of low and stable
in greater credibility for monetary policy. inflation, for the full operation of monetary policy

and for the reduction of the structural interest rate

22. The Committee discussed the possible of the economy, with widespread benefits for
interpretation by economic agents that monetary society.
policy would be reacting mechanically to recent
exchange rate developments. Committee members 28. Finally, the Copom stressed the importance of
understand that there may be impacts of the other initiatives aimed at productivity increases,
external shock on the Brazilian economy, but they efficiency gains, greater flexibility of the economy
emphasized that it is essential to understand that and improvements in the business environment.
monetary policy will not react to these impacts These efforts are fundamental for the resumption of
automatically, since its implications for monetary economic activity and for the development of the
policy depend on how the shock may be transmitted Brazilian economy.
to expectations, to inflation projections, and to the
balance of risks.

23. In this context, the Copom stated that the focus **D) Monetary Policy Decision**
of monetary policy will be on the second-round
effects on inflation (that is, on the propagation to

29. Taking into account the baseline scenario, the

prices in the economy which are not directly affected

balance of risks, and the wide array of available

by the shock) and that, in a context of anchored

information, the Copom unanimously decided to

inflation expectations, these effects tend to be

maintain the Selic rate at 6.50% p.a. The Committee

mitigated by the high level of slack in the economy.

judges that this decision reflects the recent change in
the balance of risks to prospective inflation and is

24. The Committee also emphasized that its

consistent with the convergence of inflation to

communication should reaffirm the conduct of

target over the relevant horizon for the conduct of

monetary policy with exclusive focus on the

monetary policy, which includes 2018 and, to a

evolution of inflation projections and expectations,

greater extent, 2019.

of the balance of risks, and of economic activity.
External shocks should be tackled only in the

30. The Committee reiterates that economic

secondary impact they may have on prospective

conditions prescribe accommodative monetary

inflation. In this context, the Committee concluded

policy, i.e., interest rates below the structural level.

that the absence of a mechanical relationship
between the external scenario and monetary policy
will be evident over time, but that this should already 31. The Copom emphasizes that the evolution of
be made explicit by the Copom in its official reforms and necessary adjustments in the Brazilian
communications. economy contributes to the reduction of its

structural interest rate. The Committee will continue
to reassess estimates of this rate over time.

25. Based on all assessments, the Copom members
agreed to maintain the Selic rate at 6.50% p.a. They
also decided to indicate, for the next meetings, that 32. In the Copom’s assessment, the evolution of the
with comfortable inflation projections and the baseline scenario and, mainly, of the balance of risks
current balance of risks, the Committee deems it made it unnecessary to ease monetary policy further
appropriate to maintain the interest rate at the in order to mitigate the risk of delayed convergence
current level. of inflation toward the targets. Regarding the next

meetings, the Committee deems appropriate to


-----

maintain its policy rate at its current level. The
Copom emphasizes that the next steps in the
conduct of monetary policy will continue to depend
on the evolution of economic activity, the balance of
risks, and on inflation projections and expectations.

33. The following members of the Committee voted
for this decision: Ilan Goldfajn (Governor), Carlos
Viana de Carvalho, Carolina de Assis Barros, Maurício
Costa de Moura, Otávio Ribeiro Damaso, Paulo Sérgio
Neves de Souza, Reinaldo Le Grazie, Sidnei Corrêa
Marques, and Tiago Couto Berriel.


-----

