-----

**Date: July 31[st] and August 1[st], 2018**

**Place:** BCB Headquarters’ meeting rooms on the 8[th] floor (July 31[st]) and 20[th] floor (August 1[st]) – Brasília –
DF – Brazil

**Starting and ending time: July 31[st]: 10:16 am – 12:00 am; 2:34 pm - 5:36 pm**
August 1[st]: 2:00 pm – 6:00 pm

**In attendance:**
**Members of the Copom**
Ilan Goldfajn – Governor
Carlos Viana de Carvalho
Carolina de Assis Barros
Maurício Costa de Moura
Otávio Ribeiro Damaso
Paulo Sérgio Neves de Souza
Reinaldo Le Grazie
Sidnei Corrêa Marques
Tiago Couto Berriel

**Department Heads in charge of technical presentations (present on July 31[st])**
Alan da Silva Andrade Mendes - Department of Foreign Reserves
André Minella - Research Department (also present on August 1[st])
Flávio Túlio Vilela – Department of Banking Operations and Payments System
João Barata Ribeiro Blanco Barroso – Department of International Affairs
João Henrique de Paula Freitas Simão – Department of Open Market Operations
Tulio José Lenti Maciel – Department of Economics

**Other participants (present on July 31[st])**
Adalberto Felinto da Cruz Júnior – Executive Secretary
André Luiz Caccavo Miguel –Head of the Financial System Monitoring Department
Eugênio Pacceli Ribeiro – Head of the Deputy Governor for Economic Policy’s Office
Fabia Aparecida de Carvalho – Deputy Head the Research Department
Fabio Araújo – Economic Advisory to the President
Gustavo Paul Kurrle – Press Officer
Leonardo Martins Nogueira – Head of the Governor’s Office
Renato Baldini Junior –Head of the Department of Statistics
Ricardo Eyer Harris – Head of the Deputy Governor for Regulation’s Office
Rogério Antônio Lucca – Head of the Deputy Governor for Monetary Policy’s Office

The members of Copom analyzed the recent performance and prospects for the Brazilian and international
economies, under the monetary policy framework, whose objective is to comply with the inflation targets
established by the National Monetary Council.


**Date: July 31[st] and August 1[st], 2018**


Ilan Goldfajn – Governor
Carlos Viana de Carvalho
Carolina de Assis Barros
Maurício Costa de Moura
Otávio Ribeiro Damaso
Paulo Sérgio Neves de Souza
Reinaldo Le Grazie
Sidnei Corrêa Marques
Tiago Couto Berriel


Tulio José Lenti Maciel – Department of Economics

**Other participants (present on July 31[st])**
Adalberto Felinto da Cruz Júnior – Executive Secretary
André Luiz Caccavo Miguel –Head of the Financial System Monitoring Department
Eugênio Pacceli Ribeiro – Head of the Deputy Governor for Economic Policy’s Office
Fabia Aparecida de Carvalho – Deputy Head the Research Department
Fabio Araújo – Economic Advisory to the President
Gustavo Paul Kurrle – Press Officer


The members of Copom analyzed the recent performance and prospects for the Brazilian and international
economies, under the monetary policy framework, whose objective is to comply with the inflation targets
established by the National Monetary Council.


-----

1. Recent indicators of economic activity reflect the
effects of the temporary halt in the transportation
sector, but there is evidence of subsequent recovery.
The baseline scenario entertains continuation of
recovery of economic activity in the Brazilian economy,
at a more gradual pace than envisaged prior to the
halt.

2. The economy continues to operate with a high level
of economic slack, as reflected in the low industrial
capacity utilization indexes and, mainly, in the
unemployment rate.

3. The global outlook showed some accommodation
recently, but remains more challenging. The main risks
are associated with normalization of interest rates in
some advanced economies and with uncertainty
regarding global trade. Risk appetite towards
emerging economies remained relatively stable, at a
level below that observed earlier this year.

4. June inflation reflected significant upward pressure
from the halt in the transportation sector and other
relative price changes. Recent data corroborate the
view that these effects should be temporary. Measures
of underlying inflation are still running at low levels.
This includes the components that are most sensitive
to the business cycle and monetary policy.

5. Inflation expectations for 2018 and 2019 collected
by the Focus survey are around 4.1%. Expectations for
2020 and 2021 are around 4.0%.

6. The Copom's inflation projections in the scenario
with interest rate and exchange rate paths extracted
from the Focus survey stand around 4.2% for 2018,
and 3.8% for 2019. This scenario assumes, among
other hypotheses, a path for the policy interest rate
that ends 2018 at 6.5% p.a., and 2019 at 8.0% p.a.,
and a path for the exchange rate that ends 2018 at
R$/US$ 3.70 and 2019 at that same level. In this
scenario projections for the administered prices
inflation are 7.2% for 2018 and 4.8% for 2019.

7. In the scenario with a constant interest rate at
6.50% p.a., and a constant exchange rate at
R$3.75/US$[2], Copom’s inflation projections stand
around 4.2% for 2018 and 4.1% for 2019. In this


# B) Risks around baseline inflation scenario

8. The Copom’s baseline scenario for inflation
encompasses risk factors in both directions.

9. On the one hand, (i) the possible propagation,
through inertial mechanisms, of low inflation levels in
the past and the high level of economic slack may lead
to a lower-than-expected prospective inflation
trajectory.

10. On the other hand, (ii) frustration of expectations
regarding the continuation of reforms and necessary
adjustments in the Brazilian economy may affect risk
_premia and increase the path for inflation over the_
relevant horizon for the conduct of monetary policy.
This risk intensifies in case (iii) that the global outlook
for emerging economies deteriorates. The Committee
judges that the latter risks remain at higher levels.

# C) Discussion about the conduct of monetary policy

11. The Committee members discussed the evolution
of economic activity in light of available data. May 2018
data reflect the effects of the temporary halt in the
transportation sector that took place at the end of that
month. Indicators available since then point to
subsequent recovery, although some indicators
referring to June may still be influenced by that halt.
The baseline scenario entertains the continuation of
recovery of economic activity in the Brazilian economy,
albeit at a more gradual pace than estimated prior to
the halt.

12. Regarding the global outlook, the Committee
judges that financial conditions showed some
accommodation, but the scenario remains more
challenging. The baseline scenario comprises gradual
normalization of monetary policy in central economies.
There is risk of additional impact on emerging
economies owing to this process, which may reinforce
changes in asset prices and in the volatility of financial
conditions in international markets. The Committee
members also mentioned the growing risks to the


scenario, the inflation projections for administered

# A) Update of economic outlook and prices are 7.4% for 2018 and 5.0% for 2019 Copom’s baseline scenario[1]

1. Recent indicators of economic activity reflect the
effects of the temporary halt in the transportation **B) Risks around baseline inflation**
sector, but there is evidence of subsequent recovery. **scenario**


trajectory.

3. The global outlook showed some accommodation
recently, but remains more challenging. The main risks 10. On the other hand, (ii) frustration of expectations
are associated with normalization of interest rates in regarding the continuation of reforms and necessary
some advanced economies and with uncertainty adjustments in the Brazilian economy may affect risk
regarding global trade. Risk appetite towards _premia and increase the path for inflation over the_
emerging economies remained relatively stable, at a relevant horizon for the conduct of monetary policy.
level below that observed earlier this year. This risk intensifies in case (iii) that the global outlook

for emerging economies deteriorates. The Committee


of economic activity in light of available data. May 2018

by the Focus survey are around 4.1%. Expectations for

data reflect the effects of the temporary halt in the

2020 and 2021 are around 4.0%.

transportation sector that took place at the end of that
month. Indicators available since then point to

6. The Copom's inflation projections in the scenario

subsequent recovery, although some indicators

with interest rate and exchange rate paths extracted

referring to June may still be influenced by that halt.

from the Focus survey stand around 4.2% for 2018,

The baseline scenario entertains the continuation of

and 3.8% for 2019. This scenario assumes, among

recovery of economic activity in the Brazilian economy,

other hypotheses, a path for the policy interest rate

albeit at a more gradual pace than estimated prior to


around 4.2% for 2018 and 4.1% for 2019. In this

changes in asset prices and in the volatility of financial
conditions in international markets. The Committee
members also mentioned the growing risks to the

1 Unless explicitly stated otherwise, this update takes into 2 Value obtained according to the usual procedure of
account changes occurred since the June Copom meeting rounding the average R$/US$ exchange rate observed on the
(215[th] meeting). five business days ending on the Friday prior to the Copom

meeting.


-----

continued expansion of international trade, with
possible impacts on global growth. In this context, the
Copom members once again highlighted the capacity
of the Brazilian economy to withstand a setback in the
international scenario, given its robust balance of
payments and low inflation environment in the recent
past, in addition to anchored expectations and
prospects of economic recovery. Nevertheless, the
Copom pondered the risks stemming from a possible
additional deterioration in the outlook for emerging
economies, in a context of frustration of expectations
regarding the necessary reforms and adjustments in
the Brazilian economy.

13. The Copom analyzed the inflation trajectory in the
short-term. All members agreed that June inflation
reflected significant upward pressure from the halt in
the transportation sector and from other relative price
changes. Inflation projections for July and August
corroborate the view that these effects should be
temporary.

14. The Committee pointed out that several measures
of underlying inflation were running at low levels before
those shocks and that relative price changes in a
context of anchored inflation expectations may
contribute to the convergence of inflation to target,
without posing risks to its favorable dynamics once
these price changes are over. Nevertheless, the
members considered that the evolution of the
prospective inflation path in the medium and long
terms – along with the anchoring of inflation
expectations – should be monitored in order to
evaluate possible more enduring effects from shocks
– both those that have already occurred and those that
may yet arise – on inflation (i.e., their second-round
effects).

15. The Committee reaffirmed the understanding that,
with anchored inflation expectations, in the face of
occasional shocks that lead to changes in relative
prices, monetary policy should focus on their secondround effects only. The Copom also highlighted that its
reaction to possible changes in relative prices will be
symmetrical, i.e., monetary policy will follow the same
principles, whether in the face of inflationary shocks
(as in the case of an external shock leading to a
depreciation of the exchange rate) or in the face of
disinflationary shocks (as in the case of a favorable
food price shock). The Committee emphasizes that
this prescription requires an environment with
anchored expectations.


17. The Copom members assessed that economic
conditions with anchored inflation expectations,
underlying inflation measures at low levels, inflation
projections slightly below target for 2019, and high
level of slack in the economy prescribe
accommodative monetary policy, i.e., interest rates
below the structural interest level. Although estimates
of this rate involve a high degree of uncertainty,
Committee members expressed the view that current
_ex-ante real interest rates provide stimulus to the_
economy.

18. The Committee also debated the conditionalities
that would prescribe accommodative monetary policy.
All members agreed that the appropriate level of
stimulus depends on economic conditions – in
particular, on inflation expectations, the level of
economic slack, the balance of risks, and inflation
projections.

19. The Copom stresses that the continuation of
reforms and necessary adjustments in the Brazilian
economy is essential to the reduction of its structural
interest rate. The Committee will continue to reassess
estimates of this rate over time.

20. The Committee members then discussed the
evolution of the baseline scenario and the balance of
risks since its June meeting (215[th] meeting) and the
appropriate monetary policy decision in light of such
evolution.

21. The Committee assessed the effects of the halt in
the transportation sector. It was agreed that these
effects are revealing themselves temporary.
Nonetheless, they discussed possible more enduring
effects of the shocks faced by the Brazilian economy.
This context reinforces the importance of monitoring
over time the evolution of the baseline scenario and its
risks and of evaluating the duration of the effects of
shocks on inflation (i.e., its second-round effects) in
order to ensure that the achievement of low inflation
persists, even in the face of adverse shocks.

22. Regarding the balance of risks, on the one hand,
the Committee judged that downward risks for the
prospective inflation path due to the low level of
inflation in the recent past have decreased. However,
the persistence of a high level of economic slack also
poses downward risks to inflation. On the other hand,
it discussed the importance of the continuation of the
process of adjustments and reforms in the Brazilian
economy for mitigating the risks associated with the
deterioration of the scenario for emerging economies,
in a context of frustration of the expectations about


continued expansion of international trade, with expectations. The Committee will monitor the different
possible impacts on global growth. In this context, the measures of exchange-rate pass-through to both
Copom members once again highlighted the capacity inflation and underlying inflation.
of the Brazilian economy to withstand a setback in the
international scenario, given its robust balance of 17. The Copom members assessed that economic
payments and low inflation environment in the recent conditions with anchored inflation expectations,
past, in addition to anchored expectations and underlying inflation measures at low levels, inflation
prospects of economic recovery. Nevertheless, the projections slightly below target for 2019, and high


18. The Committee also debated the conditionalities

the transportation sector and from other relative price that would prescribe accommodative monetary policy.
changes. Inflation projections for July and August All members agreed that the appropriate level of
corroborate the view that these effects should be stimulus depends on economic conditions – in
temporary. particular, on inflation expectations, the level of

economic slack, the balance of risks, and inflation

14. The Committee pointed out that several measures projections.
of underlying inflation were running at low levels before
those shocks and that relative price changes in a 19. The Copom stresses that the continuation of
context of anchored inflation expectations may


evolution.

may yet arise – on inflation (i.e., their second-round
effects).

21. The Committee assessed the effects of the halt in
the transportation sector. It was agreed that these

15. The Committee reaffirmed the understanding that,

effects are revealing themselves temporary.

with anchored inflation expectations, in the face of

Nonetheless, they discussed possible more enduring

occasional shocks that lead to changes in relative

effects of the shocks faced by the Brazilian economy.

prices, monetary policy should focus on their second-

This context reinforces the importance of monitoring

round effects only. The Copom also highlighted that its

over time the evolution of the baseline scenario and its


the persistence of a high level of economic slack also

16. Having established how monetary policy should

poses downward risks to inflation. On the other hand,

react to shocks that induce changes in relative prices,

it discussed the importance of the continuation of the

Copom members discussed the extent of the

process of adjustments and reforms in the Brazilian

exchange-rate pass-through in the Brazilian economy.

economy for mitigating the risks associated with the

They concluded that the intensity of pass-through

deterioration of the scenario for emerging economies,

depends on several factors, such as the level of slack

in a context of frustration of the expectations about

in the economy and the degree of anchoring of inflation


-----

24. The Copom then discussed the advisability of
signaling on the future evolution of monetary policy. All
members considered that, in the absence of additional
shocks, the inflationary scenario should prove
comfortable. However, the higher level of uncertainty
of the current situation generates a need for greater
flexibility in the conduct of monetary policy. This
recommends refraining from providing indications on
the next steps of monetary policy.

25. The Copom members reiterated the importance of
reaffirming the conduct of monetary policy with
exclusive focus on the evolution of inflation projections
and expectations, the balance of risks, and economic
activity. Relative price shocks should be tackled only
in the secondary impact they may have on prospective
inflation. In particular, they reiterated the importance of
insisting on communicating that there is no mechanical
relationship between recent shocks and the conduct of
monetary policy.

26. The Committee members reiterated once again
their preference for communicating conditionalities on
the evolution of monetary policy, which better
transmits the economic rationality guiding their
decisions. This contributes to increase transparency
and enhance Copom’s communications. In this
context, they reasserted that the next steps in the
conduct of monetary policy will continue to depend on
the evolution of economic activity, the balance of risks,
and on inflation projections and expectations.

27. All Committee members once again emphasized
that the approval and implementation of reforms –
notably those of fiscal nature – and adjustments in the
Brazilian economy are crucial for the sustainability of
the environment of low and stable inflation, for the full
operation of monetary policy, and for the reduction of
the structural interest rate of the economy, with
widespread benefits for society. The Committee also
notes that the perception of continuity in the reform
agenda affects expectations and current
macroeconomic projections.

28. Finally, the Copom stressed the importance of
other initiatives aimed at productivity increases,
efficiency gains, greater flexibility of the economy, and
improvements in the business environment. These
efforts are fundamental for the resumption of economic
activity and for the development of the Brazilian
economy.


29. Taking into account the baseline scenario, the
balance of risks, and the wide array of available
information, the Copom unanimously decided to
maintain the Selic rate at 6.50% p.a. The Committee
judges that this decision reflects its baseline scenario
for prospective inflation and the associated balance of
risks and is consistent with convergence of inflation to
target over the relevant horizon for the conduct of
monetary policy, which includes 2019.

30. The Committee reiterates that economic conditions
prescribe accommodative monetary policy, i.e.,
interest rates below the structural level.

31. The Copom emphasizes that the evolution of
reforms and necessary adjustments in the Brazilian
economy is essential to maintain low inflation in the
medium and long run, for the reduction of its structural
interest rate, and for sustainable economic recovery.
The Committee stresses that the perception of
continuation of the reform agenda affects current
expectations and macroeconomic projections.

32. The Copom judges that it should base its decisions
on the evolution of inflation projections and
expectations, of the balance of risks, and of economic
activity. Shocks that produce relative price changes
should only lead to a monetary policy response to their
possible second-round effects (i.e., to the propagation
to prices in the economy that are not directly affected
by the shock). It is through such second-round effects
that these shocks may affect inflation projections and
expectations, and change the balance of risks. These
effects may be mitigated by the level of economic slack
and by inflation expectations anchored around the
targets. Therefore, there is no mechanical relationship
between recent shocks and the conduct of monetary
policy.

33. The Committee judges that the effects of recent
shocks on inflation are revealing themselves
temporary, but it is important to follow the baseline
scenario and associated risks, and to assess possible
persistent effects of shocks to inflation (i.e., their
second-round effects).

34. In the Copom’s assessment, the evolution of the
baseline scenario and the balance of risks prescribes
keeping the Selic rate at its current level. The Copom
emphasizes that the next steps in the conduct of
monetary policy will continue to depend on the
evolution of economic activity, the balance of risks,
and on inflation projections and expectations.


these reforms and adjustments. The Copom judges
that these risks remain at higher levels.

# D) Monetary Policy Decision

23. Based on all assessments, the Copom members
agreed to maintain the Selic rate at 6.50% p.a.

29. Taking into account the baseline scenario, the
balance of risks, and the wide array of available

24. The Copom then discussed the advisability of information, the Copom unanimously decided to


25. The Copom members reiterated the importance of interest rates below the structural level.
reaffirming the conduct of monetary policy with
exclusive focus on the evolution of inflation projections

31. The Copom emphasizes that the evolution of

and expectations, the balance of risks, and economic

reforms and necessary adjustments in the Brazilian

activity. Relative price shocks should be tackled only

economy is essential to maintain low inflation in the

in the secondary impact they may have on prospective

medium and long run, for the reduction of its structural

inflation. In particular, they reiterated the importance of

interest rate, and for sustainable economic recovery.

insisting on communicating that there is no mechanical

The Committee stresses that the perception of

relationship between recent shocks and the conduct of

continuation of the reform agenda affects current


conduct of monetary policy will continue to depend on

by the shock). It is through such second-round effects

the evolution of economic activity, the balance of risks,

that these shocks may affect inflation projections and

and on inflation projections and expectations.

expectations, and change the balance of risks. These
effects may be mitigated by the level of economic slack

27. All Committee members once again emphasized and by inflation expectations anchored around the
that the approval and implementation of reforms – targets. Therefore, there is no mechanical relationship
notably those of fiscal nature – and adjustments in the between recent shocks and the conduct of monetary
Brazilian economy are crucial for the sustainability of policy.
the environment of low and stable inflation, for the full


efficiency gains, greater flexibility of the economy, and

keeping the Selic rate at its current level. The Copom

improvements in the business environment. These

emphasizes that the next steps in the conduct of

efforts are fundamental for the resumption of economic

monetary policy will continue to depend on the

activity and for the development of the Brazilian

evolution of economic activity, the balance of risks,

economy.

and on inflation projections and expectations.


-----

35. The following members of the Committee voted for
this decision: Ilan Goldfajn (Presidente), Carlos Viana
de Carvalho, Carolina de Assis Barros, Maurício Costa
de Moura, Otávio Ribeiro Damaso, Paulo Sérgio
Neves de Souza, Reinaldo Le Grazie, Sidnei Corrêa
Marques e Tiago Couto Berriel.


-----

