# Minutes of the 219[th] Meeting of the Monetary Policy Committee (Copom) * of the Central Bank of Brazil **

### December 11[th] and 12[th], 2018

#### * The Monetary Policy Committee of the Central Bank of Brazil is herein referred to as the “Copom” and the “Committee”.

 ** These minutes represent Copom's best effort to provide an English version of the minutes of its policy meeting. In case of any inconsistency, the original version in Portuguese prevails.


-----

**Date: December 11[th] and 12[th], 2018**

**Place:** BCB Headquarters’ meeting rooms on the 8[th] floor (December 11[th]) and 20[th] floor (December 12[th]) – Brasília –
DF – Brazil

**Starting and ending time:  December 11[th]: 9:45 am–12:44 pm; 2:33 pm–4:36 pm**

December 12[th]: 2:30 pm–6:20 pm

**In attendance:**
**Members of the Copom**
Ilan Goldfajn – Governor
Carlos Viana de Carvalho
Carolina de Assis Barros
Maurício Costa de Moura
Otávio Ribeiro Damaso
Paulo Sérgio Neves de Souza
Reinaldo Le Grazie
Sidnei Corrêa Marques
Tiago Couto Berriel

**Department Heads in charge of technical presentations (present on December 11[th])**
Alan da Silva Andrade Mendes - Department of Foreign Reserves
André Minella - Research Department (also present on December 12[th])
André de Oliveira Amante – Department of Open Market Operations
Flávio Túlio Vilela – Department of Banking Operations and Payments System
João Barata Ribeiro Blanco Barroso – Department of International Affairs
Tulio José Lenti Maciel – Department of Economics

**Other participants (present on December 11[th])**
Adalberto Felinto da Cruz Junior – Secretário Executivo
Enrico Bezerra Ximenes de Vasconcelos – Secretary of the Financial Stability Committee and Senior Advisor to the
Board
Eugênio Pacceli Ribeiro – Head of the Deputy Governor for Economic Policy’s Office
Fabia Aparecida de Carvalho – Deputy Head of the Research Department
Fabio Araujo – Head of the Economic Advisors’ Office
Fernando Alberto Sampaio Rocha – Head of the Department of Statistics
Gustavo Paul Kurrle – Press Officer
Leonardo Martins Nogueira – Head of the Governor’s Office
Márcio Antonio Estrela – Head of the Deputy Governor for International Affairs and Corporate Risk Management’s
Office
Paula Ester Farias de Leitão – Head of the Deputy Governor for Regulation’s Office
Rogério Antônio Lucca – Head of the Deputy Governor for Monetary Policy’s Office

The members of Copom analyzed the recent performance and prospects for the Brazilian and international
economies, under the monetary policy framework, whose objective is to comply with the inflation targets established
by the National Monetary Council.


-----

## A) Update of economic outlook and B) Risks around the baseline inflation Copom’s baseline scenario[1] scenario

1. Recent data on economic activity continue to indicate 8. The Copom’s baseline scenario for inflation
gradual recovery of the Brazilian economy. encompasses risk factors in both directions, but with larger

weight on the last two risks, listed below.

2. The economy continues to operate with a high level of
economic slack, as reflected in the low industrial capacity 9. On the one hand, (i) the high level of economic slack may
utilization indexes and, mainly, in the unemployment rate. lead to a lower-than-expected prospective inflation

trajectory.

3. The global outlook remains challenging for emerging
economies. The main risks are associated with an increase 10. On the other hand, (ii) frustration of expectations
in risk aversion in global financial markets, with regarding the continuation of reforms and necessary
normalization of interest rates in some advanced adjustments in the Brazilian economy may affect risk
economies, and with uncertainty regarding global trade. premia and increase the path for inflation over the relevant

horizon for the conduct of monetary policy. This risk

4. Various measures of underlying inflation are running at intensifies in case (iii) the global outlook for emerging
appropriate or comfortable levels. This includes the economies deteriorates.
components that are most sensitive to the business cycle
and monetary policy. 11. The Committee judges that risk (i) has increased,

whereas risk (ii) has moderated.

5. Inflation expectations for 2018, 2019 and 2020 collected
by the Focus survey are around 3.7%, 4.1% and 4.0%,
respectively. Expectations for 2021 are around 3.75%.

## C) Discussion about the conduct of

6. The Copom's inflation projections in the scenario with **monetary policy**
interest rate and exchange rate paths extracted from the
Focus survey stand around 3.7% for 2018, 3.9% for 2019, 12. The Committee members discussed the evolution of
and 3.6% for 2020. This scenario assumes, among other economic activity in light of available data. They concluded
assumptions, a path for the Selic rate that ends 2018 at that the data indicate continuation of the gradual recovery
6.5% p.a., increases to 7.5% p.a. over the course of 2019, of economic activity in Brazil.
and reaches 8.0% p.a. by 2020. It also assumes a path for
the exchange rate that ends 2018 at R$/US$ 3.78, and ends

13. Regarding the global outlook, the Committee members

both 2019 and 2020 at R$/US$ 3.80. In this scenario,

considered that it remains challenging for emerging

inflation projections for administered prices are 6.1% for

economies. They recognized the continuity of greater

2018, 5.1% for 2019 and 3.9% for 2020.

volatility in the prices of risky assets and debated the
possible negative effects of increased risk aversion in global

7. In the scenario with a constant Selic rate at 6.50% p.a., markets. The Copom’s baseline scenario assumes gradual
and a constant exchange rate at R$3.85/US$2, Copom’s normalization of monetary policy in some central
inflation projections stand around 3.7% for 2018, 4.0% for economies. The Committee members also mentioned the
2019, and 4.0% for 2020. In this scenario, inflation uncertainty associated to the continued expansion of
projections for administered prices are 6.1% for 2018, 5.2% international trade, with possible impacts on global
for 2019, and 4.0% for 2020. growth, and on the Chinese economy, in particular. In this

context, the Copom members once again highlighted the
capacity of the Brazilian economy to withstand a setback in
the international scenario, given its robust balance of
payments and the environment of anchored inflation
expectations and prospects of economic recovery.

14. The members of the Committee discussed the drop in
recent inflation projections and the levels of various

1 Unless explicitly stated otherwise, this update takes into account 2 Value obtained according to the usual procedure of rounding the
changes occurred since the October Copom meeting (218[th] average R$/US$ exchange rate observed on the five business days
meeting). ending on the Friday prior to the Copom meeting.


-----

measures of underlying inflation. They assessed that those considered that the current environment prescribes
measures are at appropriate or comfortable levels, and retaining greater flexibility in the conduct of monetary
that inflation projections indicate convergence of inflation policy, which requires refraining from providing indications
to target over the course of 2019 and 2020. This path is of its next steps. The members of the Copom reinforced the
consistent with inflation expectations, which remain importance of emphasizing their commitment to
anchored. The Copom members emphasized, however, the conducting monetary policy in order to maintain the path
existence of risks to the consolidation of this scenario in the for prospective inflation in line with inflation targets.
medium and long terms, especially those related to the
continuation of reforms and necessary adjustments in the 21. The Committee members reiterated their preference
Brazilian economy. for communicating the conditionalities for the conduct of

monetary policy, which better transmits the economic

15. The Copom assessed that, since its previous meeting, rationality guiding their decisions. This contributes to
the risk that the high level of economic slack may lead to a increase transparency and enhance Copom’s
lower-than-expected prospective inflation trajectory has communications. In this context, they reasserted that the
increased, while the risk related to the frustration of next steps in the conduct of monetary policy will continue
expectations regarding the continuation of reforms and to depend on the evolution of economic activity, the
necessary adjustments in the Brazilian economy has balance of risks, and on inflation projections and
decreased. However, the members highlighted that upside expectations.
risks to inflation remain significant, and with larger weight
in their balance of risks. Therefore, the Committee 22. The Copom pondered that caution, serenity, and
concluded that the balance of risks remains asymmetric, perseverance in monetary policy decisions, even in the face
albeit to a lesser degree. of volatile scenarios, have been instrumental in pursuing its

primary objective of keeping the inflation path towards the

16. The Copom members assessed that economic targets. The Committee understands that decisions
conditions with anchored inflation expectations, governed by these principles provide good guidance for

underlying inflation measures at appropriate or monetary policy.

comfortable levels, inflation projected to move toward
targets for 2019 and 2020, and high level of slack in the 23. All Committee members once again emphasized that
economy prescribe accommodative monetary policy, i.e., the approval and implementation of reforms —notably
interest rates below the structural interest rate level. those of fiscal nature— and adjustments in the Brazilian
Although estimates of this rate involve a high degree of economy are crucial for the sustainability of the
uncertainty, the Committee members expressed the view environment of low and stable inflation, for the full
that the current ex-ante real interest rates provide stimulus operation of monetary policy, and for the reduction of the
to the economy. structural interest rate of the economy, with widespread

benefits for society. The Committee also notes that the

17. The Committee also discussed the conditionalities that perception of continuity in the reform agenda affects
would prescribe accommodative monetary policy. All expectations and current macroeconomic projections.
members agreed that the appropriate level of stimulus
depends on economic conditions, inflation expectations, 24. Finally, the Copom members stressed the importance
balance of risks and inflation projections. Importantly, the of other initiatives aimed at productivity increases,
provision of monetary stimulus requires an environment efficiency gains, greater flexibility of the economy, and
with anchored inflation expectations. improvements in the business environment. These efforts

are fundamental for the resumption of economic activity

18. The Copom stresses that the continuation of reforms and the development of the Brazilian economy.
and necessary adjustments in the Brazilian economy is
essential to the reduction of its structural interest rate. The
Committee will continue to reassess the estimates of this
rate over time. **D) Monetary Policy Decision**

19. The Committee members then discussed the monetary

25. Taking into account the baseline scenario, the balance

policy decision, in light of the evolution of the baseline

of risks, and the wide array of available information, the

scenario and the balance of risks since its October meeting

Copom unanimously decided to maintain the Selic rate at

(218th meeting). They unanimously decided to maintain

6.50% p.a. The Committee judges that this decision reflects

the Selic rate at 6.50% p.a.

its baseline scenario for prospective inflation and the
associated balance of risks, and is consistent with

20. The Copom then discussed the advisability of signaling convergence of inflation to target over the relevant horizon
the future evolution of monetary policy. All members


-----

for the conduct of monetary policy, which includes 2019
and, with a smaller weight, 2020.

26. The Copom reiterates that economic conditions
prescribe stimulative monetary policy, i.e., interest rates
below the structural level.

27. The Copom emphasizes that the evolution of reforms
and necessary adjustments in the Brazilian economy is
essential to maintain low inflation in the medium and long
run, for the reduction of its structural interest rate, and for
sustainable economic recovery. The Committee stresses
that the perception of continuation of the reform agenda
affects current expectations and macroeconomic

projections.

28. In the Copom’s assessment, the evolution of the
baseline scenario and the balance of risks prescribes
keeping the Selic rate at its current level. The Copom
emphasizes that the next steps in the conduct of monetary
policy will continue to depend on the evolution of
economic activity, the balance of risks, and inflation
projections and expectations.

29. The following members of the Committee voted for this
decision: Ilan Goldfajn (Governor), Carlos Viana de
Carvalho, Carolina de Assis Barros, Maurício Costa de
Moura, Otávio Ribeiro Damaso, Paulo Sérgio Neves de
Souza, Reinaldo Le Grazie, Sidnei Corrêa Marques, and
Tiago Couto Berriel.


-----

