-----

**Date: October 30[th] and 31[st], 2018**

**Place:** BCB Headquarters’ meeting rooms on the 8[th] floor (October 30[th]) and 20[th] floor (October 31[st]) –
Brasília – DF – Brazil

**Starting and ending time: October 30[th]: 10:05 am–11:45 am; 2:34 pm–4:54 pm**
October 31[st]: 2:00 pm–6:00 pm

**In attendance:**
**Members of the Copom**
Ilan Goldfajn – Governor
Carlos Viana de Carvalho
Carolina de Assis Barros
Maurício Costa de Moura
Otávio Ribeiro Damaso
Paulo Sérgio Neves de Souza
Reinaldo Le Grazie
Sidnei Corrêa Marques
Tiago Couto Berriel

**Department Heads in charge of technical presentations (present on October 30[th])**
Alan da Silva Andrade Mendes - Department of Foreign Reserves
André Minella - Research Department (also present on October 31[st])
André de Oliveira Amante – Department of Open Market Operations
Flávio Túlio Vilela – Department of Banking Operations and Payments System
João Barata Ribeiro Blanco Barroso – Department of International Affairs
Tulio José Lenti Maciel – Department of Economics

**Other participants (present on October 30[th])**
Daniela Pires Ramos de Alcântara – Head of the Deputy Governor for International Affairs and Corporate
Risk Management’s Office
Enrico Bezerra Ximenes de Vasconcelos – Secretary of the Financial Stability Committee and Senior
Advisor to the Board
Eugênio Pacceli Ribeiro – Head of the Deputy Governor for Economic Policy’s Office
Fabia Aparecida de Carvalho – Deputy Head of the Research Department
Fabio Araujo – Head of the Economic Advisors’ Office
Fernando Alberto Sampaio Rocha – Head of the Department of Statistics
Gilneu Francisco Astolfi Vivan – Head of the Financial System Monitoring Department
Gustavo Paul Kurrle – Press Officer
João Henrique de Paula Freitas Simão – Advisor to the Department of Open Market Operations
Kathleen Krause – Head of the Deputy Governor for Regulation’s Office
Leonardo Martins Nogueira – Head of the Governor’s Office
Rogério Antônio Lucca – Head of the Deputy Governor for Monetary Policy’s Office

The members of Copom analyzed the recent performance and prospects for the Brazilian and international
economies, under the monetary policy framework, whose objective is to comply with the inflation targets
established by the National Monetary Council.


**Date: October 30[th] and 31[st], 2018**


Ilan Goldfajn – Governor
Carlos Viana de Carvalho
Carolina de Assis Barros
Maurício Costa de Moura
Otávio Ribeiro Damaso
Paulo Sérgio Neves de Souza
Reinaldo Le Grazie
Sidnei Corrêa Marques
Tiago Couto Berriel


Tulio José Lenti Maciel – Department of Economics

**Other participants (present on October 30[th])**
Daniela Pires Ramos de Alcântara – Head of the Deputy Governor for International Affairs and Corporate
Risk Management’s Office
Enrico Bezerra Ximenes de Vasconcelos – Secretary of the Financial Stability Committee and Senior
Advisor to the Board
Eugênio Pacceli Ribeiro – Head of the Deputy Governor for Economic Policy’s Office
Fabia Aparecida de Carvalho – Deputy Head of the Research Department


The members of Copom analyzed the recent performance and prospects for the Brazilian and international
economies, under the monetary policy framework, whose objective is to comply with the inflation targets
established by the National Monetary Council.


-----

# B) Risks around the baseline inflation
 A) Update of economic outlook and
 scenario
 Copom’s baseline scenario[1]

8. The Copom’s baseline scenario for inflation

1. Recent indicators of economic activity point to the

encompasses risk factors in both directions, but with

recovery of the Brazilian economy, at a more gradual

greater weight on the last two risks, listed below.

pace than envisaged early this year.


3. The global outlook remains challenging, with risk
appetite towards emerging economies at levels below
those seen early this year. The main risks continue to
be associated with normalization of interest rates in
some advanced economies and with uncertainty
regarding global trade.


10. On the other hand, (ii) frustration of expectations
regarding the continuation of reforms and necessary
adjustments in the Brazilian economy may affect risk
premia and increase the path for inflation over the
relevant horizon for the conduct of monetary policy.
This risk intensifies in case (iii) the global outlook for
emerging economies deteriorates. The Committee
judges that the degree of asymmetry in the balance of
risks has diminished since its previous meeting.

# C) Discussion about the conduct of monetary policy

11. The Committee members discussed the evolution
of economic activity in light of available data. They
concluded that the data indicate continuation of the
recovery of economic activity, at a more gradual pace
than envisaged early this year.

12. Regarding the global outlook, the Committee
members considered that it remains challenging for
emerging economies. They evaluated that, since their
previous meeting, risk appetite for assets of these
economies stabilized – in contrast with the worsening
trend observed in the previous months. However, the
assessment was that this stabilization occurred at
levels lower that those observed at the beginning of
the year, which implies higher risk premia. In addition,
since the previous Copom meeting, prices of risky
assets in some advanced economies have shown
greater volatility, which contrasts with the favorable
evolution observed previously. The Copom’s baseline
scenario assumes gradual normalization of monetary
policy in central economies. The Committee members
also mentioned the risks to the continued expansion of
international trade, with possible impacts on global
growth, and on the Chinese economy, in particular. In
this context, the Copom members once again
highlighted the capacity of the Brazilian economy to
withstand a setback in the international scenario, given
its robust balance of payments and the environment of


9. On the one hand, (i) the high level of economic slack

2. The economy continues to operate with a high level

may lead to a lower-than-expected prospective

of economic slack, as reflected in the low industrial

inflation trajectory.

capacity utilization indexes and, mainly, in the
unemployment rate.

10. On the other hand, (ii) frustration of expectations
regarding the continuation of reforms and necessary

3. The global outlook remains challenging, with risk

adjustments in the Brazilian economy may affect risk

appetite towards emerging economies at levels below

premia and increase the path for inflation over the

those seen early this year. The main risks continue to

relevant horizon for the conduct of monetary policy.


5. Inflation expectations for 2018, 2019 and 2020 **monetary policy**
collected by the Focus survey are around 4.4%, 4.2%,
and 4.0%, respectively. Expectations for 2021 remain 11. The Committee members discussed the evolution
around 3.9%. of economic activity in light of available data. They

concluded that the data indicate continuation of the

6. The Copom's inflation projections in the scenario recovery of economic activity, at a more gradual pace
with Selic and exchange rate paths extracted from the than envisaged early this year.
Focus survey stand around 4.4% for 2018, 4.2% for


since the previous Copom meeting, prices of risky

7. In the scenario with a constant Selic rate at 6.50% assets in some advanced economies have shown
p.a., and a constant exchange rate at R$3.70/US$[2], greater volatility, which contrasts with the favorable

evolution observed previously. The Copom’s baseline

Copom’s inflation projections stand around 4.4% for

scenario assumes gradual normalization of monetary

2018, 4.2% for 2019, and 4.1% for 2020. In this

policy in central economies. The Committee members

scenario, the inflation projections for administered

also mentioned the risks to the continued expansion of

prices are 7.3% for 2018, 5.4% for 2019, and 4.1% for

international trade, with possible impacts on global

2020.

growth, and on the Chinese economy, in particular. In


-----

13. The members of the Committee also highlighted
the reduction of uncertainties in the domestic front,
which led to a decline in risk premia embedded in
Brazilian asset prices. This decline of uncertainties
contributed to reduce the degree of asymmetry in the
balance of risks for inflation. Despite this improvement,
the Copom members concluded that upward risks to
inflation continue to have a greater weight in the
balance of risks.

14. The Copom analyzed the inflation trajectory for the
next months. This trajectory should lead to a rise of 12month inflation, reaching a peak around the second
quarter of 2019. Thereafter, 12-month inflation is
expected to decline over the remainder of 2019,
towards the target.

15. With regard to underlying inflation, in recent
months its various measures have risen from levels
considered to be low, reaching levels that the
Committee deems appropriate —i.e., generally
consistent with the inflation targets. Recent changes in
relative prices, in a context of anchored inflation
expectations, seem to have contributed to raise
inflation to levels compatible with the inflation targets,
without posing risks to the maintenance of inflation at
these levels once such relative price adjustments have
taken place. However, the Committee members
considered that the evolution of the prospective
inflation path in the medium and long terms — along
with the anchoring of inflation expectations — should
be monitored in order to evaluate possible more
enduring effects from recent shocks to inflation (i.e.,
their second-round effects).

16. Copom members then discussed the convenience
of maintaining in their official documents the message
on principles for conducting monetary policy in face of
relative price shocks in an inflation targeting regime
with anchored expectations. The Copom has
communicated that, in this context, monetary policy
should focus only on possible second-round effects of
relative price changes induced by occasional shocks.
It has also stressed that its reaction to possible
changes in relative prices will be symmetric, i.e.,
monetary policy will follow the same principles,
whether in face of inflationary shocks (as in the case
of a shock leading to a depreciation of the exchange
rate) or in face of disinflationary shocks (as in the case
of a favorable food price shock). Committee members
pondered that it should already be clear that there is
no mechanical relationship between shocks that
produce relative price adjustments and monetary
policy. Hence, they agreed to exclude this message as
of their next meeting, with the understanding that this
should not be interpreted as a change in the conduct
of monetary policy.


17. The members of the Committee also discussed the
extent of the exchange rate pass-through in the
Brazilian economy. They assessed that, with the
exception of some administered prices, the level of
pass-through has been contained. The members
pondered, however, that the intensity of pass-through
depends on several factors, such as the level of
economic slack, and the degree of anchoring of
inflation expectations. The Committee will continue to
monitor different measures of exchange rate passthrough to both inflation and underlying inflation.

18. The Copom members assessed that economic
conditions with anchored inflation expectations,
underlying inflation measures at adequate levels,
inflation projections close to the target for 2019 and
2020, and high level of slack in the economy still
prescribe accommodative monetary policy, i.e.,
interest rates below the structural interest rate level.
Although estimates of this rate involve a high degree
of uncertainty, the Committee members expressed the
view that the current ex-ante real interest rates provide
stimulus to the economy.

19. The Committee also discussed the conditionalities
that would prescribe accommodative monetary policy.
All members agreed that the appropriate level of
stimulus depends on economic conditions – in
particular, on inflation expectations, the level of
economic slack, the balance of risks, and inflation
projections. Importantly, the provision of monetary
stimulus requires an environment with anchored
inflation expectations. The Committee assessed that
this stimulus should be removed gradually if the
prospective scenario for inflation at the relevant
horizon and/or its balance of risks worsen.

20. The Copom stresses that the continuation of
reforms and necessary adjustments in the Brazilian
economy is essential to the reduction of its structural
interest rate. The Committee will continue to reassess
the estimates of this rate over time.

21. The Committee members then discussed the
monetary policy decision, in light of the evolution of the
baseline scenario and the balance of risks since its
September meeting (217[th] meeting). They
unanimously decided to maintain the Selic rate at
6.50% p.a.

22. The Copom then discussed the advisability of
signaling the future evolution of monetary policy.
Despite the reduction in the degree of asymmetry of
the balance of risks, all members considered that the
current environment prescribes retaining greater
flexibility in the conduct of monetary policy, which
requires refraining from providing indications of the
next steps of monetary policy. The members of the
Copom reinforced the importance of emphasizing their
commitment to conducting monetary policy in order to


anchored inflation expectations and prospects of 17. The members of the Committee also discussed the
economic recovery. extent of the exchange rate pass-through in the

Brazilian economy. They assessed that, with the

13. The members of the Committee also highlighted exception of some administered prices, the level of
the reduction of uncertainties in the domestic front, pass-through has been contained. The members
which led to a decline in risk premia embedded in pondered, however, that the intensity of pass-through
Brazilian asset prices. This decline of uncertainties depends on several factors, such as the level of
contributed to reduce the degree of asymmetry in the economic slack, and the degree of anchoring of


quarter of 2019. Thereafter, 12-month inflation is
expected to decline over the remainder of 2019, prescribe accommodative monetary policy, i.e.,
towards the target. interest rates below the structural interest rate level.

Although estimates of this rate involve a high degree
of uncertainty, the Committee members expressed the

15. With regard to underlying inflation, in recent

view that the current ex-ante real interest rates provide

months its various measures have risen from levels

stimulus to the economy.

considered to be low, reaching levels that the
Committee deems appropriate —i.e., generally
consistent with the inflation targets. Recent changes in 19. The Committee also discussed the conditionalities

that would prescribe accommodative monetary policy.


be monitored in order to evaluate possible more
enduring effects from recent shocks to inflation (i.e., horizon and/or its balance of risks worsen.
their second-round effects).

20. The Copom stresses that the continuation of

16. Copom members then discussed the convenience reforms and necessary adjustments in the Brazilian
of maintaining in their official documents the message economy is essential to the reduction of its structural
on principles for conducting monetary policy in face of interest rate. The Committee will continue to reassess
relative price shocks in an inflation targeting regime the estimates of this rate over time.
with anchored expectations. The Copom has


of a favorable food price shock). Committee members Despite the reduction in the degree of asymmetry of
pondered that it should already be clear that there is the balance of risks, all members considered that the
no mechanical relationship between shocks that current environment prescribes retaining greater
produce relative price adjustments and monetary flexibility in the conduct of monetary policy, which
policy. Hence, they agreed to exclude this message as requires refraining from providing indications of the
of their next meeting, with the understanding that this next steps of monetary policy. The members of the
should not be interpreted as a change in the conduct Copom reinforced the importance of emphasizing their
of monetary policy. commitment to conducting monetary policy in order to


-----

maintain the path for prospective inflation in line with
inflation targets. This requires flexibility to gradually
adjust the conduct of monetary policy when and if
needed. This ability to respond to different
circumstances contributes to the maintenance of the
environment with anchored expectations, which is
fundamental to ensure that the achievement of low
inflation persists, even in face of adverse shocks.

23. The Committee members reiterated their
preference for communicating the conditionalities for
the conduct of monetary policy, which better transmits
the economic rationality guiding their decisions. This
contributes to increase transparency and enhance
Copom’s communications. In this context, they
reasserted that the next steps in the conduct of
monetary policy will continue to depend on the
evolution of economic activity, the balance of risks,
and on inflation projections and expectations.

24. All Committee members once again emphasized
that the approval and implementation of reforms —
notably those of fiscal nature— and adjustments in the
Brazilian economy are crucial for the sustainability of
the environment of low and stable inflation, for the full
operation of monetary policy, and for the reduction of
the structural interest rate of the economy, with
widespread benefits for society. The Committee also
notes that the perception of continuity in the reform
agenda affects expectations and current
macroeconomic projections.

25. Finally, the Copom members stressed the
importance of other initiatives aimed at productivity
increases, efficiency gains, greater flexibility of the
economy, and improvements in the business
environment. These efforts are fundamental for the
resumption of economic activity and for the
development of the Brazilian economy.

# D) Monetary Policy Decision

26. Taking into account the baseline scenario, the
balance of risks, and the wide array of available
information, the Copom unanimously decided to
maintain the Selic rate at 6.50% p.a. The Committee
judges that this decision reflects its baseline scenario
for prospective inflation and the associated balance of
risks and is consistent with convergence of inflation to
target over the relevant horizon for the conduct of
monetary policy, which includes 2019 and, with a
smaller weight, 2020.


28. The Copom judges that it should base its decisions
on the evolution of inflation projections and
expectations, of the balance of risks, and of economic
activity. Shocks that produce relative price changes
should only lead to a monetary policy response to their
possible second-round effects (i.e., to the propagation
to prices in the economy that are not directly affected
by the shock). It is through such second-round effects
that these shocks may affect inflation projections and
expectations, and change the balance of risks. These
effects may be mitigated by the level of economic slack
and by inflation expectations anchored at the targets.
Therefore, there is no mechanical relationship
between recent shocks and the conduct of monetary
policy.


maintain the path for prospective inflation in line with continuation of the reform agenda affects current
inflation targets. This requires flexibility to gradually expectations and macroeconomic projections.
adjust the conduct of monetary policy when and if
needed. This ability to respond to different 28. The Copom judges that it should base its decisions
circumstances contributes to the maintenance of the on the evolution of inflation projections and
environment with anchored expectations, which is expectations, of the balance of risks, and of economic
fundamental to ensure that the achievement of low activity. Shocks that produce relative price changes
inflation persists, even in face of adverse shocks. should only lead to a monetary policy response to their


evolution of economic activity, the balance of risks, policy.
and on inflation projections and expectations.

29. The Copom reiterates that economic conditions

24. All Committee members once again emphasized still prescribe stimulative monetary policy, i.e., interest
that the approval and implementation of reforms — rates below the structural level. This stimulus will begin
notably those of fiscal nature— and adjustments in the to be removed gradually if the outlook for inflation at
Brazilian economy are crucial for the sustainability of the relevant horizon for the conduct of monetary policy
the environment of low and stable inflation, for the full and/or its balance of risks worsen.
operation of monetary policy, and for the reduction of


increases, efficiency gains, greater flexibility of the 31. The following members of the Committee voted for
economy, and improvements in the business this decision: Ilan Goldfajn (Governor), Carlos Viana
environment. These efforts are fundamental for the de Carvalho, Carolina de Assis Barros, Maurício Costa
resumption of economic activity and for the de Moura, Otávio Ribeiro Damaso, Paulo Sérgio
development of the Brazilian economy. Neves de Souza, Reinaldo Le Grazie, Sidnei Corrêa

Marques, and Tiago Couto Berriel.

# D) Monetary Policy Decision

26. Taking into account the baseline scenario, the


27. The Copom emphasizes that the evolution of
reforms and necessary adjustments in the Brazilian
economy is essential to maintain low inflation in the
medium and long run, for the reduction of its structural
interest rate, and for sustainable economic recovery.
The Committee stresses that the perception of


-----

