May 26, 2010

Bank of Japan

# Minutes of the Monetary Policy Meeting
## on April 30, 2010

(English translation prepared by the Bank's staff based on the Japanese original)


-----

-----

A Monetary Policy Meeting of the Bank of Japan Policy Board was held in the

Head Office of the Bank of Japan in Tokyo on Friday, April 30, 2010, from 9:00 a.m. to

1:13 p.m.[1]

**Policy Board Members Present**

**Mr. M. Shirakawa, Chairman, Governor of the Bank of Japan**

**Mr. H. Yamaguchi, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Japan**

**Mr. K. G. Nishimura, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Japan**

**Ms. M. Suda**

**Mr. T. Noda**

**Mr. S. Nakamura**

**Mr. H. Kamezaki**

**Mr. R. Miyao**

Government Representatives Present

Mr. Y. Noda, Senior Vice Minister of Finance, Ministry of Finance

Mr. K. Tsumura, Parliamentary Vice-Minister, Cabinet Office

Reporting Staff

Mr. A. Horii, Executive Director (Assistant Governor)

Mr. K. Ido, Executive Director

Mr. H. Nakaso, Executive Director

Mr. M. Amamiya, Director-General, Monetary Affairs Department

Mr. T. Kato, Associate Director-General, Monetary Affairs Department

Mr. H. Toyama, Director-General, Financial Markets Department

Mr. K. Momma, Director-General, Research and Statistics Department

Mr. T. Sekine, Associate Director-General, Research and Statistics Department

Mr. H. Ono, Director-General, International Department

1 The minutes of this meeting were approved by the Policy Board at the Monetary Policy Meeting
held on May 20 and 21, 2010 as "a document describing an outline of the discussion at the meeting"
stipulated in Article 20, paragraph 1 of the Bank of Japan Act of 1997. Those present are referred
to by their titles at the time of the meeting.

1


-----

Secretariat of the Monetary Policy Meeting

Mr. Y. Iino, Director-General, Secretariat of the Policy Board

Mr. T. Tachibana, Director, Deputy Head of Secretarial Services for the Board,

Secretariat of the Policy Board

Mr. N. Yoshioka, Deputy Director-General, Monetary Affairs Department[2]

Mr. K. Nakamura, Senior Economist, Monetary Affairs Department

Mr. M. Nakashima, Senior Economist, Monetary Affairs Department

2 Mr. N. Yoshioka was present from 11:46 a.m. to 1:13 p.m.

2


-----

**I. Summary of Staff Reports on Economic and Financial Developments[3]**

**A. Money Market Operations in the Intermeeting Period**

The Bank conducted money market operations in accordance with the guideline

decided at the previous meeting on April 6 and 7, 2010.[4] The uncollateralized overnight

call rate had been at around 0.1 percent.

With a view to ensuring market stability, the Bank continued to conduct money

market operations in a flexible manner in response to changes in the market situation, as

evidenced by its continued provision of ample funds through such operations as the

fixed-rate funds-supplying operation against pooled collateral.

**B. Recent Developments in Financial Markets**

Japan's money market remained stable on the back of market participants'

confidence in the Bank's provision of ample funds. Money market rates, including

longer-term ones, had been stable at low levels. General collateral (GC) repo rates, which

had temporarily risen somewhat to around 0.15 percent, had been broadly in the range of

0.10-0.15 percent. As for interest rates on term instruments, yields on treasury discount

bills (T-Bills), including those with a one-year maturity, had been in the range of 0.10-0.15

percent, and the TIBOR rates had declined somewhat.

Japanese stock prices declined several times against the backdrop of the

appreciation of the yen, and fell again around the end of April, reflecting developments in

U.S. and European stock prices. The Nikkei 225 Stock Average had recently been at

around 11,000 yen. With regard to long-term interest rates in Japan, the benchmark rate

had declined somewhat and had recently been at around 1.3 percent.

The yen appreciated somewhat against the U.S. dollar mainly due to a decline in

U.S. interest rates, but then depreciated and had recently been at around 94 yen against the

dollar.

**C. Overseas Economic and Financial Developments**

The world economy had continued to recover moderately.

3 Reports were made based on information available at the time of the meeting.
4 The guideline was as follows:
The Bank of Japan will encourage the uncollateralized overnight call rate to remain at
around 0.1 percent.

3


-----

The U.S. economy was recovering, albeit at a moderate pace. Exports were

increasing, private consumption was expanding at a moderate rate, and the decline in

business fixed investment as a whole was leveling out. Reflecting such developments in

demand, production was recovering, albeit moderately. In the labor market, the decline in

the number of employees was coming to a halt, and the unemployment rate had been more

or less unchanged at a high level. As for prices, the year-on-year rate of increase in the

consumer price index (CPI) for all items had been in the range of 2.0-3.0 percent, with some

fluctuations caused by changes in energy prices. The year-on-year rate of increase in the

CPI for all items less energy and food, or the core CPI, had been moderating against the

backdrop of slack in supply and demand conditions and slower growth in wages.

Economic activity in the euro area was picking up, with some differences in

growth by country. Private consumption had been relatively weak, while production had

been increasing gradually as the pace of decline in business fixed investment moderated and

exports increased. As for prices, the year-on-year rate of increase in the Harmonized

Index of Consumer Prices (HICP) excluding energy and unprocessed food had been

declining moderately against the backdrop of slack in supply and demand conditions and

slower growth in wages. The U.K. economic activity was picking up.

The Chinese economy had continued to grow at a relatively rapid pace, led mainly

by domestic demand. Growth in private consumption had been firm and fixed asset

investment had been increasing, although at a slower pace. Exports had also been rising.

Under these circumstances, production had continued to increase. Economic conditions in

the NIEs and the ASEAN countries were recovering. Exports and production, notably of

IT-related goods, had continued to rise. In addition, private consumption and business

fixed investment had been on an increasing trend. The Indian economy had also continued

to grow at a relatively rapid pace. With regard to prices, the year-on-year rates of increase

in the CPI had risen in many Asian economies, indicating an increase in inflationary

pressure.

As for global financial markets, interest rates on term instruments had been more

or less unchanged at low levels. U.S. stock prices had risen slightly, mainly because some

economic indicators and some corporate results were better than market expectations, but

most recently had declined, mainly reflecting the downgrading of some European countries'

sovereign debt. Stock markets in Europe had been nervous due to concerns about the

4


-----

consequences and possible impact of the fiscal deficit problem in countries such as Greece,

and stock prices had most recently declined sharply triggered by the downgrading of some

sovereign debt. U.S. and German long-term interest rates had fallen, mainly due to

expectations for continued accommodative monetary policy and a flight to quality on the

back of the fiscal deficit problem in countries such as Greece.

**D. Economic and Financial Developments in Japan**

1. Economic developments

Exports, especially to emerging and commodity-exporting economies, had

continued to increase at a relatively rapid pace. In the January-March quarter of 2010, real

exports to the United States and Europe decreased for the first time in four quarters, but

those to East Asia and other regions continued to rise. In terms of goods, there had been

increases in IT-related goods, capital goods and parts, and motor vehicles and their related

goods, particularly those exported to emerging and commodity-exporting economies.

As for public investment, the value of contracted public works -- an indicator of

the amount of public works orders -- declined significantly in the October-December

quarter of 2009 and the January-March quarter of 2010.

With regard to business fixed investment, machinery orders -- a leading indicator

of machinery investment -- had been more or less unchanged of late.

Private consumption on the whole had continued to pick up; for example, sales at

department stores exceeded the previous quarter's level in the January-March quarter of

2010 for the first time since the October-December quarter of 2007. Consumer confidence,

after decreasing significantly at the end of 2009, had also shown signs of improvement

recently.

Production increased by 6.7 percent in the January-March quarter from the

previous quarter, registering a rise for the fourth consecutive quarter. The production

forecast index for April onward suggested that production was likely to continue increasing,

mainly due to strong growth in exports to emerging economies.

The employment and income situation had remained severe, as seen in the

continued high unemployment rate. However, there were some positive indications: the

number of employees rose in March from the previous year and nominal wages increased

on a year-on-year basis, with the latter reflecting a rise in overtime and special payments.

5


-----

On the price front, commodity prices as a whole were on a moderate rising trend

against the background of the improvement in global economic conditions. The

three-month rate of change in the domestic corporate goods price index (CGPI) had risen

somewhat, reflecting the increase in commodity prices, in spite of the persistent slack in

supply and demand conditions for products. The CGPI was likely to rise somewhat for the

time being. The CPI (excluding fresh food) was declining on a year-on-year basis due to

the substantial slack in the economy as a whole, but the moderating trend in the pace of

decline had continued.

2. Financial environment

Financial conditions, with some lingering severity, had shown increasing signs of

easing. The declining trend in firms' funding costs had continued. Issuing conditions for

CP and corporate bonds had remained favorable, and even those for low-rated corporate

bonds had continued to show signs of improvement. As for credit demand, the amount of

funding by the private sector had declined as firms' need to fund working capital and fixed

investment had continued to decline. In these circumstances, firms' financial positions had

continued to show signs of easing on the whole, as evidenced by signs of improvement even

among very small firms.

**II. Summary of Discussions by the Policy Board on Economic and Financial**

**Developments**

**A. Economic Developments**

Members shared the view that overseas economies had continued to recover

moderately, and this trend was likely to continue. Some members were of the opinion that

the world economy was growing somewhat more rapidly than expected, led by higher

growth in emerging economies. Many members said that it was necessary to continue to

carefully watch factors such as the risk of an overheating in emerging economies and the

possible consequences of the fiscal deficit problem in some European countries. With

regard to global financial markets, some members said that investors were becoming more

cautious about taking on risks amid heightened concerns about fiscal risks in countries such

as Greece, and close attention should be paid to developments in the markets.

6


-----

Many members were of the view that the U.S. economy was recovering at a

moderate pace. Some members said that, in addition to the leveling out of business fixed

investment against the background of favorable business performance, private consumption

was recovering at a moderate rate, partly reflecting wealth effects stemming from the rise in

stock prices. Meanwhile, some members expressed the view that the slow improvement in

housing and employment indicators suggested that balance-sheet adjustment pressure still

weighed on households. These members continued that it would therefore take

considerable time for the recovery in the U.S. economy to gain momentum.

With regard to the economy of the euro area, many members said that economic

activity was picking up, led mainly by an increase in exports to outside the euro area and in

production, and would likely continue to pick up. These members, however, pointed to the

possibility that economic activity in the euro area might be adversely affected, for example,

by the heightened uncertainty arising from concerns about the fiscal deficit problem in some

euro area countries and by measures toward sound public finance to be taken in each

country in the area.

Some members expressed the view that the Chinese economy had continued to

grow at a rapid pace, led mainly by domestic demand, and this trend was likely to continue.

Some members said that, since developments in the Chinese economy would have a

significant impact on the world economy, attention should be paid to the effects of the

measures being implemented by the Chinese authorities to prevent an overheating.

Based on the above discussions on economic and financial conditions abroad,

members discussed the state of Japan's economy. They concurred that the economy had

been picking up. Many members expressed the view that the economic growth rate had

been somewhat higher than that projected in the October 2009 _Outlook for Economic_

_Activity and Prices (hereafter the Outlook Report) and the interim assessment in January_

2010. Many members said that, in addition to the increase in exports and production and

the continuing pick-up in private consumption, business fixed investment was leveling out

more clearly. Some members -- referring to some positive indications for spending by

households and firms -- expressed the view that signs of self-sustaining recovery were

starting to be seen. One member expressed the opinion that there had been clearer

evidence of a recovery trend in overseas economies, especially the U.S. economy, and thus

prospects for a self-sustaining recovery in Japan's economy were improving against the

7


-----

background of firms' expectations for economic growth remaining stable. On the other

hand, one member noted that the level of economic activity remained low and differences in

the degree of recovery persisted among industries and firms. A different member said that

Japan's economy remained greatly dependent on growth in exports and various policy

measures, and the economy could not yet be judged to have returned to a self-sustaining

recovery path.

Members concurred that the CPI (excluding fresh food) was declining on a

year-on-year basis due to the substantial slack in the economy as a whole, but the

moderating trend in the pace of decline had continued and the year-on-year pace of decline

was likely to keep moderating. One member said that, although consumers generally

continued to show a preference for inexpensive goods and services, some signs of

improvement seen in sales of luxury goods, for example, suggested that the economy was

starting to move toward overcoming deflation.

**B. Financial Developments**

Members shared the view that financial conditions, with some lingering severity,

had shown increasing signs of easing. As for the money market, some members said that,

partly because the Bank expanded the measure to encourage a decline in longer-term

interest rates in March, the TIBOR rates had declined further and bank lending rates had

also fallen. A few members were of the view that issuing conditions for CP and corporate

bonds had remained favorable on the whole, as reflected in spreads on corporate bonds

having narrowed and corporate bond issuance being at a high level.

**C. Outlook for Economic Activity and Prices**

With regard to the outlook for economic activity, members agreed that Japan's

economy was likely to be on a recovery trend. A few members expressed the view that the

demand-boosting effects of various policy measures targeted at durable goods consumption

-- which had supported the pick-up in the economy -- were likely to wane upon completion

of the policy measures in fiscal 2010. Many members, including these members, said that

Japan's exports and production were nevertheless likely to continue increasing, given that

the world economy was likely to grow moderately, led by strong growth in emerging and

commodity-exporting economies. They continued that the recovery in corporate profits

8


-----

resulting from the increases in exports and production was likely to not only stimulate

business fixed investment but also lead to improvements in the employment and income

situation, thereby positively affecting the household sector. However, one member added

that there was great uncertainty regarding the future pace of Japan's economic recovery due

to structural factors, such as firms' stances on restraining wages amid global competition.

Many members commented that, from a short-term cyclical perspective, Japan's

economy had emerged from the sharp deterioration observed since the outbreak of the

financial crisis and had been on a recovery trend. However, they expressed the opinion

that, from a medium- to long-term perspective, the economy faced the critical challenge of

raising real economic growth and productivity amid a shrinking population, a low birth rate

and further population aging, and changes in the global demand structure. A few members

said that the diminished medium- to long-term growth potential of the economy was the

underlying cause of the current deflation. Some members, including these members, were

of the view that, in order to solve the challenge, not only did firms need to explore and

capture potential demand, as well as steadily work on improving productivity and the

capacity for creating value added, but also the authorities should support such constructive

efforts by firms.

Regarding the outlook for prices, members agreed on the following assessment:

the CGPI was expected to be positive on a year-on-year basis from fiscal 2010 onward due

mainly to the improvement in the aggregate supply and demand balance and to

developments in commodity prices; under the assumption that medium- to long-term

inflation expectations remained stable, the year-on-year rate of decline in the CPI

(excluding fresh food) was expected to slow as the aggregate supply and demand balance

gradually improved, and there were prospects that the rate of change in the CPI could enter

positive territory in fiscal 2011. Some members said that the CPI would likely be boosted

by a moderate rise in commodity prices against the background of strong growth in

emerging economies. A few members -- referring to the fact that market participants were

focusing on whether the midpoint of Policy Board members' forecasts for the CPI in fiscal

2011 would be in positive territory -- said that the Bank should clearly explain that (1)

specific figures in the members' forecasts were merely supplements and (2) the underlying

economic mechanism was most important.

Members also discussed upside and downside risks to the baseline scenario.

9


-----

Members said that, regarding economic activity, upside and downside risk factors

were (1) developments in emerging and commodity-exporting economies, (2) developments

in advanced economies, (3) various international financial developments, and (4) firms'

medium- to long-term expectations for future economic growth. One member added that,

if households increasingly felt anxious about the future and developed a sense of stagnation,

and if the employment and income situation worsened due to sluggish business activity,

there was a possibility that household spending would grow only slowly.

Many members said that emerging and commodity-exporting economies had been

recovering more rapidly than expected, and, if the authorities were slow to take appropriate

policy responses, there was a certain risk that economic activity might overheat. They also

said that an overheating in these economies would lead to faster-than-expected economic

growth for Japan in the short term, but in the longer term it might be a downside risk as it

could cause an unwinding of excessive economic and financial activity in these economies.

One member was of the opinion that any policy tightening in emerging economies might be

insufficient to constrain such excessive activity, because funds would continue to flow into

these economies from advanced economies, where the extremely accommodative monetary

policy stance had been maintained. A different member pointed to the possibility that, if

commodity prices rose further on the back of an increase in demand from emerging

economies and terms of trade consequently worsened further, this might slow the pace of

increase in firms' spending.

As for advanced economies, some members said that continued balance-sheet

adjustments and declining bank lending in the United States and Europe might weigh on

economic activity for a prolonged period in these economies. One member commented

that there would inevitably be a policy shift in advanced countries toward sound public

finance, and such action might suppress their economic growth. One member said that

attention should be paid to the possibility that maintaining accommodative financial

conditions for longer than necessary could lead to large swings in economic activity and

prices.

Some members said that there were various downside risk factors that could

emerge from events in international financial markets, such as developments in the Greek

problem, the review of regulation and supervision of the financial sector, and the possible

consequences of implementation of measures to prevent an overheating in emerging

10


-----

countries. A few members commented that governments' fiscal conditions had worsened

not only in Greece but also in a number of advanced economies, including Japan, and

heightening fiscal risks warranted more careful attention.

Regarding firms' medium- to long-term expectations for future economic growth,

some members said that, if such growth expectations declined, domestic business fixed

investment and employment might be constrained considerably. One member -- who took

the view that the key to Japan's continued growth amid a shrinking population lay in

whether Japan could tap demand from emerging and commodity-exporting countries -- said

that competition to attract such demand might be extremely intense as there were many

rivals to Japan around the world.

Members were of the view that, regarding the outlook for prices, upside and

downside risk factors were (1) materialization of the upside or downside risks affecting the

level of economic activity; (2) a possible decline in firms' and households' medium- to

long-term inflation expectations; (3) changes in import prices, which might be caused by

factors such as a larger-than-expected rise in primary commodity prices brought about by

fast growth in emerging economies; and (4) uncertainty with respect to gauging the degree

of slack in the economy or the state of utilization of labor and production capacity. One

member added that there was also uncertainty regarding the degree and time lag of the

effects of the improvement in the aggregate supply and demand balance spreading to prices.

A few members said that attention should be paid to the possibility that the year-on-year

rate of change in the CPI could be revised downward as a result of the revision of the base

year for the CPI, which was expected to take place in the middle of 2011.

Based on the above considerations, members assessed the economic and price

situation from two perspectives.

Members made an assessment in terms of the first perspective; that is to say, they

assessed the most likely outlook for economic activity and prices through fiscal 2011.

Members agreed that Japan's economy was likely to be on a recovery trend. They shared

the view that, based on the assumption that medium- to long-term inflation expectations

remained stable, the year-on-year rate of decline in the CPI was likely to slow as the

aggregate supply and demand balance improved gradually, and there were prospects that the

rate of change in the CPI could enter positive territory in fiscal 2011. They agreed that the

economy was likely to return to a sustainable growth path with price stability in the longer

11


-----

term.

Members then made an assessment in terms of the second perspective; that is to

say, they examined the risks that they considered most relevant to the conduct of monetary

policy, including risks that had a longer time horizon than the first perspective. In the area

of economic activity, members shared the view that, while there were some upside risks

such as faster growth in emerging and commodity-exporting economies, there were also

downside risks such as those related to international financial developments. Regarding

the outlook for prices, they concurred that there was a possibility that inflation would rise

more than expected due to an increase in commodity prices brought about by higher growth

rates in emerging and commodity-exporting economies, while there was also a risk that the

rate of inflation might fall due, for example, to a decline in medium- to long-term inflation

expectations.

With regard to the balance of upside and downside risks to the outlook for

economic activity, many members expressed the view that they had generally become more

balanced. One member, however, still saw risks as tilted to the downside. On the other

hand, a different member saw risks as tilted to the upside in the short term, mainly due to

the possibility of increased momentum to support a self-sustaining recovery in domestic

private demand, but took a somewhat cautious view about the balance of risks in the

medium term because the pace of recovery in the financial intermediary function in the

United States and Europe was sluggish and because there were concerns about

consequences of the fiscal deficit problem in some countries. Furthermore, from a

longer-term perspective, the member did not have confidence in the growth potential of

Japan's economy.

�

**III. Review of the "Understanding of Medium- to Long-Term Price Stability"**

In March 2006, the Bank announced, in "The Bank's Thinking on Price Stability,"

that the "understanding of medium- to long-term price stability" (the level of inflation that

each member of the Policy Board understood, when conducting monetary policy, as being

consistent with price stability over the medium to long term; hereafter "understanding")

would be, in principle, reviewed annually.

Members exchanged views regarding points that should be discussed in examining

the "understanding." Many members expressed the view that no large measurement bias

12


-----

remained in the CPI in Japan. Many members said that it was necessary to accept some

inflation as a "safety margin" that acted as a buffer against the risk of falling into a vicious

circle of declining prices and deteriorating economic activity. One member was of the

opinion that inflation of only slightly over 0 percent was too small to constitute a "safety

margin." A different member -- noting that intense competition among firms continued to

weigh on wages, the potential economic growth rate was low, and the fiscal deficit was

widening significantly -- expressed the view that it was becoming more necessary to have a

"safety margin." Some members referred to a view outside the Bank that the experience of

the recent financial crisis suggested that it was necessary to have a large "safety margin."

These members then said that, as a buffer against problems as considerable as a financial

crisis or a long-term downtrend in the growth potential of the economy, some degree of

"safety margin" was of limited importance. They continued that, considering the cost

incurred by having a large "safety margin" in normal times, such a margin would be

unnecessary. In relation to the level of inflation perceived by firms and households, some

members were of the opinion that medium- to long-term inflation expectations had

generally remained stable. One member said that, partly because prices in Japan had

stayed stable at low levels for a long time, the level of inflation that the public perceived as

consistent with price stability was lower than in overseas economies. A different member

said that there seemed to be a change in the public's perception of prices, as evidenced by a

survey in which the proportion of respondents taking a favorable view of the price decline

had decreased. This member continued that it was important that the public's perception

of the level of inflation remain stable.

Based on the above considerations, members exchanged views regarding the

figures that would represent the "understanding" in terms of the year-on-year rate of change

in the CPI. The figure representing many members' "understanding" was around 1 percent,

with a range of 0.5 or 1 percentage point in each direction attached. One member's

"understanding" was expressed as a range from 0.5 to 2 percent, and the midpoint was

slightly over 1 percent. A different member said that the member's "understanding" could

be best expressed by a positive number closer to 0 percent than to 1 percent. The member

noted that, while the midpoints of most Policy Board members' "understanding" were

around 1 percent, this should not be overly emphasized. After stating their individual

views, members agreed that the following expression, made clearer in December 2009,

13


-----

should be maintained: each Policy Board member's "understanding" fell in a positive range

of 2 percent or lower, and the midpoints of most Policy Board members' "understanding"

were around 1 percent.

**IV. Summary of Discussions on Monetary Policy for the Immediate Future**

Regarding the guideline for money market operations for the intermeeting period

ahead, members agreed that it was appropriate to maintain the current guideline that the

Bank would encourage the uncollateralized overnight call rate to remain at around 0.1

percent.

As for the future conduct of monetary policy, members agreed that, in order for

Japan's economy to overcome deflation and return to a sustainable growth path with price

stability, the Bank should continue to consistently make contributions as central bank.

They concurred that, in the conduct of monetary policy, the Bank would continue to aim at

maintaining the extremely accommodative financial environment. One member raised the

possibility that an upward revision of Policy Board members' forecasts might cause

speculation about a possible change in the Bank's accommodative monetary policy, and the

Bank should therefore clearly explain its stance on monetary policy -- namely, that it would

maintain the extremely accommodative financial environment. A few members expressed

the opinion that the experience of the recent global financial crisis suggested that, in the

conduct of monetary policy, it was necessary to make wide-ranging assessments of not only

stability in prices measured by the price index but also accumulation of financial

imbalances observed in, for example, asset prices and credit aggregates.

Members also discussed the effects of the expansion of the measure to encourage a

decline in longer-term interest rates in March. A few members said that the intended

purpose of the expansion had been achieved, in that interest rates on term instruments had

declined, and it had promoted the further spread of monetary easing effects. However, a

few members commented that there was a view in the market that, against the background

of a steady increase in the amount outstanding of funds provided by the fixed-rate

funds-supplying operation against pooled collateral, money market transactions had

contracted and market participants' confidence that they could acquire sufficient funds

whenever necessary had weakened as a result. A few members said that attention should

be paid to the possibility that smooth financial intermediation might be impaired if the

14


-----

expansion of the measure squeezed financial institutions' profits through the decline in their

lending rates. Some members expressed the view that, in the conduct of money market

operations, the Bank should continue to give due consideration to ensuring the functioning

of the market while continuing to provide ample funds.

Members discussed how to tackle the economy's medium- to long-term challenge

of strengthening the foundations for economic growth, based on the recognition that,

although the economy had been on a recovery trend from a short-term cyclical perspective,

from a longer-term perspective it faced downward pressure on domestic demand against the

backdrop of a low birth rate, population aging, and a shrinking population. Some

members raised the issue that, although efforts to increase productivity and strengthen

economic growth potential should be made primarily by firms and other economic entities

in the private sector, there might be room for the Bank to support such efforts from the

financial side by making use of its central bank functions. One member -- noting that the

ordinary scope of the conduct of monetary policy was to tackle issues regarding short-term

cyclical developments -- added that, since the underlying cause of the current deflation lay

in the reduced growth potential of the economy, it was necessary that the Bank find a way

to make contributions from the central bank's perspective, in light of its mission to achieve

price stability and thereby contribute to sustainable economic growth.

In response to the issue raised, the staff explained that, if the Bank were to support

firms' efforts to strengthen the foundations for economic growth by making use of central

bank functions, one possibility was to focus on financial institutions' lending activity and

provide such institutions with funds to support their lending to those industries with growth

potential.

Some members said that, if the Bank were to implement such a new measure to

support financial institutions, it should ensure consistency with its mission as stipulated in

the Bank of Japan Act and with the need to ensure its financial health. A few members

expressed the view that the new measure should be formulated carefully so as not to

constrain the regular conduct of monetary policy. A few members commented that, in

formulating the new measure, the Bank should devise ways to avoid its excessive

involvement in resource allocation among individual firms. A few members noted that it

was financial institutions that actually extended loans to firms, and therefore the Bank

needed to gain a clear understanding of such institutions' needs in formulating the new

15


-----

measure.

Based on the discussion, members concurred that a new measure to support

strengthening the foundations for economic growth should be examined in detail from a

practical perspective by taking account of the following: (1) preventing any constraint on

the regular conduct of monetary policy; (2) avoiding the Bank's excessive involvement in

microeconomic resource allocation among individual firms; and (3) ensuring the Bank's

financial health. The chairman instructed the staff to (1) devise a possible scheme for,

evaluate the efficacy of, and focus on the relevant points of the new measure to support

private financial institutions in terms of fund provisioning with a view to strengthening the

foundations for economic growth; (2) exchange views with financial institutions about

issues regarding the formulation of the new measure; and (3) report their findings.

**V. Remarks by Government Representatives**

The representative from the Ministry of Finance made the following remarks.

(1) The Japanese economy had been picking up steadily, but it was only self-sustaining at a

weak level and the situation remained difficult, as evidenced by the high unemployment

rate. As for short-term prospects, in addition to risk factors such as international

financial developments and deflation, there was continued concern that the employment

situation could deteriorate further, and the basis for the economy's return to a path of

strong private demand-led growth remained fragile.

(2) Faced by the current severe economic conditions, the government, with the aim of

overcoming deflation and ensuring economic recovery, would carry out the emergency

economic countermeasures and steadily implement the recently approved budget for

fiscal 2010, and would also draw up concrete plans for the "New Growth Strategy

(Basic Policies)" and implement the plans.

(3) The government -- while recognizing that the Bank showed its determination to

consistently make contributions to overcome deflation -- expected the Bank to continue

to support the economy from the financial side, for example, with a view to overcoming

deflation, by conducting monetary policy in an appropriate and flexible manner, while

working together with the government. In releasing the April Outlook Report, the

government expected the Bank to clearly explain that the Bank would continue to

maintain the extremely accommodative financial environment.

16


-----

The representative from the Cabinet Office made the following remarks.

(1) The Japanese economy had been picking up steadily, but it was only self-sustaining at a

weak level and the situation remained difficult, as evidenced by the high unemployment

rate. The year-on-year rate of change in the CPI was likely to continue declining

moderately, although the pace of decline was expected to slow. The task for the

Japanese economy in the immediate future was to ensure economic recovery and

overcome deflation while securing employment. The government considered it

important that the government and the Bank work together to achieve a positive

inflation rate as early as possible.

(2) The government would implement the emergency economic countermeasures and the

measures laid out in the budget for fiscal 2010 in a steady and appropriate manner. To

fulfill its responsibility, it would also put forward additional measures for the "New

Growth Strategy (Basic Policies)" and draw up concrete plans for it, thereby showing a

clear picture of future economic growth, and present to the public a path toward sound

public finance.

(3) The government considered it important to show how the content of the April Outlook

Report -- for which the text would be decided later in this meeting -- could be assessed

in light of the Bank's "understanding" regarding price stability, and also to ensure

consistency between the content and this "understanding." The government hoped that

the Bank would continue to aim at overcoming deflation swiftly and underpin the

economy.

**VI. Votes**

Based on the above discussions, members agreed that it was appropriate to

maintain the current guideline for money market operations, which encouraged the

uncollateralized overnight call rate to remain at around 0.1 percent.

To reflect this view, the chairman formulated the following proposal and put it to a

vote.

**The Chairman's Policy Proposal on the Guideline for Money Market Operations:**

1. The guideline for money market operations for the intermeeting period ahead will be as

follows.

17


-----

The Bank of Japan will encourage the uncollateralized overnight call rate

to remain at around 0.1 percent.

2. A public statement will be decided separately.

Votes for the proposal: Mr. M. Shirakawa, Mr. H. Yamaguchi, Mr. K. G. Nishimura,

Ms. M. Suda, Mr. T. Noda, Mr. S. Nakamura, Mr. H. Kamezaki, and Mr. R. Miyao.

Votes against the proposal: None.

**VII. Discussion on the Statement on Monetary Policy**

Members shared the view that, given the current economic conditions in Japan, it

would be necessary to strengthen the foundations for economic growth, and that, based on

this recognition, it was necessary for the Bank to make new efforts to contribute to such a

strengthening. They discussed and put to a vote the text of a Statement on Monetary

Policy that included the chairman's instruction to the staff to examine and report on possible

ways to support private financial institutions in terms of fund provisioning with a view to

strengthening the foundations for economic growth. The Policy Board decided the text by

a unanimous vote. It was confirmed that the statement would be released immediately

after the meeting (see Attachment).

**VIII. Discussion on the Outlook for Economic Activity and Prices**

Members discussed the draft of the _Outlook for Economic Activity and Prices_

(consisting of "The Bank's View" and "The Background"), and put "The Bank's View" to a

vote. The Policy Board decided, by a unanimous vote, the text of "The Bank's View." It

was confirmed that "The Bank's View" would be published on April 30, 2010 and the whole

report on May 1, 2010.

Votes for the proposal: Mr. M. Shirakawa, Mr. H. Yamaguchi, Mr. K. G. Nishimura,

Ms. M. Suda, Mr. T. Noda, Mr. S. Nakamura, Mr. H. Kamezaki, and Mr. R. Miyao.

Votes against the proposal: None.

18


-----

**IX. Approval of the Minutes of the Monetary Policy Meeting**

The Policy Board approved unanimously the minutes of the Monetary Policy

Meeting of April 6 and 7, 2010 for release on May 10, 2010.

19


-----

Attachment

April 30, 2010

Bank of Japan

**Statement on Monetary Policy**

1. At the Monetary Policy Meeting held today, the Policy Board of the Bank of Japan

decided, by a unanimous vote,[5] to set the following guideline for money market

operations for the intermeeting period:

The Bank of Japan will encourage the uncollateralized overnight call rate

to remain at around 0.1 percent.

2. At the Meeting, Policy Board members examined the _Outlook for Economic Activity_

_and Prices. Based on the recognition that Japan's economy faces the critical challenge_

of overcoming deflation and returning to a sustainable growth path with price stability,

it was confirmed at the Meeting that, in the conduct of monetary policy, the Bank

would aim to maintain the extremely accommodative financial environment. It was

also confirmed that it would be necessary to strengthen the foundations for economic

growth given the current economic conditions in Japan. Based on this recognition,

members shared the view that it was necessary for the Bank to make new efforts to

contribute to strengthening the foundations for economic growth.

In light of these discussions, the Chairman has instructed the staff to examine and

report on another occasion, on possible ways to support private financial institutions in

terms of fund provisioning with a view to strengthening the foundations for economic

growth.

5 Voting for the action: Mr. M. Shirakawa, Mr. H. Yamaguchi, Mr. K. G. Nishimura, Ms. M. Suda,
Mr. T. Noda, Mr. S. Nakamura, Mr. H. Kamezaki, and Mr. R. Miyao.
Voting against the action: None.

20


-----

