Not to be released until 8:50 a.m.
Japan Standard Time on Friday,
October 8, 2010.

October 8, 2010

Bank of Japan

# Minutes of the Monetary Policy Meeting
## on September 6 and 7, 2010

(English translation prepared by the Bank's staff based on the Japanese original)


-----

Please contact the Bank of Japan at the address below in advance to request permission

when reproducing or copying the content of this document for commercial purposes.

Secretariat of the Policy Board, Bank of Japan

P.O. Box 30, Nihonbashi, Tokyo 103-8660, Japan

Please credit the source when quoting, reproducing, or copying the content of this

document.


-----

A Monetary Policy Meeting of the Bank of Japan Policy Board was held in the

Head Office of the Bank of Japan in Tokyo on Monday, September 6, 2010, from 2:00 p.m.

to 4:29 p.m., and on Tuesday, September 7, from 9:00 a.m. to 12:34 p.m.[1]

**Policy Board Members Present**

**Mr. M. Shirakawa, Chairman, Governor of the Bank of Japan**

**Mr. H. Yamaguchi, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Japan**

**Mr. K. G. Nishimura, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Japan**

**Ms. M. Suda**

**Mr. T. Noda**

**Mr. S. Nakamura**

**Mr. H. Kamezaki**

**Mr. R. Miyao**

**Mr. Y. Morimoto**

Government Representatives Present

Mr. M. Ikeda, Senior Vice Minister of Finance, Ministry of Finance[2]

Mr. Y. Kinoshita, Deputy Vice Minister for Policy Planning and Coordination, Ministry

of Finance[3]

Mr. K. Tsumura, Parliamentary Vice-Minister, Cabinet Office[2]

Mr. K. Umetani, Director-General, Economic and Fiscal Management, Cabinet Office[3]

Reporting Staff

Mr. K. Yamamoto, Executive Director

Mr. H. Nakaso, Executive Director (Assistant Governor)

Mr. M. Amamiya, Executive Director

1 The minutes of this meeting were approved by the Policy Board at the Monetary Policy Meeting
held on October 4 and 5, 2010 as "a document describing an outline of the discussion at the meeting"
stipulated in Article 20, paragraph 1 of the Bank of Japan Act of 1997. Those present are referred
to by their titles at the time of the meeting.
2 Messrs. M. Ikeda and K. Tsumura were present on September 7: from 9:21 a.m. to 12:34 p.m. and
for the whole of the session, respectively.
3 Messrs. Y. Kinoshita and K. Umetani were present on September 6.

1


-----

Mr. N. Kinoshita, Executive Director

Mr. S. Kushida, Director-General, Monetary Affairs Department

Mr. T. Kato, Head of Policy Planning Division, Monetary Affairs Department

Mr. H. Toyama, Director-General, Financial Markets Department

Mr. K. Momma, Director-General, Research and Statistics Department

Mr. T. Sekine, Head of Economic Research Division, Research and Statistics

Department

Mr. H. Ono, Director-General, International Department

Secretariat of the Monetary Policy Meeting

Mr. Y. Iino, Director-General, Secretariat of the Policy Board

Mr. T. Tachibana, Director, Deputy Head of Planning and Coordination Division,

Secretariat of the Policy Board

Mr. K. Nishizaki, Senior Economist, Monetary Affairs Department

Mr. H. Ichiue, Senior Economist, Monetary Affairs Department

2


-----

**I. Summary of Staff Reports on Economic and Financial Developments[4]**

**A. Money Market Operations in the Intermeeting Period**

The Bank conducted money market operations in accordance with the guideline

decided at the previous meetings on August 9 and 10 and on August 30, 2010.[5] The

uncollateralized overnight call rate had been at around 0.1 percent.

The Bank, in consideration of the recent formation of market rates, conducted

money market operations in a flexible manner. On September 3, it provided funds with a

six-month term through the fixed-rate funds-supplying operation against pooled collateral,

and on September 6 disbursed the first new loans under the fund-provisioning measure to

support strengthening the foundations for economic growth.

**B. Recent Developments in Financial Markets**

Money market rates -- particularly longer-term ones -- had declined, albeit very

slightly, partly because the Bank decided at the previous meeting on August 30 to introduce

an additional monetary easing measure. General collateral (GC) repo rates on the whole

had been broadly stable in the range of 0.10-0.15 percent, although they exhibited some

volatility. As for interest rates on term instruments, yields on treasury discount bills

(T-Bills) had declined, and the TIBOR rates had been on a moderate declining trend.

Issuance rates on CP had been on a moderate downtrend due in part to the fall in overall

money market rates against the backdrop of the ongoing favorable supply and demand

conditions.

Japanese stock prices, after declining amid the continued appreciation of the yen

and weak U.S. and European stock prices as a whole, had recovered somewhat. The

Nikkei 225 Stock Average had recently been in the range of 9,000-9,500 yen. With regard

to long-term interest rates in Japan, the benchmark rate, which temporarily fell below 0.9

percent due to the downtrend in overseas long-term interest rates amid concern about a

possible slowdown in the U.S. economy, had recently been in the range of 1.1-1.2 percent

partly due to profit-taking sales by such entities as banks.

The yen had remained under upward pressure amid concern about possible

4 Reports were made based on information available at the time of the meeting.
5 The guideline was as follows:
The Bank of Japan will encourage the uncollateralized overnight call rate to remain at
around 0.1 percent.

3


-----

deceleration in the U.S. economy, and its value had recently been at around 84 yen.

**C. Overseas Economic and Financial Developments**

The world economy had been slowing but continued to recover.

The U.S. economy had been recovering at a slower but moderate pace. The pace

was decelerating partly due to slower growth in inventory investment, although exports

were continuing to increase and business fixed investment was rising moderately. In the

labor market, although the number of employees was picking up, the unemployment rate

had been more or less unchanged at a high level, and this suggested that the employment

situation had not improved noticeably. Private consumption was increasing only gradually,

and housing investment remained at a depressed level. In this situation, downside risks to

the economy associated with balance-sheet adjustments had drawn greater attention from

the market. As for prices, the year-on-year rate of increase in the consumer price index

(CPI) for all items less energy and food, or the core CPI, had been moderating partly due to

slack in supply and demand conditions and slower growth in wages.

Economic activity in the euro area as a whole was recovering moderately, with

some differences in growth by country. Exports had been firm partly due to the

depreciation of the euro; in addition, domestic demand components such as private

consumption were picking up and production had been increasing gradually. As for prices,

the year-on-year rate of increase in the Harmonized Index of Consumer Prices (HICP)

excluding energy and unprocessed food had been declining partly due to slack in supply and

demand conditions and slower growth in wages. U.K. economic conditions were

recovering at a moderate pace.

The Chinese economy continued to show relatively high growth, although the pace

had slowed somewhat. Growth in overall private consumption had been firm due to

households' higher income levels. Exports had been increasing, although the pace of

increase was slowing due to deceleration in overseas economies. Fixed asset investment

had continued to show high growth, although the rate was decelerating partly due to the

government's measures to restrain the increase in real estate transactions. Economic

conditions in the NIEs and the ASEAN countries had continued to recover steadily.

Growth in exports and production had recently slowed, while private consumption and

business fixed investment had been on an increasing trend. The Indian economy had also

4


-----

continued to grow at a relatively rapid pace. In many of these Asian economies, upward

pressure on prices had been increasing due to higher food prices and greater utilization of

production factors.

As for global financial markets, U.S. stock prices and long-term interest rates

declined until around the end of August because released economic indicators were weaker

than market expectations, but had rebounded since the release in early September of

stronger-than-expected indicators such as the employment data. In Europe, developments

in stock prices had followed those in the United States. Long-term interest rates in

Germany and the United Kingdom had fallen due mainly to a flight to quality triggered by

the resurgence of the fiscal problem in Ireland. Financial developments in some peripheral

European countries had been volatile, as evidenced by the fact that yield spreads between

government bonds issued by Germany and those issued by these other countries, which

narrowed after publication of the results of the stress test exercise conducted on European

financial institutions, were under pressure to expand again as a result of the resurgence of

the fiscal problem in Ireland.

**D. Economic and Financial Developments in Japan**

1. Economic developments

Exports had been increasing, albeit at a slower pace. They were expected to

continue increasing, albeit moderately for the time being, reflecting continued improvement

in overseas economic conditions.

Public investment was declining, and this trend was likely to continue.

With regard to domestic private demand, business fixed investment was showing

signs of picking up. Such signs were expected to gradually become more evident as the

improvement in corporate profits continued. However, with firms' persistent sense of

excessive capital stock, the pace of improvement in business fixed investment was likely to

remain moderate for the time being.

Private consumption had been generally picking up and had recently been boosted

by the extremely hot weather and a last-minute increase in demand for durable consumer

goods ahead of the expiration of subsidies. Meanwhile, the employment and income

situation had remained severe, but the degree of severity had eased somewhat. Private

consumption was expected to remain on a recovery trend, despite a likely temporary

5


-----

weakening mainly due to the ending of the boost from the extremely hot weather and the

expiration of subsidies for purchasers of environmentally friendly cars.

Housing investment had leveled out. It was expected to gradually head for a

recovery, given the recent developments in housing starts.

Production had been increasing, albeit at a slower pace. It was expected to

continue to trend upward, although it was likely to temporarily show weakness primarily in

durable consumer goods.

On the price front, commodity prices, which started decreasing in May, leveled out

and were recently more or less flat. The domestic corporate goods price index (CGPI) had

been somewhat lower than three months earlier, mainly due to the earlier decrease in

commodity prices, amid the persistent slack in supply and demand conditions for products.

The CGPI was expected to be somewhat weak for the time being, since the effects of the

earlier decrease in commodity prices were likely to continue. The CPI (excluding fresh

food) was declining on a year-on-year basis due to the substantial slack in the economy as a

whole, but the slowing trend in the pace of decline had continued. The year-on-year pace

of decline in the CPI was likely to slow as a trend as the aggregate supply and demand

balance improved gradually.

2. Financial environment

Financial conditions had continued to show signs of easing. The overnight call

rate had remained at an extremely low level, and the declining trend in firms' funding costs

had continued. While stimulative effects from low interest rates were still partly

constrained given current developments in economic activity and prices, such effects were

beginning to strengthen in light of improved corporate profits. With regard to credit

supply, firms saw financial institutions' lending attitudes as improving. Issuing conditions

for CP and corporate bonds had remained favorable. As for credit demand, firms' need to

fund working capital and fixed investment had declined, and some firms had reduced the

on-hand liquidity that they had accumulated. Against this backdrop, bank lending had

declined on a year-on-year basis. The amount outstanding of corporate bonds had

exceeded the previous year's level, while that of CP had declined. In these circumstances,

firms' financial positions had continued to show signs of improvement as a whole.

Meanwhile, the year-on-year rate of change in the money stock had been in the range of

2.5-3.0 percent.

6


-----

**II. Summary of Discussions by the Policy Board on Economic and Financial**

**Developments**

**A. Economic Developments**

Members shared the view that overseas economies had been slowing but continued

to recover, and were likely to continue recovering led by high growth in emerging

economies. Many members expressed the opinion that the pace of recovery in advanced

economies would probably remain moderate amid the lingering severity in balance-sheet

adjustments. Some members said that developments in economic indicators and financial

markets suggested that uncertainty about the outlook had heightened. Many members

noted that the pace of recovery in emerging economies, which had previously been rapid,

was somewhat slowing mainly reflecting tighter policies such as adjustments to

accommodative monetary policy. In this regard, some members said that the slowdown

should basically be considered as a shift toward a more sustainable and steady pace,

although future developments continued to require close monitoring.

Members shared the view that the U.S. economy had been recovering at a slower

but moderate pace. Some members said that not a few economic indicators released in

August were weak, particularly those of retail sales and housing, and this indicated that the

pace was clearly decelerating. A few members commented that the pace of deceleration

was faster than expected, although the economic state could not be described as a recession

yet. Many members said, however, that the economy was unlikely to decelerate

significantly because production was on the rise against the backdrop of firm growth in

exports and the number of employees in the private sector was picking up. Members

agreed that, although the U.S. economy was likely to continue recovering, there was

considerable uncertainty regarding the outlook. Some members expressed the opinion that,

since the economy faced a problem of balance-sheet adjustments similar to that observed

during the post-bubble period in Japan, it had become difficult for the self-sustaining

virtuous circle of growth in production, income, and spending to operate properly, and the

economy was susceptible to downside risk factors.

Many members expressed the view that economic activity in the euro area as a

whole was recovering moderately, with some differences in growth by country. Many

members were of the opinion that the earlier depreciation of the euro had boosted exports

and production in major euro area countries, thereby underpinning income and spending.

7


-----

Some members said that financial markets were unstable in Greece and other peripheral

euro area countries, in a situation where both the public and private sectors were mired in

excessive debt, and economic disparities among euro area countries had recently widened

further. Many members were of the view that, although the earlier depreciation of the euro

would continue to boost production, the euro area economy would likely recover only

moderately because economic activity would be constrained by balance-sheet adjustments

and moves toward fiscal austerity.

Members agreed that the Chinese economy continued to show relatively high

growth, although the pace had slowed somewhat. Many members noted that growth in

fixed asset investment and industrial production had decelerated, partly due to the

government's measures to restrain the increases in real estate transactions and in energy

consumption, but not at a rapid pace. As for the measures to restrain the increase in real

estate transactions, a few members regarded the deceleration caused by the measures as

favorable for the Chinese economy's sustainable growth over the medium to long term.

Some members expressed the view that private consumption indicators such as retail sales

had been firm on the whole due to households' higher income levels. Many members

shared the view that, although the slowing trend in production would continue on the back

of the decelerated growth in fixed asset investment and exports, the economy as a whole

was likely to continue to show relatively high growth on the back of the continued uptrend

in private consumption.

Regarding global financial markets, most members agreed that foreign exchange,

stock, and bond markets remained extremely susceptible to developments in economic

indicators against the background of increased uncertainty regarding the outlook for the

world economy. Many members expressed the view that global investors had become

increasingly risk averse, against the background that U.S. economic indicators released until

around the end of August were weaker than market expectations and the fiscal problem in

European countries such as Ireland had drawn attention. Some members pointed to

increased demand in foreign exchange markets for relatively safe currencies in that

currencies such as the yen and Swiss franc were bought while others, such as the euro, were

sold. A few members expressed the opinion that a flight to quality had weakened stock

prices and exerted downward pressure on long-term interest rates around the world. In

relation to long-term interest rates in some peripheral euro area countries, some members -
8


-----

noting the widening of yield spreads between government bonds issued by Germany and

those issued by these countries -- said that the sovereign risk problem had been lurking as a

downside risk to the world economy, although, unlike in spring 2010, it had not caused

major disruptions recently in global financial markets.

Based on the above deliberations on economic and financial conditions abroad,

members discussed the state of Japan's economy. They concurred that the economy

showed further signs of a moderate recovery. Many members expressed the view that,

although growth in exports and production had been decelerating due to a slowdown in the

pace of overseas economic growth, the momentum for economic recovery had been

sustained as a whole, supported by the improvement in the employment and income

situation and most recently by the boost to private consumption induced by the extremely

hot weather and a last-minute increase in demand for durable consumer goods ahead of the

expiration of subsidies. In this regard, a few members -- referring to the first preliminary

estimate of real GDP for the April-June quarter, for which the annualized rate of growth was

extremely low at 0.4 percent -- were of the opinion that the results of the _Financial_

_Statements Statistics of Corporations by Industry, Quarterly that were released following_

the first preliminary GDP estimate suggested that the second preliminary GDP estimate was

likely to be revised upward and indicate a moderate recovery of Japan's economy, as the

Bank had projected in its interim assessment. As for the outlook, members agreed that the

economy was likely to be on a moderate recovery trend. Many members added, however,

that the pace of improvement was likely to slow temporarily in the latter half of fiscal 2010

because of the negative impact from the deceleration in overseas economies and the waning

effects of temporary factors, such as the boost to consumption from the extremely hot

weather and a last-minute increase in demand for durable consumer goods ahead of the

expiration of subsidies.

With regard to risks for economic activity, some members again cited the

possibility of even faster growth in emerging and commodity-exporting economies as an

upside risk. A few of these members expressed the view that the short-term risk of

overheating in these economies still warranted attention because, although a growing

number of these economies had been conducting tighter policies such as adjustments to

accommodative monetary policy, capital continued to flow from advanced economies into

these economies, in which the level of economic activity was already considerably high.

9


-----

On the other hand, members agreed that attention should be paid to downside risks to

Japan's economy since uncertainty about the future, especially for the U.S. economy, had

heightened and foreign exchange rates and stock prices had consequently been unstable.

In this regard, one member referred to a possibility that Japan's economic growth might be

slightly weaker than expected in the interim assessment, in view of economic data released

since then and developments in financial markets. This member continued that such a

possibility should be borne in mind when examining developments in economic activity and

prices for the upcoming _Outlook for Economic Activity and Prices. Some members_

expressed the view that weakness in some U.S. economic indicators, such as those of retail

sales and housing, was becoming prominent and therefore closer attention should be paid to

downside risks to overseas economies. In relation to this, a few members pointed to the

risk of the U.S. economy growing only slowly over a prolonged period, in view of the

possibility that the decline in U.S. long-term interest rates might indicate a decrease in the

expected nominal economic growth rate over the long term. With regard to recent

developments in foreign exchange markets, most members raised the possibility that the

appreciation of the yen might depress growth in exports and corporate profits. Many

members were of the opinion that attention should be paid to how the appreciation and a

consequent weakness in stock prices affected business and consumer confidence. One

member -- referring to the strong correlation between the recent developments in the

dollar-yen exchange rate and Japanese stock prices -- said that, if the pace of recovery in

emerging economies accelerated again, this might underpin Japanese stock prices and

weaken the correlation.

Turning to developments in each demand component, members shared the view

that exports had been increasing, albeit at a slower pace. As factors behind the slower

export growth, many members noted that the pace of recovery in emerging economies,

which had previously been rapid, was somewhat slowing, especially in China. Some

members commented that the growth in demand for some IT-related goods was slowing

around the world. As for the outlook, most members agreed that exports were likely to

continue increasing, albeit moderately for the time being, reflecting continued improvement

in overseas economic conditions. Many members pointed to the need to pay attention to

the effects on exports of the recent developments in overseas economies and appreciation of

the yen.

10


-----

Members agreed that business fixed investment was showing signs of picking up.

Many members said that, according to the Financial Statements Statistics of Corporations

_by Industry, Quarterly, business fixed investment started to increase in the April-June_

quarter on a seasonally adjusted quarter-on-quarter basis. Many members concurred that

signs of a pick-up were likely to gradually become more evident as the improvement in

corporate profits continued, but the pace of improvement was likely to remain moderate for

the time being. Regarding effects on firms' fixed investment plans of the recent

appreciation of the yen and uncertainty about future developments in foreign exchange rates,

some members raised the possibility that, although corporate profits had become less

affected by appreciation of the yen and firms had a considerable number of fixed

investment plans to implement, the recent appreciation might undermine business

confidence and thereby cause firms to postpone implementing their investment plans.

Members shared the view that the employment and income situation had remained

severe, but the degree of severity had eased somewhat. Some members were of the

opinion that firms, which still regarded their workforces as excessive, had maintained their

stance of restraining labor costs. Many members, including these members, commented

that the employment and income situation nevertheless continued to show signs of

improvement, such as the continued rise in the ratio of job offers to applicants and summer

bonus payments exceeding the previous year's level.

Members agreed that private consumption had been generally picking up and had

recently been boosted by the extremely hot weather and a last-minute increase in demand

for durable consumer goods ahead of the expiration of subsidies. Some members

expressed the opinion that the effects of the extremely hot weather could be seen in the

increases in sales of air conditioners and sales at convenience stores in July. Many

members said that the number of new passenger-car registrations spiked in August, boosted

by the last-minute increase in demand ahead of the expiration of subsidies for purchasers of

environmentally friendly cars. Members concurred that, amid the waning effects of

temporary factors that boosted demand, the pace at which the employment and income

situation improved would be the key to recovery in private consumption. Many members

were of the view that private consumption was likely to remain on a recovery trend, despite

a likely temporary weakening mainly due to the ending of the boost from the extremely hot

weather and the expiration of subsidies for purchasers of environmentally friendly cars.

11


-----

Members agreed that production had been increasing, albeit at a slower pace.

Some members said that, according to the analysis of industrial production data using

information obtained, for example, from interviews with corporate managers, the actual

trend of production appeared to be as follows: there was some strength, particularly in

transport equipment, due partly to the last-minute increase in demand for cars ahead of the

expiration of subsidies, and in air conditioners and beverages, boosted by the extremely hot

weather; however, the pace of increase in production taken as a whole had been

decelerating mainly due to the slower export growth. As for the outlook, members shared

the view that production was likely to continue to trend upward, although it was likely to

temporarily show weakness primarily in durable consumer goods. Many members said

that attention should be paid to possible effects on production activity of the recent

developments in overseas economies and appreciation of the yen, in a situation where

downward pressure on production would likely rise following the ending of the boost from

the last-minute increase in demand ahead of the expiration of subsidies and from the

extremely hot weather.

Members concurred that the CPI (excluding fresh food) was declining on a

year-on-year basis due to the substantial slack in the economy as a whole, but excluding the

effects of subsidies for high school tuition, the slowing trend in the pace of decline had

continued. One member said that the year-on-year rate of decline in the trimmed mean

CPI -- which eliminated large relative price fluctuations -- had been narrowing mildly. A

different member expressed the view that, in the July CPI data, the figure representing the

difference between the number of items for which prices had declined and of items for

which prices had risen fell for the second consecutive month, and this might suggest that the

spread of price declines to a wider range of goods and services had come to a halt. As for

the outlook, members agreed that the year-on-year pace of decline in the CPI was likely to

slow as the aggregate supply and demand balance improved gradually. Many members

referred to developments in import prices as a risk factor for the outlook for prices, and

pointed to the need to closely monitor the degree to which the recent appreciation of the yen

exerted downward pressure on consumer prices. One member raised the possibility that

the spread of discussion regarding disinflation or deflation, which was of concern with

regard to advanced economies, might lower inflation expectations.

12


-----

**B. Financial Developments**

Members shared the view that financial conditions had continued to show signs of

easing.

As for the money market, many members -- noting that interest rates on term

instruments had declined somewhat since the previous meeting -- commented that the

Bank's introduction of the additional monetary easing measure decided at the previous

meeting was starting to facilitate further spreading of the effects of monetary easing.

Members agreed that the declining trend in firms' funding costs had continued.

Some members referred to the fact that the average contracted interest rates on new loans

and discounts declined significantly in July, to a level close to the record low, and said that

the effects of the aggressive monetary easing measures taken so far had been steadily

spreading to the corporate sector. A few members expressed the opinion that, given that

the Financial Statements Statistics of Corporations by Industry, Quarterly for the April-June

quarter confirmed the continued recovery trend of corporate profits, stimulative effects from

low interest rate had strengthened further.

Members agreed that issuing conditions for CP and corporate bonds had remained

favorable, even those for low-rated bonds. Some members said that spreads on BBB-rated

bonds in the secondary market had continued to narrow. A few members noted the

increase in the number of firms issuing bonds, and also pointed to the fact that firms that

had previously deferred bond issuance had restarted it in view of the instability in global

financial markets stemming from the heightened sovereign risks in Europe.

Members concurred that firms' financial positions had continued to show signs of

improvement. Many members -- noting that the results of several surveys conducted on

small firms and released in August showed that these firms judged their financial positions

to have improved -- expressed the view that the financial environment small firms faced had

also continued to show signs of improvement.

**III. Summary of Discussions on Monetary Policy for the Immediate Future**

Regarding the guideline for money market operations for the intermeeting period

ahead, members agreed that, given the above assessment of economic activity and prices, it

was appropriate to maintain the current guideline that the Bank would encourage the

uncollateralized overnight call rate to remain at around 0.1 percent.

13


-----

As for the future conduct of monetary policy, members acknowledged that, in

order for Japan's economy to overcome deflation and return to a sustainable growth path

with price stability, the Bank had been striving to pursue powerful monetary easing, ensure

financial market stability, and support strengthening the foundations for economic growth,

and shared the view that it should continue to consistently make such contributions as

central bank. They concurred that, in the conduct of monetary policy, the Bank would

maintain the extremely accommodative financial environment. Furthermore, they

confirmed that their thinking regarding the future conduct of monetary policy remained the

same in that the Bank should carefully examine the outlook for economic activity and prices

and, if judged necessary, take policy actions in a timely and appropriate manner. They

agreed that the Bank should clearly present this thinking to the public.

Members discussed the fund-provisioning measure to support strengthening the

foundations for economic growth, under which the Bank disbursed the first new loans on

September 6. The chairman instructed the staff to report the results of the first new loan

disbursement.

In response, the staff reported the following: (1) notification and the loan

disbursement were carried out on August 31 and September 6, respectively; (2) the total

amount of loans disbursed by the Bank was 462.5 billion yen and the average amount per

lending or investment project to be financed by such loans was 360 million yen; (3) by area

for strengthening the foundations for economic growth, large amounts of funds were

provided to "environment and energy business" and "others," followed by "development

and upgrading of social infrastructure" and "medical, nursing care, and other health-related

business"; (4) the average duration of lending or investment projects was 8.2 years; and (5)

there were 47 borrower financial institutions and 1,342 lending or investment projects.

Some members -- noting that borrowers included various types of financial

institutions and their lending or investment covered broad areas for strengthening the

foundations for economic growth, including "others" -- expressed the opinion that financial

institutions, taking into account the characteristics of their customer base and the regions

they served, were making a range of efforts. A few members said that the measure was

producing positive effects as a catalyst, as evidenced by the number of financial institutions

qualified for the measure increasing toward the second new loan disbursement, and by

several financial institutions having established -- with the introduction of the measure -
14


-----

new dedicated funds and lending schemes. Based on this discussion, many members

expressed the view that, in order to continue to offer support as broadly as possible for the

efforts that private financial institutions were making on their own initiative toward

strengthening the foundations for economic growth, the Bank should continue to

sufficiently exchange views with them and provide funds in accordance with the measure's

objective.

**IV. Remarks by Government Representatives**

The representative from the Ministry of Finance made the following remarks.

(1) In the "New Growth Strategy," the government stated that it regarded overcoming

deflation as the top-priority task in its macroeconomic policy management; in

overcoming deflation, it aimed to make the CPI inflation rate positive by the end of

fiscal 2011, and quickly achieve and maintain a positive inflation rate.

(2) The situation of the Japanese economy remained difficult. While the foundation for a

self-sustaining recovery remained fragile -- as seen in the fact that the employment

situation remained severe, especially for new graduates and younger people, and many

regions were suffering from continued difficulties -- the Japanese economy faced

heightened risks of experiencing negative impacts from the possibility of further and

prolonged appreciation of the yen and a possible slowdown in overseas economies.

(3) In order to respond flexibly to downside risks to the economy and accelerate the

implementation schedule of the policies in the "New Growth Strategy," the government

had decided to implement carefully selected policies that would produce an immediate

impact and high effectiveness in boosting demand and employment. For this purpose,

the Cabinet had recently decided the "Basic Policy for a New Economic Stimulus

Package" consisting of five main pillars, such as measures for employment. The

government would endeavor to properly carry out its economic stimulus package in line

with the "Basic Policy for a New Economic Stimulus Package."

(4) The Bank recognized, as did the government, that overcoming deflation was a policy

objective that both entities shared, and expressed its determination in the unscheduled

Monetary Policy Meeting held on August 30 that it would further enhance easy

monetary conditions and continue to consistently make its utmost contributions as

central bank by working together with the government, which would proceed with its

15


-----

economic stimulus package. The government expected the Bank to conduct monetary

policy in an appropriate and flexible manner in response to economic and financial

developments. It also expected the Bank to clearly explain to market participants and

the public its thinking on the future conduct of monetary policy.

The representative from the Cabinet Office made the following remarks.

(1) The Japanese economy faced heightened risks of experiencing negative impacts from

the possibility of further and prolonged appreciation of the yen and a possible

slowdown in overseas economies, especially the U.S. economy. As for prices,

deflation continued, as evidenced by the fact that the year-on-year rate of change in the

CPI for July was minus 1.1 percent, which included the effects of subsidies for high

school tuition of about minus 0.5 percentage point, marking the 17th consecutive month

of negative figures. Overcoming deflation was the government's primary target for the

time being in its economic policy management.

(2) In order to respond flexibly to downside risks to the economy caused by such factors as

the appreciation of the yen and to help build the foundation for swiftly overcoming

deflation, the Cabinet would decide a new economic stimulus package on September 10,

to be financed by the economic crisis response and regional revitalization reserve funds.

Depending on the economic and employment conditions, the government was prepared

to make swift and flexible responses if necessary, including preparing a supplementary

budget.

(3) The government expected the Bank to remain well aware that overcoming deflation was

a policy objective that both entities shared, and to continue to aim at overcoming

deflation swiftly and underpin the economy, by conducting monetary policy in an

appropriate and flexible manner while sufficiently exchanging views and working

together with the government.

**V. Votes**

Based on the above discussions, members agreed that it was appropriate to

maintain the current guideline for money market operations, which encouraged the

uncollateralized overnight call rate to remain at around 0.1 percent.

16


-----

To reflect this view, the chairman formulated the following proposal and put it to a

vote.

**The Chairman's Policy Proposal on the Guideline for Money Market Operations:**

1. The guideline for money market operations for the intermeeting period ahead will be as

follows.

The Bank of Japan will encourage the uncollateralized overnight call rate

to remain at around 0.1 percent.

2. A public statement will be decided separately.

Votes for the proposal: Mr. M. Shirakawa, Mr. H. Yamaguchi, Mr. K. G. Nishimura,

Ms. M. Suda, Mr. T. Noda, Mr. S. Nakamura, Mr. H. Kamezaki, Mr. R. Miyao, and

Mr. Y. Morimoto.

Votes against the proposal: None.

**VI. Discussion on the Statement on Monetary Policy**

Members discussed the Statement on Monetary Policy, and put it to a vote. The

Policy Board decided the text by a unanimous vote. It was confirmed that the statement

would be released immediately after the meeting (see Attachment).

**VII. Approval of the Minutes of the Monetary Policy Meeting**

The Policy Board approved unanimously the minutes of the Monetary Policy

Meeting of August 9 and 10, 2010 for release on September 10, 2010.

17


-----

Attachment

September 7, 2010

Bank of Japan

**Statement on Monetary Policy**

1. At the Monetary Policy Meeting held today, the Policy Board of the Bank of Japan

decided, by a unanimous vote,[6] to set the following guideline for money market

operations for the intermeeting period:

The Bank of Japan will encourage the uncollateralized overnight call rate

to remain at around 0.1 percent.

2. Japan's economy shows further signs of a moderate recovery. Exports and production

have been increasing, albeit at a slower pace. Business fixed investment is showing

signs of picking up. The employment and income situation has remained severe, but

the degree of severity has eased somewhat. In these circumstances, private

consumption has been generally picking up and has recently been boosted by the

extremely hot weather and a last-minute increase in demand for durable consumer

goods ahead of the expiration of the policy measure. Public investment is declining.

Meanwhile, financial conditions have continued to show signs of easing. The CPI

(excluding fresh food) is declining on a year-on-year basis due to the substantial slack

in the economy as a whole, but the slowing trend in the pace of decline has continued.

3. The Bank's baseline scenario projects that the economy is likely to be on a recovery

trend. With regard to prices, based on the assumption that medium- to long-term

6 Voting for the action: Mr. M. Shirakawa, Mr. H. Yamaguchi, Mr. K. G. Nishimura, Ms. M. Suda,
Mr. T. Noda, Mr. S. Nakamura, Mr. H. Kamezaki, Mr. R. Miyao, and Mr. Y. Morimoto.
Voting against the action: None.

18


-----

inflation expectations remain stable, the year-on-year rate of decline in the CPI

(excluding fresh food) is expected to slow as the aggregate supply and demand balance

improves gradually.

4. With regard to economic activity, there are some upside risks such as faster growth in

emerging and commodity-exporting economies. On the other hand, against the

backdrop of increased uncertainty about the future, especially for the U.S. economy,

and associated instability in the foreign exchange and stock markets, attention should

be paid to downside risks to Japan's economy. With regard to prices, there is a

possibility that inflation will rise more than expected due to a rise in commodity prices

brought about by higher growth rates in emerging and commodity-exporting economies,

while there is also a risk that the rate of inflation might decline due, for example, to a

decline in medium- to long-term inflation expectations.

5. The Bank recognizes that Japan's economy faces the critical challenge of overcoming

deflation and returning to a sustainable growth path with price stability. To this end,

the Bank has been striving to pursue powerful monetary easing, ensure financial market

stability, and support strengthening the foundations for economic growth, and it will

continue to consistently make such contributions as central bank. In the conduct of

monetary policy, the Bank will maintain the extremely accommodative financial

environment. The Bank will carefully examine the outlook for economic activity and

prices, and, if judged necessary, take policy actions in a timely and appropriate manner.

19


-----

