Not to be released until 8:50 a.m.
Japan Standard Time on Tuesday,
February 23, 2010.

February 23, 2010

Bank of Japan

# Minutes of the Monetary Policy Meeting
## on January 25 and 26, 2010

(English translation prepared by the Bank's staff based on the Japanese original)


-----

Please contact the Bank of Japan at the address below in advance to request permission

when reproducing or copying the content of this document for commercial purposes.

Secretariat of the Policy Board, Bank of Japan

P.O. Box 30, Nihonbashi, Tokyo 103-8660, Japan

Please credit the source when quoting, reproducing, or copying the content of this

document.


-----

A Monetary Policy Meeting of the Bank of Japan Policy Board was held in the

Head Office of the Bank of Japan in Tokyo on Monday, January 25, 2010, from 2:00 p.m. to

4:17 p.m., and on Tuesday, January 26, from 9:00 a.m. to 12:21 p.m.[1]

**Policy Board Members Present**

**Mr. M. Shirakawa, Chairman, Governor of the Bank of Japan**

**Mr. H. Yamaguchi, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Japan**

**Mr. K. G. Nishimura, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Japan**

**Ms. M. Suda**

**Mr. T. Noda**

**Mr. S. Nakamura**

**Mr. H. Kamezaki**

Government Representatives Present

Mr. Y. Noda, Senior Vice Minister of Finance, Ministry of Finance[2]

Mr. S. Kagawa, Deputy Vice Minister for Policy Planning and Coordination, Ministry of

Finance[3]

Mr. K. Umetani, Deputy Director-General, Economic and Fiscal Management, Cabinet

Office

Reporting Staff

Mr. A. Horii, Executive Director (Assistant Governor)

Mr. K. Ido, Executive Director

Mr. H. Nakaso, Executive Director

Mr. M. Amamiya, Director-General, Monetary Affairs Department

Mr. T. Kato, Associate Director-General, Monetary Affairs Department

Mr. H. Toyama, Director-General, Financial Markets Department

1 The minutes of this meeting were approved by the Policy Board at the Monetary Policy Meeting
held on February 17 and 18, 2010 as "a document describing an outline of the discussion at the
meeting" stipulated in Article 20, paragraph 1 of the Bank of Japan Act of 1997. Those present are
referred to by their titles at the time of the meeting.
2 Mr. Y. Noda was present on January 26.
3 Mr. S. Kagawa was present on January 25.

1


-----

Mr. K. Momma, Director-General, Research and Statistics Department

Mr. T. Sekine, Associate Director-General, Research and Statistics Department

Mr. H. Ono, Director-General, International Department

Secretariat of the Monetary Policy Meeting

Mr. Y. Iino, Director-General, Secretariat of the Policy Board

Mr. T. Tachibana, Director, Deputy Head of Secretarial Services for the Board,

Secretariat of the Policy Board

Mr. K. Nakamura, Senior Economist, Monetary Affairs Department

Mr. M. Nakashima, Senior Economist, Monetary Affairs Department

2


-----

**I. Summary of Staff Reports on Economic and Financial Developments[4]**

**A. Money Market Operations in the Intermeeting Period**

The Bank conducted money market operations in accordance with the guideline

decided at the previous meeting on December 17 and 18, 2009.[5] The uncollateralized

overnight call rate had been at around 0.1 percent.

With a view to ensuring market stability, the Bank continued to conduct money

market operations in a flexible manner in response to changes in the market situation, as

evidenced by its ample provision of funds maturing over the calendar year-end. The Bank

also steadily conducted the fixed-rate funds-supplying operation against pooled collateral,

which was introduced in December 2009. Meanwhile, outright purchases of corporate

bonds and CP were completed at the end of December 2009 as scheduled.

**B. Recent Developments in Financial Markets**

In Japan's money market, interest rates, including longer-term ones, had declined

further as the effects of the Bank's measure to enhance easy monetary conditions spread.

General collateral (GC) repo rates had been stable in the range of 0.10-0.15 percent.

Interest rates on term instruments showed the following developments. Yields on

government bills, including those with a one-year maturity, had been in the range of

0.10-0.15 percent. In the CP market, issuance rates had been more or less unchanged at

low levels. Euroyen rates with longer maturities had been on a declining trend, although

the rates had remained at relatively elevated levels compared with the yields on government

bills.

Japanese stock prices rose by a fairly large extent, against the backdrop that the

value of the yen had been somewhat lower than the recent high level and U.S. and European

stock prices had been firm. The Nikkei 225 Stock Average had been in the range of

10,500-11,000 yen. With regard to long-term interest rates in Japan, the benchmark rate

had risen somewhat and had recently been in the range of 1.30-1.35 percent.

The yen temporarily depreciated to the range of 93-94 yen against the U.S. dollar.

It then appreciated somewhat and had recently been traded at around 91 yen.

4 Reports were made based on information available at the time of the meeting.
5 The guideline was as follows:
The Bank of Japan will encourage the uncollateralized overnight call rate to remain at
around 0.1 percent.

3


-----

**C. Overseas Economic and Financial Developments**

The world economy was recovering moderately.

U.S. economic activity was picking up. Private consumption was increasing,

albeit moderately, amid reduced downward pressure on home prices. Exports were

increasing, and the rate of decrease in business fixed investment was slowing. Reflecting

such developments in demand, production had been increasing due to progress in inventory

adjustments. In the labor market, although the number of employees had continued to

decline and the unemployment rate had been on an uptrend, the pace of decrease in the

number of employees was slowing. As for prices, the year-on-year rate of change in the

consumer price index (CPI) for all items had turned positive as the effects of the drop in

energy prices had dissipated. The year-on-year rate of increase in the CPI for all items less

energy and food, or the core CPI, had been in the range of 1.5-2.0 percent.

Economic conditions in the euro area had started to pick up. Private consumption

had been relatively weak as a whole, while production had started to increase as exports

improved and the pace of decline in business fixed investment moderated. As for prices,

the year-on-year rate of change in the Harmonized Index of Consumer Prices (HICP)

excluding unprocessed food and energy had been around 1.0 percent. Economic

conditions in the United Kingdom had stopped worsening. Regarding prices, the

year-on-year rate of increase in the CPI had risen, mainly due to the dissipating effects of

the reduction in the rate of the value-added tax and to the rise in gasoline prices.

The Chinese economy had continued to grow at a relatively rapid pace, led mainly

by domestic demand. Growth in private consumption had been firm, fixed asset

investment had been increasing strongly, and exports had been rising. Under these

circumstances, production had continued to increase. With regard to prices, the

year-on-year pace of increase in the CPI had accelerated. Economic conditions in the

NIEs and the ASEAN countries were recovering. Exports and private consumption had

risen, business fixed investment had picked up, and production had increased. The Indian

economy had also continued to grow at a relatively rapid pace.

As for global financial markets, money markets were regaining stability, as

evidenced by the fact that Treasury-Eurodollar (TED) spreads had been at around the levels

seen in summer 2007. In the United States and Europe, stock prices had increased, mainly

reflecting improvement in some economic indicators. Long-term interest rates in the

4


-----

United States had risen slightly, while those in Germany had declined. Meanwhile, the

market had started to direct its attention to governments' fiscal conditions and their impact

on financial markets, as well as potential effects of the regulation of financial institutions

that had been newly proposed in the United States.

**D. Economic and Financial Developments in Japan**

1. Economic developments

Exports had been increasing, due to the improvement in overseas economic

conditions. The uptrend in exports was expected to continue, reflecting continued

improvement in overseas economic conditions, although the pace of increase was likely to

moderate gradually.

Public investment had started to level off and was likely to decrease gradually.

With regard to domestic private demand, the decline in business fixed investment

had been coming to a halt. Although business fixed investment was expected to pick up

gradually, it was likely to remain more or less unchanged for the time being, with corporate

profits remaining at a low level and the sense of excessive capital stock being strong.

Private consumption, notably durable goods consumption, was picking up mainly

due to policy measures, despite the continued severe employment and income situation, and

this trend was likely to continue for the time being.

There were some signs that housing investment had stopped decreasing. It was

likely to gradually start showing clearer evidence of leveling out, given the recent

developments in housing starts.

Production had been increasing, reflecting progress in inventory adjustments and

policy effects, both at home and abroad. It was likely to continue rising as a trend in

parallel with exports, although the pace of increase was expected to moderate gradually.

The employment and income situation had remained severe, with a high

unemployment rate and a significant decline in household income. Household income was

likely to continue decreasing substantially for the time being, considering the lagged effects

from developments in corporate profits and production.

On the price front, commodity prices had been on a moderate rising trend, albeit

with some fluctuations. The three-month rate of change in the domestic corporate goods

price index (CGPI) had been slightly negative, mainly due to the slack in supply and

5


-----

demand conditions for products. Despite the continuation of such slack, the CGPI was

likely to remain more or less unchanged for the time being, as the rise in commodity prices

was expected to exert upward pressure. The CPI (excluding fresh food) had been

declining on a year-on-year basis due to the substantial slack in the economy as a whole, but

the pace of decline had been moderating mainly because the effects of fluctuations in the

prices of petroleum products had been dissipating. Although the substantial slack in the

economy as a whole was expected to persist, the year-on-year pace of decline in the CPI

was likely to moderate, mainly because the prices of petroleum products were expected to

exert upward pressure.

2. Financial environment

The financial environment, with some lingering severity, had continued to show

signs of improvement. The overnight call rate had remained at an extremely low level,

and the declining trend in the firms' funding costs had continued. The stimulative effects

from low interest rates were still constrained by the low levels of economic activity and

corporate profits, but the degree of constraint had begun to moderate. With regard to

credit supply, although many firms still saw financial institutions' lending attitudes as severe,

firms as a whole regarded the situation as improving. Issuing conditions for CP and

corporate bonds had remained favorable, except for low-rated corporate bonds. As for

credit demand, firms' need to fund working capital and fixed investment had declined, and

some firms had reduced the on-hand liquidity that they had accumulated. Against this

backdrop, bank lending had turned to a decline on a year-on-year basis, partly due to the

high growth of a year before. The amount outstanding of corporate bonds had exceeded

the previous year's level, while that of CP had declined. In these circumstances, although

many firms, mainly small ones, still saw their financial positions as weak, on the whole

firms' financial positions had continued to improve. Meanwhile, the year-on-year rate of

change in the money stock had been around 3 percent.

**II. Summary of Discussions by the Policy Board on Economic and Financial**

**Developments**

**A. Economic Developments**

Members shared the view that overseas economies were recovering moderately.

6


-----

Many members said that regional differences in the pace of economic growth had become

more evident: the pace remained slow in advanced economies, while it continued to be

more rapid than expected in emerging economies, especially the Chinese economy.

Regarding the outlook for overseas economies as a whole, members concurred that

they were likely to continue recovering moderately. Many members said that the pace of

recovery in advanced economies was likely to decelerate temporarily due to the waning

effects of inventory restocking and various demand-boosting policy measures. One

member noted that, from a broad perspective, the economic downturn after the failure of

Lehman Brothers and the ensuing economic recovery could be attributable, respectively, to

the tightening of financial conditions caused by the sharp financial contraction and to the

subsequent improvement in the financial environment as a result of an improvement in

market conditions and monetary easing. This member continued that, with the financial

environment remaining accommodative, the world economy was less likely to stop

recovering. Regarding risks to the outlook for overseas economies, some members noted

the importance of recognizing the possibility that an increase in capital inflow from

advanced economies that maintained their accommodative monetary policy stance might

lead to overheating and a subsequent downturn in emerging economies. Some members

said that the pace of progress in balance-sheet adjustments was key to the sustainability of

recovery in the U.S. economy and European advanced economies.

On the state of global financial markets, some members were of the view that

stock prices and foreign exchange rates, after becoming volatile in response to Dubai's debt

crisis in late November 2009, had recently regained stability. Some members said that the

issues of fiscal deficit and fiscal discipline had started to attract market attention as

economic conditions and financial markets regained stability. In relation to this, some

members expressed the view that for individual countries -- including Japan, for which the

fiscal situation was serious -- to be able to conduct appropriate policies while ensuring

market stability, it had become all the more important to maintain market confidence in the

conduct of both fiscal policy and monetary policy. Some members added that various

discussions regarding a review of financial regulation and supervision had brought more

market attention to the future progress and possible impact of such a review. Based on this

discussion, members shared the view that developments in various issues concerning global

financial markets and their possible effects continued to warrant close attention.

7


-----

Many members were of the view that U.S. economic activity was picking up.

Some members said that exports and production were increasing, and the rate of decrease in

business fixed investment was slowing. Some members were of the opinion that consumer

confidence had improved and private consumption was expanding at a moderate rate, as

evidenced by solid Christmas sales results. A few members expressed the view that the

improvement in housing-related indicators, such as home prices and housing starts, had

recently slowed and future developments warranted monitoring. One member said that

improvement in the employment and income situation was significantly lagging behind that

in production. As for the outlook, some members were of the opinion that, amid the

waning of the effects of inventory restocking and fiscal spending, the pace of U.S.

economic recovery was likely to remain moderate, constrained by households' excessive

debt. These members continued that deterioration in the quality of consumer loans and

declines in commercial real estate prices warranted close attention, as these might

reintensify an adverse feedback loop between financial and economic activity.

With regard to the economy of the euro area, members said that economic

conditions had started to pick up on the back of an increase in exports to outside the euro

area and stimulus measures by governments in the area. Many members expressed the

view that the pace of economic recovery in the euro area remained slower than that in the

United States and other countries, since the recovery in domestic demand of the area still

lacked momentum. Some members said that attention should continue to be paid to some

financial developments, such as the decrease in the growth rates in bank lending and the

broad monetary aggregate M3, and the possible effects of these developments on economic

activity in the euro area.

Members agreed that the Chinese economy had continued to grow at a relatively

rapid pace, led mainly by domestic demand, and this trend was likely to continue. Many

members -- noting that growth in bank lending and fixed asset investment remained

elevated and the pace of increase in consumer prices had started to accelerate -- said that

attention should be paid to the risk of overheating in financial and economic activity.

These members continued that attention should also be paid to whether recent measures to

restrain overheating would reduce such risk and lead to sustainable economic growth. One

member expressed the view that the Chinese economy was experiencing a rapid

development process whereby accumulation of capital stock, technology, and human capital

8


-----

was taking place concurrently thanks to the progress in information technology and

economic globalization in recent years, and thus differed from the staged process that

advanced economies had previously experienced. This member added that, with such a

process, growth differentials in economic activity among regions and industries tended to

persist and economic fluctuations tended to be large, and therefore whether the Chinese

economy would achieve sustainable growth warranted close examination.

Based on the above discussions on economic and financial conditions abroad,

members discussed the state of Japan's economy. They concurred that Japan's economy

was picking up, against the background of an increase in exports and production and a

pick-up in private consumption. They also agreed that the improvement in the economy

had been underpinned by various policy measures taken at home and abroad and by

inventory restocking, and there was not yet sufficient momentum to support self-sustaining

recovery in private demand. Some members noted that the pace and extent of the

improvement in economic activity varied by region, industry, and firm size. Some

members said that improvement in business confidence had lagged behind that in business

conditions. These members continued that this situation might reflect that firms had not

yet been able to find a way to achieve medium- to long-term growth, and attention should

be paid to the possible impact of subdued business confidence on business fixed investment

and other business activity.

As for the outlook, members expressed the view that the pace of improvement of

the economy was likely to moderate temporarily due to the waning effects of inventory

restocking and various demand-boosting policy measures. One member said that it was

uncertain how fast and to what extent the effects of such measures would wane, and

therefore developments required careful examination. Members concurred that, from

around the middle of fiscal 2010, the economic growth rate was likely to rise gradually, as

improvements in the corporate sector -- particularly evident in exports and production -
were likely to continue and spill over to the household sector.

Regarding developments in each demand component, many members were of the

view that exports had been increasing, mainly due to the improvement in overseas

economic conditions, and the uptrend was likely to continue.

Some members said that public investment had recently started to level off and

was likely to decrease gradually.

9


-----

Members agreed that the decline in business fixed investment had been coming to

a halt. Many members said that they would maintain their assessment that machinery

orders, after declining considerably, had recently been leveling out, but that whether

weakness in machinery orders from nonmanufacturing firms for November 2009 indicated

their cautious investment stance warranted close examination. Some members noted the

importance of carefully examining how firms perceived the domestic business environment,

how they evaluated the differences between Japan's economy and emerging economies in

rates of growth, and how they envisaged systems for providing emerging economies with

their products, and how these factors would impact domestic business fixed investment.

Some members expressed the view that private consumption, notably durable

goods consumption, continued to pick up mainly due to policy measures, despite the

continued severe employment and income situation. A few members, however, said that

the future pace of increase in private consumption should be viewed conservatively because

consumer confidence had deteriorated, partly reflecting the large decline in winter bonus

payments and the discussions about deflation. One member was of the opinion that the

mechanism of improvements in the corporate sector gradually spilling over to the household

sector might not operate as smoothly as expected, as firms were taking a strict stance on

wages amid intense global competition.

Members agreed that production had been increasing, reflecting progress in

inventory adjustments and policy effects, both at home and abroad, and was likely to remain

on an uptrend, although the pace of increase was likely to moderate.

Members shared the view that the employment and income situation had remained

severe, with a high unemployment rate and a significant decline in household income.

One member -- noting that firms had been retaining a considerable number of workers and

regarded their workforces as excessive, and that corporate managers appeared to be taking a

strict stance on wages -- said that a further improvement in economic conditions might not

immediately lead to an increase in the number of employees and household income.

Many members said that the CPI (excluding fresh food) had been declining on a

year-on-year basis due to the substantial slack in the economy as a whole, but the pace of

decline had been moderating mainly because the effects of fluctuations in the prices of

petroleum products had been dissipating. Members shared the view that, although the

pace of decline in the CPI was likely to continue moderating as the supply and demand

10


-----

balance improved, downward pressure on prices was likely to persist for an extended period

because the pace of economic recovery would probably be only moderate. Members also

discussed medium- to long-term inflation expectations and firms' price-setting behavior as

factors that would affect future price developments. Some members noted that, according

to recent survey results, consumers' short-term inflation expectations had declined. A few

members attributed this to the possibility that the acceleration in price declines through

summer 2009 and an increase in discussions about deflation after autumn might have

affected consumers' views on prices. A few members, however, commented that

consumers' medium- to long-term inflation expectations had not yet declined by a

significant degree. In relation to firms' price-setting behavior, some members noted a

gradual increase in the number of firms that had adopted a strategy of avoiding intense price

competition and increasing their competitiveness in terms of elements other than prices.

Members shared the view that factors such as medium- to long-term inflation expectations

and firms' price-setting behavior, in addition to the supply and demand balance, should

continue to be closely monitored.

**B. Financial Developments**

Members concurred that the financial environment, with some lingering severity,

had continued to show signs of improvement.

Some members said that, in the money market, the sense of an abundance of

liquidity had grown further due to the Bank's provision of ample funds, and interest rates,

including longer-term ones, had been on a moderate declining trend. A few members

commented that nothing of particular note happened in the money market during the run-up

to the calendar year-end and the risk premium embedded in interest rates on term

instruments maturing beyond the fiscal year-end had been marginal so far.

Many members said that issuing conditions for CP and corporate bonds had

generally remained favorable. A few members noted that CP issuance rates had gradually

started to better reflect the differences in issuers' creditworthiness since the Bank announced

that it would complete outright purchases of CP as scheduled. One member said that

yields on government bills had been declining, reflecting the enhancement of easy monetary

conditions by the Bank, and that an unusual situation in which yields on government bills

had exceeded issuance rates on some high-rated CP was being corrected gradually. Many

11


-----

members said that issuing conditions for corporate bonds had remained favorable, as seen in

the narrowing of credit spreads and the increase in the number of firms issuing bonds.

As for corporate funding activity, many members said that, amid reduced demand

for funds among firms, the amount outstanding of bank lending was significantly below the

level of a year before, when it was growing rapidly. Members shared the view that firms'

financial positions had continued to improve, although many firms, mainly small ones, still

saw their financial positions as weak. A few members -- noting that small firms,

particularly very small ones, regarded their financial positions as having deteriorated -
commented that differences in funding conditions according to firm size were widening.

**C. Interim Assessment**

Given the above assessment of recent developments, members agreed with the

following baseline scenario for Japan's economy: the pace of improvement of the economy

was likely to remain moderate until around the middle of fiscal 2010, and thereafter the

growth rate of the economy was likely to rise gradually. Many members said that,

compared with the scenario presented in the October 2009 Outlook for Economic Activity

_and Prices (hereafter the Outlook Report), growth in overseas economies had been_

somewhat stronger than expected, especially in emerging economies. However, members

shared the view that the baseline scenario for Japan's economy remained broadly unchanged

from that presented in the October 2009 Outlook Report.

Members then concurred that the year-on-year rates of change in the CGPI and the

CPI (excluding fresh food) would likely be somewhat higher than the October projections,

due mainly to the rise in crude oil prices against the backdrop of faster growth in emerging

economies. They also agreed that the following basic view of prices remained unchanged:

the year-on-year rate of decline in prices was likely to continue to moderate as the output

gap narrowed; however, the year-on-year rate of change in the CPI was likely to continue

declining even in fiscal 2011 because the pace of the output gap's narrowing would

probably remain only moderate.

In relation to numerical forecasts of prices, members discussed how various

measures laid out by the government in the budget for fiscal 2010, such as making high

school tuition effectively free, should be taken into account. They agreed that, since the

specific way to reflect the effects of these measures in the CPI had not yet been announced,

12


-----

it would be appropriate, in the interim assessment, not to factor in the effects of these

measures into the Bank's numerical forecasts of the CPI. On this basis, some members

said, given that the numerical forecasts would need to be revised significantly downward

should the effects be reflected in the CPI with the implementation of these measures, the

Bank should explain that its forecasts in the interim assessment had not factored in such

effects. One member commented that, in the context of monetary policy conduct, it was

important to gauge the underlying price trends, which excluded the effects of one-time

events such as institutional changes, and the Bank should explain this point clearly.

With regard to risk factors for economic activity, members concurred that, while

there were some upside risks such as faster growth in emerging and commodity-exporting

economies, there remained downside risks such as the possible consequences of

balance-sheet adjustments in the United States and Europe as well as potential changes in

firms' medium- to long-term growth expectations. They also agreed that attention should

be paid to the effects of various recent international financial developments on Japan's

economy, such as increased concerns about sovereign risk and developments in financial

regulation and supervision around the globe. Many members were of the view that,

compared with the risk assessment presented in the October 2009 Outlook Report, upside

and downside risks had started to become more balanced due to faster growth in emerging

economies. As for risks to the outlook for prices, members shared the view that, while

there was a possibility that inflation would rise more than expected due to an increase in

commodity prices, there was also a risk that the rate of inflation might fall due to a decline

in medium- to long-term inflation expectations.

**III. Summary of Discussions on Monetary Policy for the Immediate Future**

Regarding the guideline for money market operations for the intermeeting period

ahead, members agreed that, given the above assessment of economic activity and prices, it

was appropriate to maintain the current guideline that the Bank would encourage the

uncollateralized overnight call rate to remain at around 0.1 percent.

As for the future conduct of monetary policy, members agreed that, in order for

Japan's economy to overcome deflation and return to a sustainable growth path with price

stability, the Bank should continue to consistently make contributions as central bank.

They concurred that in its conduct of monetary policy the Bank was determined to maintain

13


-----

the extremely accommodative financial environment by providing ample funds to meet

market demand and maintaining the extremely low interest rates.

Members discussed the effects of the two actions the Bank took in December

2009: the introduction of a fixed-rate funds-supplying operation against pooled collateral,

and the announcement of a clearer expression of the "understanding of medium- to

long-term price stability" (the level of inflation that each member of the Policy Board

understood, when conducting monetary policy, as being consistent with price stability over

the medium to long term). Many members said that these actions had helped to further

spread the strong effects of monetary easing, thereby inducing a decline in interest rates on

term instruments. Some members commented that the risk that international financial

developments and foreign exchange market instability might undermine business

confidence had increased rapidly from late November 2009, but the two December actions

had effectively reduced such risk. One member was of the view that the Bank should

monitor how the effects of the decline in interest rates on term instruments spilled over to

funding costs in the private sector.

**IV. Remarks by Government Representatives**

The representative from the Ministry of Finance made the following remarks.

(1) The Japanese economy had been picking up, but the recovery was not autonomous and

the situation remained difficult. As for short-term prospects, there were risk factors

such as international financial developments, further worsening of the employment

situation, and deflation, and the basis for the economy's return to a path of strong

private demand-led growth remained fragile.

(2) Based on the aforementioned assessment of economic conditions, in December 2009,

the Cabinet decided the "Emergency Economic Countermeasures for Future Growth

and Security." On January 18, 2010, the government submitted the related

supplementary budget for fiscal 2009 to the Diet. The government aimed to obtain the

Diet's approval of this supplementary budget as early as possible to overcome deflation

and ensure economic recovery.

(3) The government expected the Bank to continue to support the economy from the

financial side, for example, with a view to overcoming deflation, by conducting

14


-----

monetary policy in an appropriate and flexible manner, while working together with the

government.

The representative from the Cabinet Office made the following remarks.

(1) The Japanese economy had been picking up, but the situation remained difficult. In

fiscal 2010, the Japanese economy was expected to grow by about 1.4 percent on a real

basis and about 0.4 percent on a nominal basis, and the year-on-year rate of change in

the CPI was likely to continue declining moderately, although the pace of decline was

expected to slow.

(2) Given that deflation had a considerable negative impact on the economy and eventually

on people's lives, it was important that the government, with the aim of overcoming

deflation, work together with the Bank to achieve a positive inflation rate as early as

possible.

(3) The government was working to fulfill its responsibility by, for example, steadily

implementing the "Emergency Economic Countermeasures for Future Growth and

Security" and formulating the basic policies of a new growth strategy. It hoped that

the Bank would aim at overcoming deflation and continue to underpin the economy by

conducting monetary policy in an appropriate and flexible manner, while sufficiently

exchanging views and working together with the government.

**V. Votes**

Based on the above discussions, members agreed that it was appropriate to

maintain the current guideline for money market operations, which encouraged the

uncollateralized overnight call rate to remain at around 0.1 percent.

To reflect this view, the chairman formulated the following proposal and put it to a

vote.

**The Chairman's Policy Proposal on the Guideline for Money Market Operations:**

1. The guideline for money market operations for the intermeeting period ahead will be as

follows.

15


-----

The Bank of Japan will encourage the uncollateralized overnight call rate

to remain at around 0.1 percent.

2. A public statement will be decided separately.

Votes for the proposal: Mr. M. Shirakawa, Mr. H. Yamaguchi, Mr. K. G. Nishimura,

Ms. M. Suda, Mr. T. Noda, Mr. S. Nakamura, and Mr. H. Kamezaki.

Votes against the proposal: None.

**VI. Discussion on the Statement on Monetary Policy**

Members discussed the Statement on Monetary Policy, and put it to a vote. The

Policy Board decided the text by a unanimous vote. It was confirmed that the statement

would be released immediately after the meeting (see Attachment).

**VII. Approval of the Minutes of the Monetary Policy Meetings**

The Policy Board approved unanimously the minutes of the Monetary Policy

Meetings of December 1, 2009 and December 17 and 18 for release on January 29, 2010.

16


-----

Attachment

January 26, 2010

Bank of Japan

**Statement on Monetary Policy**

1. At the Monetary Policy Meeting held today, the Policy Board of the Bank of Japan

decided, by a unanimous vote,[6] to set the following guideline for money market

operations for the intermeeting period:

The Bank of Japan will encourage the uncollateralized overnight call rate

to remain at around 0.1 percent.

2. Japan's economy is picking up mainly due to various policy measures taken at home

and abroad, although there is not yet sufficient momentum to support a self-sustaining

recovery in domestic private demand. Exports and production have been increasing

against a backdrop of progress in inventory adjustments both at home and abroad as

well as an improvement in overseas economies, especially, fast growth in emerging

economies. The decline in business fixed investment has been coming to a halt.

Private consumption, notably durable goods consumption, is picking up mainly due to

policy measures, despite the continued severe employment and income situation.

Public investment has started to level off. Meanwhile, the financial environment, with

some lingering severity, has continued to show signs of improvement. The CPI

(excluding fresh food) has been declining on a year-on-year basis due to the substantial

slack in the economy as a whole, but the rate of decline has been moderating mainly

because the effects of fluctuations in the prices of petroleum products have been

dissipating.

6 Voting for the action: Mr. M. Shirakawa, Mr. H. Yamaguchi, Mr. K. G. Nishimura, Ms. M. Suda,
Mr. T. Noda, Mr. S. Nakamura, and Mr. H. Kamezaki.
Voting against the action: None.

17


-----

3. The Bank's baseline scenario projects that the pace of improvement of the economy is

likely to remain moderate until around the middle of fiscal 2010. Thereafter, as

improvements in the corporate sector originating from exports are expected to spill

over to the household sector, the growth rate of the economy is likely gradually to rise.

With regard to prices, assuming that medium- to long-term inflation expectations

remain stable, the year-on-year rate of decline in the CPI (excluding fresh food) is

likely to moderate as the aggregate supply and demand balance improves gradually.

4. Compared with the projections presented in the October 2009 _Outlook for Economic_

_Activity and Prices, growth prospects remain broadly unchanged. With regard to_

prices, the year-on-year rates of change in the domestic corporate goods price index

and the CPI (excluding fresh food) will likely be somewhat higher than the October

projections due mainly to the rise in crude oil prices.

5. With regard to economic activity, while there are some upside risks, such as faster

growth in emerging and commodity-exporting economies, there remain downside risks,

although somewhat diminished; downside risk factors include the possible

consequences of balance-sheet adjustments in the United States and Europe as well as

potential changes in firms' medium- to long-term growth expectations. Attention

should continue to be paid to recent various international financial developments and

their effects. With regard to prices, there is a possibility that inflation will rise more

than expected due to a rise in commodity prices brought about by higher growth rates

in emerging and commodity-exporting economies. On the other hand, there is also a

risk that the rate of inflation might decline due, for example, to a decline in medium- to

long-term inflation expectations.

6. The Bank recognizes that it is a critical challenge for Japan's economy to overcome

deflation and return to a sustainable growth path with price stability. To this end, the

Bank will continue to consistently make contributions as central bank. In the conduct

of monetary policy, the Bank will aim to maintain the extremely accommodative

financial environment.

18


-----

**Forecasts of the Majority of Policy Board Members**


Appendix 1

y/y % chg.

|Col1|Col2|Col3|Col4|y/y % chg|
|---|---|---|---|---|
|||Real GDP|Domestic CGPI|CPI (excluding fresh food)|
|Fiscal 2009 Forecasts made in October 2009||-2.5 to -2.5 [-2.5]|-5.3 to -5.2 [-5.3]|-1.5 to -1.5 [-1.5]|
||Forecasts made in October 2009|-3.3 to -3.2 [-3.2]|-5.3 to -5.0 [-5.2]|-1.5 to -1.5 [-1.5]|
|Fiscal 2010 Forecasts made in October 2009||+1.2 to +1.4 [+1.3]|-0.5 to -0.4 [-0.5]|-0.6 to -0.5 [-0.5]|
||Forecasts made in October 2009|+0.8 to +1.3 [+1.2]|-1.5 to -1.0 [-1.4]|-0.9 to -0.7 [-0.8]|
|Fiscal 2011 Forecasts made in October 2009||+1.7 to +2.4 [+2.1]|-0.5 to 0.0 [-0.4]|-0.3 to -0.1 [-0.2]|
||Forecasts made in October 2009|+1.6 to +2.4 [+2.1]|-1.0 to -0.3 [-0.7]|-0.7 to -0.4 [-0.4]|


Notes: 1. Figures in brackets indicate the median of the Policy Board members' forecasts (point estimates).

2. The forecasts of the majority of Policy Board members are constructed as follows: each Policy
Board member's forecast takes the form of a point estimate, namely, the figure to which he or she
attaches the highest probability of realization. These forecasts are then shown as a range, with
the highest figure and the lowest figure excluded. It should be noted that the range does not
indicate the forecast errors.

3. Individual Policy Board members make their forecasts with reference to the view of market
participants regarding the future course of the policy interest rate -- a view that is incorporated in
market interest rates.

4. The revised forecasts for real GDP in fiscal 2009 is largely attributable to the revision of past
GDP statistics.

5. The range shown below includes the forecasts of all Policy Board members.
y/y % chg.

Real GDP Domestic CGPI CPI (excluding fresh food)

Fiscal 2009 -2.6 to -2.3 -5.5 to -5.0 -1.6 to -1.5

Forecasts made in
-3.4 to -3.0 -5.4 to -5.0 -1.6 to -1.4
October 2009

Fiscal 2010 +1.0 to +1.5 -0.9 to -0.4 -0.7 to -0.4

Forecasts made in
+0.7 to +1.5 -1.5 to -0.9 -1.2 to -0.7
October 2009

Fiscal 2011 +1.6 to +2.5 -0.5 to +0.2 -0.3 to 0.0

Forecasts made in
+1.4 to +2.5 -1.1 to +0.2 -1.0 to -0.3
October 2009

19

|Col1|Col2|Col3|Col4|y/y % chg.|
|---|---|---|---|---|
|||Real GDP|Domestic CGPI|CPI (excluding fresh food)|
|Fiscal 2009 Forecasts made in October 2009||-2.6 to -2.3|-5.5 to -5.0|-1.6 to -1.5|
||Forecasts made in October 2009|-3.4 to -3.0|-5.4 to -5.0|-1.6 to -1.4|
|Fiscal 2010 Forecasts made in October 2009||+1.0 to +1.5|-0.9 to -0.4|-0.7 to -0.4|
||Forecasts made in October 2009|+0.7 to +1.5|-1.5 to -0.9|-1.2 to -0.7|
|Fiscal 2011 Forecasts made in October 2009||+1.6 to +2.5|-0.5 to +0.2|-0.3 to 0.0|
||Forecasts made in October 2009|+1.4 to +2.5|-1.1 to +0.2|-1.0 to -0.3|


-----

Appendix 2
### Risk Balance Charts

(1) Real GDP (2) CPI (Excluding Fresh Food)
FY2009 FY2009


50

45

40

35

30

25

20

15

10

5

0


0

FY2010 FY2010


30

25


20

15


10

5


50

45

40

35

30

25

20

15

10

5

0


0

FY2011 FY2011


30

25


20

15


10

5


50

45

40

35

30

25

20

15

10

5

0


5

0

Notes: 1. Vertical axes in the charts represent probability (%), while horizontal axes represent the year-on-year percentage
changes in the respective indicators. Bar charts represent the probability distributions in January 2010, and
solid lines represent those in October 2009.
2. Vertical dashed heavy lines indicate the median of the Policy Board members' forecasts (point estimates).
indicates the range of the forecasts of the majority of Policy Board members.          indicates
the range of the forecasts of all Policy Board members.
3. Vertical dashed thin lines indicate the median of the Policy Board members' forecasts (point estimates) in October 2009.
4. For the process of compilation of the Risk Balance Charts, see the box on page 9 of the April 2008 Outlook for
_Economic Activity and Prices._


30

25


20

15


10


20


-----

