Not to be released until 8:50 a.m.
Japan Standard Time on Friday,
August 13, 2010.

August 13, 2010

Bank of Japan

# Minutes of the Monetary Policy Meeting
## on July 14 and 15, 2010

(English translation prepared by the Bank's staff based on the Japanese original)


-----

Please contact the Bank of Japan at the address below in advance to request permission

when reproducing or copying the content of this document for commercial purposes.

Secretariat of the Policy Board, Bank of Japan

P.O. Box 30, Nihonbashi, Tokyo 103-8660, Japan

Please credit the source when quoting, reproducing, or copying the content of this

document.


-----

A Monetary Policy Meeting of the Bank of Japan Policy Board was held in the

Head Office of the Bank of Japan in Tokyo on Wednesday, July 14, 2010, from 2:00 p.m. to

4:39 p.m., and on Thursday, July 15, from 9:02 a.m. to 12:40 p.m.[1]

**Policy Board Members Present**

**Mr. M. Shirakawa, Chairman, Governor of the Bank of Japan**

**Mr. H. Yamaguchi, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Japan**

**Mr. K. G. Nishimura, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Japan**

**Ms. M. Suda**

**Mr. T. Noda**

**Mr. S. Nakamura**

**Mr. H. Kamezaki**

**Mr. R. Miyao**

**Mr. Y. Morimoto**

Government Representatives Present

Mr. M. Ikeda, Senior Vice Minister of Finance, Ministry of Finance[2]

Mr. S. Kagawa, Deputy Vice Minister for Policy Planning and Coordination, Ministry of

Finance[3]

Mr. K. Tsumura, Parliamentary Vice-Minister, Cabinet Office[2]

Mr. K. Umetani, Deputy Director-General, Economic and Fiscal Management, Cabinet

Office[3]

Reporting Staff

Mr. K. Ido, Executive Director

Mr. K. Yamamoto, Executive Director

Mr. H. Nakaso, Executive Director (Assistant Governor)

1 The minutes of this meeting were approved by the Policy Board at the Monetary Policy Meeting
held on August 9 and 10, 2010 as "a document describing an outline of the discussion at the
meeting" stipulated in Article 20, paragraph 1 of the Bank of Japan Act of 1997. Those present are
referred to by their titles at the time of the meeting.
2 Messrs. M. Ikeda and K. Tsumura were present on July 15.
3 Messrs. S. Kagawa and K. Umetani were present on July 14.

1


-----

Mr. M. Amamiya, Executive Director

Mr. S. Kushida, Director-General, Monetary Affairs Department

Mr. T. Kato, Associate Director-General, Monetary Affairs Department

Mr. H. Toyama, Director-General, Financial Markets Department

Mr. K. Momma, Director-General, Research and Statistics Department

Mr. T. Sekine, Associate Director-General, Research and Statistics Department

Mr. H. Ono, Director-General, International Department

Secretariat of the Monetary Policy Meeting

Mr. Y. Iino, Director-General, Secretariat of the Policy Board

Mr. T. Tachibana, Director, Deputy Head of Secretarial Services for the Board,

Secretariat of the Policy Board

Mr. K. Nakamura, Senior Economist, Monetary Affairs Department

Mr. A. Okuno, Senior Economist, Monetary Affairs Department

2


-----

**I. Summary of Staff Reports on Economic and Financial Developments[4]**

**A. Money Market Operations in the Intermeeting Period**

The Bank conducted money market operations in accordance with the guideline

decided at the previous meeting on June 14 and 15, 2010.[5] The uncollateralized overnight

call rate had been at around 0.1 percent.

The Bank continued its provision of funds through the fixed-rate funds-supplying

operation against pooled collateral, and in consideration of the recent formation of market

rates, conducted money market operations in a flexible manner. On July 13, the Bank

conducted an auction for the U.S. dollar funds-supplying operation, but the value of bids

was small.

**B. Recent Developments in Financial Markets**

Money market rates had generally been stable at low levels due to the Bank's

provision of ample funds. General collateral (GC) repo rates had generally been in the

range of 0.10-0.15 percent. As for interest rates on term instruments, yields on treasury

discount bills (T-Bills), including those with a one-year maturity, had been stable in the

range of 0.10-0.15 percent, and the TIBOR rates had declined somewhat. Issuance rates

on CP had remained more or less unchanged at low levels, and differences in these rates

among various issuers had narrowed, albeit to a slight degree. European financial markets

had continued to be unstable, but the effects on Japan's money market had remained limited.

Japanese stock prices had declined somewhat, reflecting weakness in U.S. and

European stock prices until early July and the appreciating trend of the yen. The Nikkei

225 Stock Average had recently been at around 9,500 yen. Long-term interest rates in

Japan had declined amid a decrease in long-term interest rates abroad reflecting, for

example, cautious views on the pace of U.S. economic recovery. The benchmark rate had

recently been in the range of 1.10-1.15 percent.

The yen had appreciated against the U.S. dollar and had recently been in the range

of 88-89 yen.

4 Reports were made based on information available at the time of the meeting.
5 The guideline was as follows:
The Bank of Japan will encourage the uncollateralized overnight call rate to remain at
around 0.1 percent.

3


-----

**C. Overseas Economic and Financial Developments**

The world economy had continued to recover moderately.

The U.S. economy was recovering at a moderate pace. Exports were increasing,

private consumption was expanding at a moderate rate, and business fixed investment as a

whole was picking up. Reflecting such developments in demand, production was

recovering moderately. In the labor market, the number of employees was picking up,

while the unemployment rate had been more or less unchanged at a high level. The

numbers of housing starts and home sales remained at depressed levels, below market

expectations. As for prices, the year-on-year rate of increase in the consumer price index

(CPI) for all items less energy and food, or the core CPI, had been moderating against the

backdrop of slack in supply and demand conditions and slower growth in wages.

Economic activity in the euro area was picking up, with some differences in

growth by country. Exports had been firm partly due to the depreciation of the euro, and

production in the manufacturing sector had been increasing gradually. Meanwhile, private

consumption had been relatively weak, as moves toward fiscal consolidation across the area

were exerting downward pressure on consumer confidence. As for prices, the

year-on-year rate of increase in the Harmonized Index of Consumer Prices (HICP)

excluding energy and unprocessed food had been declining moderately against the backdrop

of slack in supply and demand conditions and slower growth in wages. The U.K.

economic activity was picking up.

The Chinese economy had continued to grow at a relatively rapid pace, led mainly

by domestic demand. Growth in private consumption had been firm mainly due to higher

income levels, and fixed asset investment had been increasing, although at a slower pace.

Exports had also been rising due to the recovery in overseas economies, and production had

continued to increase. Economic conditions in the NIEs and the ASEAN countries were

recovering steadily. Exports had continued to rise on the back of expanding demand for

IT-related goods, and private consumption and business fixed investment had been on an

increasing trend. Under these circumstances, production was increasing. The Indian

economy had also continued to grow at a relatively rapid pace. In many of these Asian

economies, upward pressure on prices had been increasing due to higher energy and food

prices and greater utilization of production factors such as labor and capital.

As for global financial markets, sovereign risks in Europe had continued to be a

4


-----

concern. In the money market, participants had been cautious about counterparty risks in

relation to European financial institutions, and upward pressure on interest rates on term

instruments had continued. U.S. and European stock prices, which had tended to be

volatile mainly due to the fiscal problem in Europe, had fluctuated sharply: they dropped

significantly, as many U.S. economic indicators were worse than market expectations, and

rose thereafter. Long-term interest rates in the United States had declined reflecting more

cautious views on the outlook for the economy. Those in Germany had fallen mainly due

to a flight to quality, while those in some other European countries had been at high levels

on the back of concern about their fiscal problems.

**D. Economic and Financial Developments in Japan**

1. Economic developments

Exports had been increasing, due to the improvement in overseas economic

conditions. Those to emerging economies in particular had been on a firm uptrend;

expanding global demand for IT-related goods and other factors had recently led to rapid

growth in exports of IT-related goods and of capital goods and parts, especially to East Asia.

The uptrend in exports was expected to continue, reflecting continued improvement in

overseas economic conditions, although the pace of increase was likely to moderate

gradually.

Public investment was declining, and this trend was likely to continue.

With regard to domestic private demand, business fixed investment was showing

signs of picking up. Although such signs were expected to gradually become evident with

the continued improvement in corporate profits, the pace of improvement in business fixed

investment was likely to remain moderate for the time being amid the persistent sense

among firms of excessive capital stock.

Private consumption had been generally picking up. Meanwhile, the employment

and income situation had remained severe, but the degree of severity had eased somewhat.

Private consumption was expected to continue picking up, but the pace of improvement was

likely to remain moderate for the time being, since the effects of policy measures were

expected to wane.

Housing investment had leveled out. It was expected to gradually head for a

recovery, given the recent developments in housing starts.

5


-----

Production had been increasing. It was likely to continue rising as a trend in

parallel with exports, although the pace of increase was expected to moderate gradually.

On the price front, commodity prices had been weakening slightly. The

three-month rate of increase in the domestic corporate goods price index (CGPI) was

slowing, mainly due to the decrease in commodity prices, amid the persistent slack in

supply and demand conditions for products. The CGPI was expected to be somewhat

weak for the time being, since the effects of the decrease in commodity prices were likely to

continue. The CPI (excluding fresh food) was declining on a year-on-year basis due to the

substantial slack in the economy as a whole, but the slowing trend in the pace of decline had

continued. The year-on-year pace of decline in the CPI was likely to slow as a trend as the

aggregate supply and demand balance improved gradually.

2. Financial environment

Financial conditions had continued to show signs of easing. The overnight call

rate had remained at an extremely low level, and the declining trend in firms' funding costs

had continued. While stimulative effects from low interest rates were still partly

constrained given current developments in economic activity and prices, such effects were

beginning to strengthen in light of improved corporate profits. With regard to credit

supply, firms saw financial institutions' lending attitudes as improving. Issuing conditions

for CP and corporate bonds had remained favorable as a whole. As for credit demand,

firms' need to fund working capital and fixed investment had declined, and some firms had

reduced the on-hand liquidity that they had accumulated. Against this backdrop, bank

lending had declined on a year-on-year basis. The amount outstanding of corporate bonds

had exceeded the previous year's level, while that of CP had declined. In these

circumstances, firms' financial positions had continued to show signs of improvement as a

whole. Meanwhile, the year-on-year rate of change in the money stock had been at around

3 percent.

**II. Summary of Discussions by the Policy Board on Economic and Financial**

**Developments**

**A. Economic Developments**

Many members expressed the view that global financial markets remained

6


-----

unstable, especially European markets. Some members said that the recent bidding of

government bonds such as Spain's went relatively smoothly, and this suggested that the

concern about sovereign risks in some European countries had eased somewhat. Many

members, however, expressed the opinion that the situation still warranted attention because

yield spreads between government bonds issued by Germany and those issued by other

European countries, as well as spreads on U.S. and European corporate bonds, had been at

relatively high levels on the back of the continued risk aversion among investors. Some

members commented that there had been upward pressure in U.S. and European money

markets on interest rates on term instruments because market participants had been cautious

about counterparty risks in relation to European financial institutions. In this regard, many

members referred to the stress test exercise being conducted on 91 European financial

institutions -- the results of which would be released on July 23. One member raised the

possibility that, if the stress test exercise dispelled uncertainty about financial institutions'

financial soundness, this might lead to stabilization of financial markets. Some members

added that another key issue was whether European countries could swiftly launch specific

measures for stabilizing the financial system in view of the results of the stress test exercise.

Members shared the view that overseas economies had continued to recover

moderately, and this trend was likely to continue led by higher growth in emerging

economies. With regard to emerging economies, many members noted that their growth

had continued to be somewhat faster than expected. Some members raised the following

as factors behind the high growth: the continued increase in private consumption and

infrastructure-related investment; and a large increase in Asian exports, reflecting the global

expansion of the markets for new IT products, such as smartphones, observed in recent

years. Many members said that emerging economies were likely to continue to grow at a

relatively rapid pace with the virtuous circle of growth in production, income, and spending

remaining intact. These members expressed the view that whether these economies could

make a soft landing onto a sustainable growth path was extremely important in terms of

bringing the world economy toward steady growth. Regarding advanced economies, many

members said that they had continued to recover, albeit at a moderate pace. Some

members, however, were of the opinion that the pace of recovery was likely to be only

moderate, given the severe employment situation and governments' fiscal conditions.

A few members -- referring to the prevailing projection for the world economic

7


-----

growth rate in the coming years of above 4 percent, a rate similar to that observed during

the years preceding the bursting of the credit bubble -- expressed some reservations about

whether the world economy could continue to grow at such a rapid pace. One of these

members said that the recent high growth was partly attributable to the fact that the

extremely accommodative monetary policy in advanced countries had been indirectly

stimulating economic activity in emerging countries, rather than directly stimulating

economic activity in their own countries, and it was difficult to judge the sustainability of

such a mechanism.

Members shared the view that the U.S. economy was recovering at a moderate

pace and was likely to generally continue recovering. Some members said that exports

and production continued to increase and that business fixed investment as a whole was

picking up, as evidenced by the uptrend in new orders for capital goods. A few members

said that private consumption was expanding at a moderate rate against the backdrop of an

increase in working hours. On the other hand, some members expressed the opinion that,

judging from the prolonged average duration of unemployment and the decline in stock

prices, the environment surrounding consumption had not improved noticeably. A few

members raised the possibility that the recent developments in stock prices and weak

economic data, housing indicators in particular, might suggest a weakening of the

momentum of U.S. economic recovery. Members shared the view that the U.S. economy

as a whole was likely to continue recovering. One member added that the basic

mechanism -- in which the effects of strong corporate performance spilling over to business

fixed investment and wages, thereby underpinning economic activity -- was likely to

continue operating. However, some members expressed the view that the pace of

economic recovery would likely remain moderate for the time being, given that

balance-sheet adjustment pressure had persisted in the household sector. One of these

members saw risks as tilted to the downside. Based on this discussion, members said that

due attention should be paid to future developments in the U.S. economy, some indicators

of which had recently shown weakness.

Many members expressed the view that economic activity in the euro area overall

was picking up mainly due to a steady increase in exports, with some differences in

economic growth by country. Some members said that the employment situation remained

severe -- as evidenced by the fact that the unemployment rate continued to be at a high level

8


-----

of around 10 percent -- and private consumption had been relatively weak. Some

members were of the view that the euro area economy would likely continue to head toward

a moderate recovery as the depreciation of the euro boosted exports. Some members,

however, expressed the opinion that attention should be paid to the possibility that,

depending on developments in fiscal tightening measures planned for implementation in

euro area countries, economic activity in the area might be exposed to

stronger-than-expected downward pressure. In this regard, one member mentioned a view

that actions taken toward fiscal consolidation could ease the public's concern about the

future and have an immediate positive impact on consumption. A few members expressed

the view that, if the European financial system became unstable due to such factors as

materialization of sovereign risks, the adverse feedback loop between financial and

economic activity might intensify again.

Members agreed that the Chinese economy had continued to grow at a rapid pace

against the background of high growth in domestic demand and a surge in exports. Many

members said that the pace of economic growth was likely to slow somewhat mainly due to

the effects of measures to restrain the increase in real estate transactions. Some members,

however, expressed the view that the Chinese economy was unlikely to decelerate rapidly in

the near future, taking account of the following factors specific to China: high economic

growth was required to create sufficient employment opportunities; and the government's

measures to restrain excessive economic activity targeted only some markets that had

shown notable signs of overheating, such as the real estate market. With regard to the

effects on the Chinese economy of the renminbi exchange rate's enhanced flexibility, which

was announced by the People's Bank of China in June, a few members said that these had

been marginal because there had been only a slight appreciation of the renminbi against the

U.S. dollar to date. A few members were of the opinion that the risk of inflation had

increased in China, as evidenced by the acceleration in the CPI inflation rate and the rise in

wages across the country on the back of increased labor disputes. Based on this discussion,

some members said that full attention should continue to be paid to the future conduct of

China's macroeconomic policy and its effects.

Based on the above deliberations on economic and financial conditions abroad,

members discussed the state of Japan's economy. They concurred that the economy

showed further signs of a moderate recovery, induced by improvement in overseas

9


-----

economic conditions. Some members expressed the view that improvement was spreading

in the corporate sector on the back of an increase in exports and production, and this

improvement was beginning to spill over to the household sector, albeit at a moderate pace.

One member, referring to the results of the June 2010 _Tankan (Short-Term Economic_

Survey of Enterprises in Japan), said that business confidence had improved significantly

not only in manufacturing industries but also in nonmanufacturing industries such as

transport and information services. Some members said that private consumption had

been generally picking up in reflection of improved corporate profits and reduced

employment uncertainty, and indicators of consumer confidence had been on a recovery

trend on the whole. Meanwhile, some members noted the recent slowing of growth in

industrial production and signs of weakness in some other indicators such as machinery

orders and the unemployment rate. In relation to this, a few members expressed the view

that Japan's economy, since bottoming out in spring 2009, had been recovering at a faster

pace than U.S. and European economies, and therefore it was inevitable that the pace of

recovery would slow to some extent as the effects of inventory restocking and policy

measures waned.

As for the outlook, members concurred that Japan's economy was likely to recover

at a moderate pace. Some members expressed the view that, although policy effects were

likely to wane in the latter half of fiscal 2010, self-sustaining recovery in domestic private

demand was likely to gain momentum led by a recovery in corporate activity and

consequent gradual improvement in the employment and income situation.

Turning to developments in each demand component, members shared the view

that exports had been increasing more steadily than they had previously expected, mainly

due to high growth in emerging economies and the expansion in global demand for

IT-related goods. Many members agreed that the uptrend in exports was likely to continue,

reflecting continued improvement in overseas economic conditions. In relation to this, a

few members expressed the view that growth in Japan's exports was likely to gradually slow

toward a more sustainable pace, as the effects of inventory restocking would wane,

especially in Asia.

Members agreed that business fixed investment was showing signs of picking up.

Many members expressed the view that signs of a pick-up were likely to gradually become

evident with the continued improvement in corporate profits. Some members said that, in

10


-----

the June 2010 _Tankan, fixed investment plans of manufacturing and nonmanufacturing_

firms for fiscal 2010 were revised upward and the aggregated amount of all industries' plans

exceeded the previous year's level for the first time in three years. However, some

members were of the opinion that manufacturers in particular had revised their investment

plans only slightly relative to the increase in production and improvement in profits, and

this suggested that firms were taking cautious views on the outlook for the economy. In

relation to this point, one member -- noting that firms might be formulating their strategies

for establishing an optimal production system from a global perspective, or might be

determining an appropriate timing for their investment -- expressed the view that

developments, including in firms' shifting of production sites to other Asian countries,

should continue to be closely monitored.

Members shared the view that the employment and income situation had remained

severe but the degree of severity had eased somewhat. Some members said that signs of

improvement had continued to be seen in the employment and income situation: for

example, the ratio of job offers to applicants was on an uptrend, and household income had

exceeded the previous year's level mainly due to the increase in overtime payments.

However, a few members expressed the view that firms remained cautious about raising

wages or increasing employment amid the persistent sense of an excessive workforce, and

therefore a situation continued in which the increase in production and profits did not

necessarily lead to a rise in household income.

Members agreed that private consumption had been generally picking up. Some

members expressed the view that growth in demand for durable goods, which had continued

to be high due to policy effects, had recently slowed as expected, as evidenced by sales of

electrical appliances after the start of fiscal 2010. However, some members said that signs

of a pick-up in private consumption were seen in areas that had not been directly supported

by policy measures: for example, sales at department stores and supermarkets had

essentially stopped decreasing and outlays for travel had recently started to recover. Some

members expressed the opinion that the pace of pick-up in private consumption was likely

to be only moderate for the time being mainly due to the waning effects of the policy

measures. One member added that the key was whether an increase in self-sustaining

consumer spending led by improvement in the employment and income situation would

more than offset a decline in spending following the termination of the policy measures.

11


-----

Members shared the view that housing investment had recently leveled out, mainly

in the Tokyo metropolitan area, and was likely to gradually head for a recovery.

Members agreed that production had been increasing, mainly reflecting high

growth in emerging economies and the expansion in global demand for IT-related goods.

Some members expressed the view that production was likely to continue rising as a trend

reflecting the recovery in overseas economies, although the pace of increase in production

would moderate gradually due to the waning effects of policy measures and of inventory

restocking.

Members concurred that the CPI (excluding fresh food) was declining on a

year-on-year basis due to the substantial slack in the economy as a whole, but excluding the

effects of subsidies for high school tuition, the slowing trend in the pace of decline had

continued. One member, in view of the fact that the year-on-year rate of decline in the

trimmed mean CPI had been moderating, expressed the opinion that the lagged effects of

the narrowing of the negative output gap since 2009 had manifested themselves. A

different member, noting the record high reached by the figure representing the difference

between the number of items for which prices had declined and of items for which prices

had risen, said that the persistent downward pressure on prices still required close

monitoring. As for the outlook, members agreed that the year-on-year pace of decline in

the CPI was likely to slow as the aggregate supply and demand balance improved gradually.

A few members pointed to the fact that the results of the Bank's _Opinion Survey on the_

_General Public's Views and Behavior conducted in June showed that households'_

one-year-ahead inflation expectations rose somewhat from the March survey.

**B. Financial Developments**

Members shared the view that financial conditions had continued to show signs of

easing.

Many members said that Japan's money market had been stable due in part to the

Bank's provision of ample funds, despite the heightened strains in U.S. and European

markets. Some members expressed the view that, amid the continued declining trend in

firms' funding costs, stimulative effects from low interest rates were beginning to strengthen

in light of improved corporate profits.

Some members said that long-term interest rates in Japan had declined

12


-----

significantly through early July, mainly reflecting a decrease in long-term interest rates

abroad. One member said that, although fiscal consolidation had recently become a hot

topic of discussion in Japan as well, there had not been any significant changes in risk

premiums so far. Some members commented that due attention should continue to be paid

to whether the declining trend in long-term interest rates would be prolonged.

Members concurred that financial institutions' lending attitudes, as perceived by

firms, and firms' financial positions had continued to show signs of improvement as a whole.

Some members said that, according to the results of the June 2010 _Tankan and other_

surveys, firms judged their financial positions to be as tight as or less tight than the average

situation in the previous decade. One member said that the ratio of firms' on-hand

liquidity to sales, particularly for small firms, had recently registered a record high. This

member added that, on the whole, firms' funding conditions no longer constrained their

spending, even for small firms. Some members noted that the degree of improvement in

very small firms' funding conditions remained small. One member explained that this

situation was partly attributable to significant changes in their business environment amid

changes in demographic conditions and the industrial structure. The member continued

that, therefore, the essence of the underlying issues might be overlooked if firms' funding

conditions were the only focal point.

With regard to the recent appreciation of the yen and fall in Japanese stock prices,

some members said that the effects on Japan's economic activity should be examined

closely. In relation to this point, some members noted the following developments amid

the increased risk aversion among investors around the world: stock prices continued to be

unstable not only in Japan but also in overseas markets; and the yen had appreciated partly

because investors had no better alternative than to buy yen as safe assets. One member

said that it was important to comprehensively assess the effects of the strong yen and weak

stock prices, taking into account economic conditions and the market situation at the time.

This member added that, when making such assessment, it was also necessary to take into

consideration the fact that domestic and overseas economies were recovering and that,

compared with the situation in the United States and Europe, money and credit markets in

Japan were more stable and Japan's financial system was considerably more robust.

13


-----

**C. Interim Assessment**

Given the above assessment of recent developments, members agreed that growth

prospects for fiscal 2010 would likely be higher than the Bank's projection presented in the

April 2010 _Outlook for Economic Activity and Prices (hereafter the Outlook Report)._

Many members cited the following as reasons: a faster-than-expected rate of increase in

exports mainly due to accelerated growth in emerging economies; and a larger carry-over

effect from fiscal 2009 on GDP growth for fiscal 2010 due to the higher-than-expected level

of GDP for the last quarter of fiscal 2009. Members concurred that growth prospects for

fiscal 2011 would likely remain broadly unchanged compared with the April projection.

With regard to prices, members agreed that the year-on-year rates of change in the

CGPI and the CPI (excluding fresh food) would likely be broadly in line with the

projections presented in the April 2010 Outlook Report. A few members added that these

price forecasts were made in view of both the upside factor of higher growth prospects for

fiscal 2010 and the downside factors of the recent fall in commodity prices and appreciation

of the yen.

With regard to risks for economic activity, many members noted that the size of

upside and downside risks had increased somewhat compared with the April projections,

and some members expressed the view that both sets of risks were broadly balanced. As

downside risk factors, many members pointed to international financial developments and

said that particular attention should be paid to the effects of developments in European

fiscal and financial conditions on international finance and the world economy. One

member expressed greater concern over the downside risks in the second half of fiscal 2010,

in view of fiscal and financial developments in Europe and the possibility that waning of

policy effects would depress consumption, of durable goods in particular. Some members

also noted the possible consequences of balance-sheet adjustments in the United States and

Europe as a downside risk factor. In this regard, one member added that the ongoing

balance-sheet adjustments might be dampening expectations for U.S. medium- to long-term

economic growth, and this warranted attention. A different member said that Japan's

expansionary macroeconomic policy, should it be maintained for longer than necessary,

might result in sluggish productivity growth due to a delay with the progress in structural

changes, and in a consequent decline in expectations for Japan's medium- to long-term

economic growth. On the other hand, as upside risk factors, most members cited even

14


-----

faster growth in emerging and commodity-exporting economies. Some members

expressed the view that attention should be paid to the possibility that a shift from

accommodative monetary policy might be delayed in emerging economies, for which

growth momentum was strong, mainly because these economies were concerned about

adverse effects on them from the sluggish recovery in advanced economies. A few

members said that if such a policy shift actually lagged behind, emerging economies might

face the risk of further overheating and undergo a subsequent rapid unwinding of economic

and financial activity. Meanwhile, one member said that the pace of growth in emerging

economies might accelerate further, depending on developments in such factors as (1)

capital flows from advanced economies to emerging economies and (2) global demand for

IT-related goods. With regard to the latter, a different member was of the opinion that it

was important to bear in mind that the supply-demand balance for IT-related goods tended

to change significantly in a relatively short term, as suggested by past experience. In this

regard, another member said that, when examining the effects on Japan's economic activity,

it was necessary to keep in mind that upside risk factors and downside ones associated with

emerging and advanced economies were complexly intertwined, rather than independent of

each other.

As for risks to the outlook for prices, some members said that there was a

possibility that inflation would rise more than expected due to an increase in primary

commodity prices brought about by higher growth rates in emerging economies, while there

was also a risk that the rate of inflation might fall due, for example, to a decline in medium
to long-term inflation expectations. As for the latter risk, one member commented that the

Bank, as the central bank, should prevent such a decline in medium- to long-term inflation

expectations.

**III. Summary of Discussions on Monetary Policy for the Immediate Future**

Regarding the guideline for money market operations for the intermeeting period

ahead, members agreed that, given the above assessment of economic activity and prices, it

was appropriate to maintain the current guideline that the Bank would encourage the

uncollateralized overnight call rate to remain at around 0.1 percent.

As for the future conduct of monetary policy, members agreed that, in order for

Japan's economy to overcome deflation and return to a sustainable growth path with price

15


-----

stability, the Bank should continue to consistently make contributions as central bank.

They concurred that, in the conduct of monetary policy, the Bank would continue to aim at

maintaining the extremely accommodative financial environment.

Members discussed the fund-provisioning measure to support strengthening the

foundations for economic growth, the introduction of which the Bank decided in June.

Some members -- noting that 66 financial institutions, including regional banks and shinkin

banks, had qualified for the measure -- regarded this as a favorable move in that it was

consistent with the measure's objective of offering support as broadly as possible for the

various efforts that financial institutions would make. Many members said that the

measure should also act as a catalyst for private financial institutions to make efforts on

their own initiative toward strengthening the foundations for economic growth, and it was

important that the measure would lead to a spread of such efforts among financial

institutions. On this point, some members said that an increasing number of private

financial institutions had already set up funds on the assumption that they would qualify for

the measure. One member hoped that many financial institutions would make positive

efforts consistent with the objectives of the measure, and in this regard said that it was

necessary to consider how the Bank should disclose the results of its loan provision through

the measure. A different member expressed the view that, besides this measure, the Bank

should continue to explore various possibilities from the central bank's perspective -- for

example, toward establishing a market for the purpose of strengthening the foundations for

economic growth.

**IV. Remarks by Government Representatives**

The representative from the Ministry of Finance made the following remarks.

(1) The Japanese economy had been picking up steadily, and the foundation for a

self-sustaining recovery was being laid. Nevertheless, the situation remained difficult,

as evidenced by the high unemployment rate. As for short-term prospects, in addition

to risk factors such as international financial developments and deflation, there was

continued concern that the employment situation could deteriorate further, and the basis

for the economy's return to a path of strong private demand-led growth remained

fragile.

16


-----

(2) In the "New Growth Strategy," which had recently been decided by the Cabinet, the

government stated that it regarded overcoming deflation as the top-priority task in its

macroeconomic policy management, and would work with the Bank to launch vigorous

and comprehensive policy efforts. In the strategy, the government divided the period

through fiscal 2020 into two phases and regarded "Phase I" as the "period of

overcoming deflation," in which the government aimed to end deflation, making the

CPI inflation rate positive by the end of fiscal 2011 and quickly achieving and

maintaining a positive inflation rate. It would also make efforts to raise the economic

growth rate close to 3 percent in real terms. After ending deflation, the government

would maintain an appropriate and stable year-on-year price increase of approximately

1 percent in terms of the GDP deflator. The government, by putting forward the

measures specified in the strategy, would strive to eliminate the negative output gap,

placing priority on the implementation of measures and programs that were highly

effective in creating demand and jobs. In the strategy, the government also stated that

it expected the Bank to share the basic perspectives on macroeconomic policy

management with it, and make every possible policy effort.

(3) In addition to the "New Growth Strategy," the Cabinet had recently decided the "Fiscal

Management Strategy," in which a path toward sound public finance was presented.

The government would put the two strategies into action in an integrated manner and do

its utmost to achieve their aims.

(4) The Bank recognized, as did the government, that the critical challenge for Japan's

economy was to overcome deflation, and presented its view that it would maintain the

extremely accommodative financial environment. The government expected the Bank

to continue to support the economy from the financial side, for example, with a view to

overcoming deflation, by conducting monetary policy in an appropriate and flexible

manner, while closely exchanging views with the government.

The representative from the Cabinet Office made the following remarks.

(1) In the government's opinion, the Japanese economy had been picking up steadily and

the foundation for a self-sustaining recovery was being laid. Nevertheless, the

situation remained difficult, as evidenced by the high unemployment rate. The

government aimed to bring about a strong economy, robust public finance, and a strong

17


-----

social security system by putting forward, in an integrated manner, the measures

specified in the "New Growth Strategy" and the "Fiscal Management Strategy," both

decided by the Cabinet in June.

(2) In the midyear economic projection for fiscal 2010, which the Cabinet Office released

in June as a reference to the two strategies, the government projected a decline in the

CPI of about 0.4 percent in fiscal 2010 -- excluding the effects of subsidies for high

school tuition -- effectively forecasting that deflation would continue. It also projected

that the year-on-year rate of change in the CPI for fiscal 2011 would be about 0.0

percent.

(3) Based on the "New Growth Strategy," the government -- viewing recovery in demand,

which was constrained under deflation, as a pressing challenge -- would make policy

efforts to eliminate the negative output gap. It regarded overcoming deflation as the

top-priority task in its macroeconomic policy management, and thus aimed to make the

CPI inflation rate positive by the end of fiscal 2011 and to quickly achieve and maintain

a positive inflation rate.

(4) Regarding the level of CPI inflation that the Bank's Policy Board members understood

as being consistent with price stability over the medium to long term, or the

"understanding," each Policy Board member's "understanding" fell in a positive range

of 2 percent or lower and the midpoints of most members' "understanding" were around

1 percent. However, the Bank, in its interim assessment at this meeting of the April

2010 Outlook Report, projected a CPI inflation rate for fiscal 2011 that was only

slightly positive. The government expected the Bank to recognize that overcoming

deflation was a policy objective that both entities shared. The government also hoped

that, during the "period of overcoming deflation" set out in the "New Growth Strategy,"

the Bank would conduct monetary policy in an appropriate and flexible manner, while

sufficiently exchanging views and working together with the government.

(5) The government was working to further improve the credibility of Japan's economic

statistics, including the GDP statistics, and also to create an indicator to measure social

progress. The government hoped that it would be able to gain the Bank's

understanding and cooperation on these efforts.

18


-----

**V. Votes**

Based on the above discussions, members agreed that it was appropriate to

maintain the current guideline for money market operations, which encouraged the

uncollateralized overnight call rate to remain at around 0.1 percent.

To reflect this view, the chairman formulated the following proposal and put it to a

vote.

**The Chairman's Policy Proposal on the Guideline for Money Market Operations:**

1. The guideline for money market operations for the intermeeting period ahead will be as

follows.

The Bank of Japan will encourage the uncollateralized overnight call rate

to remain at around 0.1 percent.

2. A public statement will be decided separately.

Votes for the proposal: Mr. M. Shirakawa, Mr. H. Yamaguchi, Mr. K. G. Nishimura,

Ms. M. Suda, Mr. T. Noda, Mr. S. Nakamura, Mr. H. Kamezaki, Mr. R. Miyao, and

Mr. Y. Morimoto.

Votes against the proposal: None.

**VI. Discussion on the Statement on Monetary Policy**

Members discussed the Statement on Monetary Policy, and put it to a vote. The

Policy Board decided the text by a unanimous vote. It was confirmed that the statement

would be released immediately after the meeting (see Attachment).

**VII. Approval of the Minutes of the Monetary Policy Meeting**

The Policy Board approved unanimously the minutes of the Monetary Policy

Meeting of June 14 and 15, 2010 for release on July 21, 2010.

19


-----

Attachment

July 15, 2010

Bank of Japan

**Statement on Monetary Policy**

1. At the Monetary Policy Meeting held today, the Policy Board of the Bank of Japan

decided, by a unanimous vote,[6] to set the following guideline for money market

operations for the intermeeting period:

The Bank of Japan will encourage the uncollateralized overnight call rate

to remain at around 0.1 percent.

2. Japan's economy shows further signs of a moderate recovery, induced by improvement

in overseas economic conditions. Exports and production have been increasing

mainly due to high growth in emerging economies and increased global demand for

IT-related goods. Corporate profits and business sentiment have been improving, and

business fixed investment is showing signs of picking up. The employment and

income situation has remained severe, but the degree of severity has eased somewhat.

In these circumstances, private consumption has been generally picking up. Public

investment is declining. Meanwhile, financial conditions have continued to show

signs of easing. The CPI (excluding fresh food) is declining on a year-on-year basis

due to the substantial slack in the economy as a whole, but the slowing trend in the

pace of decline has continued.

6 Voting for the action: Mr. M. Shirakawa, Mr. H. Yamaguchi, Mr. K. G. Nishimura, Ms. M. Suda,
Mr. T. Noda, Mr. S. Nakamura, Mr. H. Kamezaki, Mr. R. Miyao, and Mr. Y. Morimoto.
Voting against the action: None.

20


-----

3. The Bank's baseline scenario projects that the economy is likely to be on a recovery

trend. With regard to prices, based on the assumption that medium- to long-term

inflation expectations remain stable, the year-on-year rate of decline in the CPI

(excluding fresh food) is expected to slow as the aggregate supply and demand balance

improves gradually.

4. Compared with the projections presented in the April 2010 _Outlook for Economic_

_Activity and Prices, growth prospects will likely be higher for fiscal 2010 mainly due to_

acceleration of growth in emerging economies, but remain broadly unchanged for fiscal

2011. With regard to prices, the year-on-year rates of change in the domestic

corporate goods price index and the CPI (excluding fresh food) are expected to be

broadly in line with the projections presented in April.

5. With regard to economic activity, there are some upside risks such as even faster

growth in emerging and commodity-exporting economies. On the other hand, there

are also downside risks such as those related to international financial developments.

In this regard, attention should be paid to the effects of developments in fiscal and

financial conditions in some European economies on international finance and the

global economy. With regard to prices, there is a possibility that inflation will rise

more than expected due to a rise in commodity prices brought about by higher growth

rates in emerging and commodity-exporting economies, while there is also a risk that

the rate of inflation might decline due, for example, to a decline in medium- to

long-term inflation expectations.

6. The Bank recognizes that Japan's economy faces the critical challenge of overcoming

deflation and returning to a sustainable growth path with price stability. To this end,

the Bank will continue to consistently make contributions as central bank. In the

conduct of monetary policy, the Bank will aim to maintain the extremely

accommodative financial environment.

21


-----

**Forecasts of the Majority of Policy Board Members**


Appendix 1

y/y % chg.

|Col1|Col2|Col3|Col4|y/y % chg.|
|---|---|---|---|---|
|||Real GDP|Domestic CGPI|CPI (excluding fresh food)|
|Fiscal 2010 Forecasts made in April 2010||+2.5 to +2.7 [+2.6]|+1.2 to +1.3 [+1.2]|-0.5 to -0.2 [-0.4]|
||Forecasts made in April 2010|+1.6 to +2.0 [+1.8]|+1.1 to +1.5 [+1.3]|-0.5 to -0.2 [-0.5]|
|Fiscal 2011 Forecasts made in April 2010||+1.8 to +2.1 [+1.9]|+0.5 to +0.9 [+0.8]|0.0 to +0.2 [+0.1]|
||Forecasts made in April 2010|+2.0 to +2.2 [+2.0]|+0.5 to +0.8 [+0.7]|-0.1 to +0.2 [+0.1]|


Notes: 1. Figures in brackets indicate the median of the Policy Board members' forecasts (point
estimates).

2. The forecasts of the majority of Policy Board members are constructed as follows: each
Policy Board member's forecast takes the form of a point estimate, namely, the figure to
which he or she attaches the highest probability of realization. These forecasts are then
shown as a range, with the highest figure and the lowest figure excluded. The range does
not indicate the forecast errors.

3. Individual Policy Board members make their forecasts with reference to the view of
market participants regarding the future course of the policy interest rate -- a view that is
incorporated in market interest rates.

4. The CPI for fiscal 2010 excludes the effects of the introduction of subsidies for high
school tuition fees, a factor that will substantially lower the year-on-year rate of change in
the CPI for the year. This measure is estimated to lower the year-on-year rate of change
in the CPI (excluding fresh food) by approximately 0.5 percentage points.

5. The range shown below includes the forecasts of all Policy Board members.
y/y % chg.

Real GDP Domestic CGPI CPI (excluding fresh food)

Fiscal 2010 +2.2 to +2.7 +1.0 to +1.4 -0.5 to -0.2

Forecasts made in
+1.5 to +2.0 +1.0 to +1.6 -0.6 to -0.2
April 2010

Fiscal 2011 +1.8 to +2.1 +0.5 to +1.0 -0.1 to +0.3

Forecasts made in
+1.9 to +2.4 +0.4 to +1.0 -0.1 to +0.3
April 2010

22

|Col1|Col2|Col3|Col4|y/y % chg.|
|---|---|---|---|---|
|||Real GDP|Domestic CGPI|CPI (excluding fresh food)|
|Fiscal 2010 Forecasts made in April 2010||+2.2 to +2.7|+1.0 to +1.4|-0.5 to -0.2|
||Forecasts made in April 2010|+1.5 to +2.0|+1.0 to +1.6|-0.6 to -0.2|
|Fiscal 2011 Forecasts made in April 2010||+1.8 to +2.1|+0.5 to +1.0|-0.1 to +0.3|
||Forecasts made in April 2010|+1.9 to +2.4|+0.4 to +1.0|-0.1 to +0.3|


-----

Appendix 2
### Risk Balance Charts

(1) Real GDP (2) CPI (Excluding Fresh Food)
FY2010 FY2010


50

45

40

35

30

25

20

15

10

5

0


0

FY2011 FY2011


30

25


20

15


10

5


50

45

40

35

30

25

20

15

10

5

0


5

0

Notes: 1. Vertical axes in the charts represent probability (%), while horizontal axes represent the year-on-year percentage
changes in the respective indicators. Bar charts represent the probability distributions in July 2010, and
solid lines represent those in April 2010.
2. Vertical dashed heavy lines indicate the median of the Policy Board members' forecasts (point estimates).
indicates the range of the forecasts of the majority of Policy Board members.          indicates
the range of the forecasts of all Policy Board members.
3. Vertical dashed thin lines indicate the median of the Policy Board members' forecasts (point estimates) in April 2010.
4. For the process of compilation of the Risk Balance Charts, see the box on page 9 of the April 2008 Outlook for
_Economic Activity and Prices._


30

25


20

15


10

|Col1|Col2|
|---|---|


23


-----

