Not to be released until 8:50 a.m.
Japan Standard Time on Friday,
June 18, 2010.

June 18, 2010

Bank of Japan

# Minutes of the Monetary Policy Meeting
## on May 20 and 21, 2010

(English translation prepared by the Bank's staff based on the Japanese original)


-----

Please contact the Bank of Japan at the address below in advance to request permission

when reproducing or copying the content of this document for commercial purposes.

Secretariat of the Policy Board, Bank of Japan

P.O. Box 30, Nihonbashi, Tokyo 103-8660, Japan

Please credit the source when quoting, reproducing, or copying the content of this

document.


-----

A Monetary Policy Meeting of the Bank of Japan Policy Board was held in the

Head Office of the Bank of Japan in Tokyo on Thursday, May 20, 2010, from 2:00 p.m. to

4:27 p.m., and on Friday, May 21, from 9:00 a.m. to 12:37 p.m.[1]

**Policy Board Members Present**

**Mr. M. Shirakawa, Chairman, Governor of the Bank of Japan**

**Mr. H. Yamaguchi, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Japan**

**Mr. K. G. Nishimura, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Japan**

**Ms. M. Suda**

**Mr. T. Noda**

**Mr. S. Nakamura**

**Mr. H. Kamezaki**

**Mr. R. Miyao**

Government Representatives Present

Mr. S. Kagawa, Deputy Vice Minister for Policy Planning and Coordination, Ministry of

Finance

Mr. K. Umetani, Deputy Director-General, Economic and Fiscal Management, Cabinet

Office

Reporting Staff

Mr. A. Horii, Executive Director (Assistant Governor)

Mr. K. Ido, Executive Director

Mr. H. Nakaso, Executive Director

Mr. M. Amamiya, Director-General, Monetary Affairs Department

Mr. N. Yoshioka, Deputy Director-General, Monetary Affairs Department[2]

Mr. T. Kato, Associate Director-General, Monetary Affairs Department

Mr. H. Toyama, Director-General, Financial Markets Department

1 The minutes of this meeting were approved by the Policy Board at the Monetary Policy Meeting
held on June 14 and 15, 2010 as "a document describing an outline of the discussion at the meeting"
stipulated in Article 20, paragraph 1 of the Bank of Japan Act of 1997. Those present are referred
to by their titles at the time of the meeting.
2 Mr. N. Yoshioka was present on May 21.

1


-----

Mr. K. Momma, Director-General, Research and Statistics Department

Mr. T. Sekine, Associate Director-General, Research and Statistics Department

Mr. H. Ono, Director-General, International Department

Secretariat of the Monetary Policy Meeting

Mr. Y. Iino, Director-General, Secretariat of the Policy Board

Mr. T. Tachibana, Director, Deputy Head of Secretarial Services for the Board,

Secretariat of the Policy Board

Mr. T. Sakamoto, Associate Director-General, Monetary Affairs Department[3]

Mr. K. Nishizaki, Senior Economist, Monetary Affairs Department

Mr. M. Nakashima, Senior Economist, Monetary Affairs Department

3 Mr. T. Sakamoto was present on May 21 from 10:51 a.m. to 12:37 p.m.

2


-----

**I. Summary of Staff Reports on Economic and Financial Developments[4]**

**A. Money Market Operations in the Intermeeting Period**

The Bank conducted money market operations in accordance with the guideline

decided at the previous meetings on April 30 and May 10, 2010.[5] The uncollateralized

overnight call rate had been at around 0.1 percent.

With a view to ensuring market stability, the Bank continued to conduct money

market operations in a flexible manner, giving consideration to the recent formation of

market rates, as evidenced by its continued provision of funds through such operations as

the fixed-rate funds-supplying operation against pooled collateral and by its active

purchases of Japanese government securities (JGSs) under repurchase agreements. On

May 18, the Bank conducted an auction for the U.S. dollar funds-supplying operation,

which it had decided to reestablish at the meeting on May 10.

**B. Recent Developments in Financial Markets**

Money market rates, including longer-term ones, had been stable at low levels on

the back of market participants' growing confidence in the Bank's provision of ample funds.

General collateral (GC) repo rates had been in the range of 0.10-0.15 percent. As for

interest rates on term instruments, yields on treasury discount bills (T-Bills), including those

with a one-year maturity, had been stable in the range of 0.10-0.15 percent. Euroyen rates

had remained high relative to overnight index swap (OIS) rates, which reflected market

expectations about the future policy interest rate. Issuance rates on CP had remained more

or less unchanged at low levels. The effects on Japan's money market of the sovereign

risk problem in Europe stemming from the Greek problem had remained limited.

Japanese stock prices had dropped, against the background of the decline in U.S.

and European stock prices due to concern about sovereign risks in Europe and of the slight

appreciation of the yen. The Nikkei 225 Stock Average had recently been in the range of

9,500-10,000 yen. With regard to long-term interest rates in Japan, the benchmark rate

had declined somewhat mainly in response to the drop in stock prices, and was in the range

of 1.2-1.3 percent.

4 Reports were made based on information available at the time of the meeting.
5 The guideline was as follows:
The Bank of Japan will encourage the uncollateralized overnight call rate to remain at
around 0.1 percent.

3


-----

The yen had increasingly been bought as a less risky currency, because investors

were becoming more cautious about taking risks amid growing concern over sovereign risks

in Europe. The yen had recently been traded at around 90 yen against the U.S. dollar.

**C. Overseas Economic and Financial Developments**

The world economy had continued to recover moderately.

The U.S. economy was recovering at a moderate pace. Exports were increasing,

private consumption was expanding at a moderate rate, and business fixed investment as a

whole was picking up. Reflecting such developments in demand, production was

recovering moderately. In the labor market, the number of employees was picking up,

while the unemployment rate had been more or less unchanged at a high level. As for

prices, the year-on-year rate of increase in the consumer price index (CPI) for all items less

energy and food, or the core CPI, had been moderating against the backdrop of slack in

supply and demand conditions and slower growth in wages.

Economic activity in the euro area was picking up, with some differences in

growth by country. Private consumption had been relatively weak, while production in the

manufacturing sector had been increasing gradually as the pace of decline in business fixed

investment moderated and exports increased. As for prices, the year-on-year rate of

increase in the Harmonized Index of Consumer Prices (HICP) excluding energy and

unprocessed food had been declining moderately against the backdrop of slack in supply

and demand conditions and slower growth in wages. The U.K. economic activity was

picking up.

The Chinese economy had continued to grow at a relatively rapid pace, led mainly

by domestic demand. Growth in private consumption had been firm and fixed asset

investment had been increasing, although at a slower pace. Exports had also been rising

due to the recovery in overseas economies, and production had continued to increase.

Economic conditions in the NIEs and the ASEAN countries were recovering. Exports had

continued to rise on the back of expanding demand for IT-related goods, and private

consumption and business fixed investment had been on an increasing trend. Under these

circumstances, production was increasing. The Indian economy had also continued to

grow at a relatively rapid pace. With regard to prices, the rate of inflation had been

increasing gradually in many of these Asian economies, due to a faster rise in energy and

4


-----

food prices and greater utilization of production factors.

As for global financial markets, interest rates on term instruments had risen

somewhat, as market participants had become cautious about taking on counterparty risks in

transactions, amid growing concern about sovereign risks in Europe. Against the

backdrop of such concern, U.S. and European stock prices, which had plunged in early May,

rebounded temporarily subsequent to the European authorities' decision to take

countermeasures but then declined again. U.S. and European long-term interest rates had

fallen, mainly due to a flight to quality.

**D. Economic and Financial Developments in Japan**

1. Economic developments

Exports had been increasing, due to the improvement in overseas economic

conditions. The uptrend in exports was expected to continue, reflecting continued

improvement in overseas economic conditions, although the pace of increase was likely to

moderate gradually.

Public investment was declining, and this trend was likely to continue.

With regard to domestic private demand, business fixed investment was showing

signs of picking up. Although such signs were expected to gradually become evident with

the recovery in corporate profits, the improvement in business fixed investment was likely

to remain moderate for the time being as the sense of excessive capital stock was strong

among firms.

Private consumption, notably durable goods consumption, was picking up partly

due to policy measures. It was expected to continue picking up only moderately for the

time being amid the continued severe employment and income situation, despite the

underpinning effect of policy measures.

Housing investment had leveled out. It was expected to gradually head for a

recovery, given the recent developments in housing starts.

Production had been increasing. It was likely to continue rising as a trend in

parallel with exports, although the pace of increase was expected to moderate gradually.

On the price front, commodity prices had recently fallen back slightly, but had

been on a moderate rising trend on the whole against the background of the improvement in

world economic conditions. The three-month rate of change in the domestic corporate

5


-----

goods price index (CGPI) was rising moderately, reflecting the increase in commodity

prices, in spite of the persistent slack in supply and demand conditions for products. The

CGPI was likely to continue rising moderately for the time being. The CPI (excluding

fresh food) was declining on a year-on-year basis due to the substantial slack in the

economy as a whole, but the moderating trend in the pace of decline had continued. The

year-on-year pace of decline in the CPI was likely to slow as a trend as the aggregate supply

and demand balance improved gradually.

2. Financial environment

Financial conditions, with some lingering severity, had continued to show signs of

easing. The overnight call rate had remained at an extremely low level, and the declining

trend in firms' funding costs had continued. With economic activity and corporate profits

at current levels, the stimulative effects from low interest rates were still partly constrained,

but the degree of constraint had decreased mainly due to the improvement in corporate

profits. With regard to credit supply, although many firms still saw financial institutions'

lending attitudes as severe, firms as a whole regarded the situation as improving. Issuing

conditions for CP and corporate bonds had remained favorable, and even those for

low-rated corporate bonds had shown signs of improvement. As for credit demand, firms'

need to fund working capital and fixed investment had declined, and some firms had

reduced the on-hand liquidity that they had accumulated. Against this backdrop, bank

lending had declined on a year-on-year basis, partly due to the high growth of a year before.

The amount outstanding of corporate bonds had exceeded the previous year's level, while

that of CP had declined. In these circumstances, although many small firms still saw their

financial positions as weak, on the whole financial positions of firms, including small ones,

had continued to show signs of easing. Meanwhile, the year-on-year rate of change in the

money stock had been at around 3 percent.

**II. Summary of Staff Reports on a Fund-Provisioning Measure to Facilitate**

**Strengthening of the Foundations for Economic Growth**

The staff reported the following.

At the Monetary Policy Meeting held on April 30, the chairman instructed the staff

to examine and report on possible ways to support private financial institutions in terms of

6


-----

fund provisioning with a view to strengthening the foundations for economic growth.

In response to the instruction, the staff began exchanging views with private

financial institutions on this matter. This revealed some need by financial institutions for

the Bank's provision of long-term funds at a low interest rate that would effectively finance

their lending and investment.

As the term of lending and investment by financial institutions toward

strengthening the foundations for economic growth was considered to be very long, the

Bank's provision of funds to support such lending and investment should have a term longer

than the terms of the existing operations to meet financial institutions' needs. Defining and

identifying such lending and investment would be a practical issue, and this required further

examination. Also, details such as the total amount of the loans and the deadline for new

applications for the loans should be determined, taking into account financial institutions'

plans for such lending and investment.

Based on the above considerations regarding the fund-provisioning measure to

facilitate strengthening of the foundations for economic growth, it was appropriate to

compile and announce a preliminary framework, and then further exchange views with

financial institutions and promptly draw up concrete plans for the measure. The staff,

upon further exchange of views and examination of operational details, would report on the

result of deliberations at a future Monetary Policy Meeting.

**III. Summary of Discussions by the Policy Board on Economic and Financial**

**Developments**

**A. Economic Developments**

With regard to global financial markets, many members were of the view that

European financial markets had remained unstable, although strains stemming from the

Greek problem had eased somewhat as a result of a series of policy actions. Some

members noted that growing sovereign risks had continued to exert upward pressure on U.S.

and European interbank rates. Many members said that the decline in international

investors' risk tolerance had led to a flight to quality, resulting in the weakness in stock

prices worldwide and a fall in U.S. and German long-term interest rates. Most members

said that two major problems lay behind such instability in European financial markets -
namely, undermined market confidence in fiscal sustainability and consolidation in some

7


-----

European countries, and the decline in the competitiveness of these countries. Many

members said that, since it would take some time for European countries to yield results in

their economic and fiscal reforms and to recover market confidence, it was necessary to

closely examine how developments would affect global financial markets and the world

economy. One of these members added that the key to future developments was whether

major countries in the euro area could clearly show their determination to maintain the

existing currency system and work in concert. Some members said that it was important

that the market felt confident that the economic and fiscal problem in some European

countries -- the fundamental cause of the market strains -- would improve.

Members shared the view that overseas economies had continued to recover

moderately, and this trend was likely to continue led by higher growth in emerging

economies. Some members said that the virtuous circle of growth in production, income,

and spending had already started to operate in emerging economies, and their growth was

stronger than the forecasts by international organizations and the market. A few members

said that, considering that some emerging economies were increasingly showing signs of

overheating, attention should be paid to whether they were responding to the situation in a

timely manner. Most members said that advanced economies had continued to improve,

albeit at a moderate pace. Many members said that the probability was small at present

that the recovery in advanced economies would come to an end. These members

continued that close attention should be paid to the risk that balance-sheet adjustments and

events stemming from European countries' fiscal conditions might adversely affect

advanced economies through such channels as financial markets and international trade. A

few members said that the key to world economic recovery was whether a "decoupling"

could occur -- in other words, whether the world economy could establish a virtuous circle

that would start off with the rapid growth in emerging economies and maintain a solid

recovery in the U.S. and Japanese economies, while containing the adverse effects from the

heightened uncertainty in European economies.

Members shared the view that the U.S. economy was recovering at a moderate

pace. Some members said that private consumption had continued to expand at a

moderate rate across a wide range of items and business fixed investment had been picking

up, especially in terms of investment in equipment. Some members referred to the fact

that the number of employees increased sharply in April, while the average duration of

8


-----

unemployment had continued to extend its longest record and the unemployment rate had

been more or less unchanged at a high level. They continued that, despite some signs of

improvement, the assessment remained valid that the employment and income situation was

still severe. With regard to developments in the real estate market, many members said

that home sales had remained at a low level and home prices had still been more or less

unchanged. Members shared the view that the U.S. economy as a whole was likely to

continue recovering. However, many members said that the pace of economic recovery

would likely remain moderate for the time being, given that the growth in households'

disposable income had been sluggish and balance-sheet adjustment pressure had persisted.

Members shared the view that economic activity in the euro area was picking up,

with some differences in growth by country. Many members said that, while economic

conditions had remained severe in some countries such as Greece, economic activity -
particularly in Germany and France -- had continued to pick up led by the increase in

exports to outside the euro area and in production. Many members said that economic

activity in the euro area was likely to continue to show signs of moderate recovery. Some

members expressed the view that the strains in European financial markets stemming from

the Greek problem had not intensified further owing to the European authorities' responses,

and the probability was small at present that the strains would interrupt the pick-up in

economic activity. A few members, pointing to the fact that some economies that faced

the fiscal problem at present represented a relatively small proportion of the euro area

economy, said that the impact of the strains in European financial markets stemming from

the Greek problem on economic activity in the whole area might be limited. Many

members, including these members, said that the momentum for economic recovery in the

euro area -- burdened with balance-sheet adjustment pressure and Eastern European

economies' excessive debt -- was weaker than in other advanced economies. They

continued that attention should therefore be paid to the risk that possible intensification of

the financial market strains -- which might arise in the process of fiscal consolidation and

economic reforms in countries such as Greece -- might depress economic activity in the

whole euro area through various channels. In relation to this, a few members said that, if

several European countries conducted fiscal consolidation at the same time, the resultant

fiscal drag might be larger than expected. Some members argued that such a result would

be more than offset by positive effects from a recovery in market confidence in fiscal

9


-----

sustainability and consequent stabilization of financial markets.

Members agreed that the Chinese economy had continued to grow at a rapid pace,

led mainly by domestic demand, and this trend was likely to continue. Some members

expressed the view that the continued high growth in private consumption and fixed asset

investment indicated strong momentum of domestic demand. A few members said that

exports to Europe accounted for a relatively large proportion of Chinese exports, and

slower-than-expected growth in European economies could inevitably have a negative

impact on the Chinese economy. Many members were of the view that the risk of inflation

had increased further in China, as evidenced by the continued rise in real estate prices and

acceleration in the CPI inflation rate. Based on this discussion, some members said that

full attention should continue to be paid to developments in China's macroeconomic policy,

including monetary policy, and their possible effects.

Based on the above discussions on economic and financial conditions abroad,

members discussed the state of Japan's economy. They concurred that the economy was

starting to recover moderately, induced by improvement in overseas economic conditions,

and this was in line with the Bank's projection presented in the April 2010 _Outlook for_

_Economic Activity and Prices (hereafter the Outlook Report). Most members said that_

exports and production had been increasing against a backdrop of high growth in emerging

economies. They continued that, in these circumstances, business fixed investment was

showing signs of picking up, and private consumption, notably durable goods consumption,

was also picking up partly due to policy measures. These members expressed the view

that signs of self-sustaining recovery were starting to be seen in domestic private demand.

Some members pointed to the fact that GDP for the January-March quarter of 2010 marked

an annualized growth rate close to 5 percent, underpinned by the increase in exports and the

pick-up in private consumption, and said that the figure supported the above economic

assessment.

As for the outlook, members expressed the view that Japan's economy was likely

to recover moderately, in line with the projection presented in the April 2010 Outlook

Report. Many members were of the view that the effects on Japan's economy of the

heightened uncertainty in European economies stemming from the Greek problem were

limited at present. Some members said that an important factor in forecasting economic

developments was whether the momentum in domestic private demand toward a

10


-----

self-sustaining recovery would take hold before the effects of policy measures abated.

Many members were of the view that risk factors for economic activity had

essentially remained the same as presented in the April 2010 Outlook Report, but the size of

both upside and downside risks had increased somewhat. Most members, pointing to the

continued instability in European financial markets, said that close attention should be paid

to the risk that strains in global financial markets might intensify due to events stemming

from fiscal conditions of some European countries, and this might depress the world

economy through various channels. On the other hand, many members expressed the view

that the recent growth in emerging and commodity-exporting economies had remained

stronger than expected, and this warranted closer attention as an upside risk factor. In this

regard, some members added that if a delayed policy response by these economies led to an

overheating, a rapid unwinding of economic and financial activity in these economies might

occur and this could turn out to be a downside risk factor for Japan's economy.

Turning to developments in each demand component, members agreed that exports

had been increasing, mainly due to the continued stronger-than-expected growth in

emerging economies. Many members expressed the view that the uptrend was likely to

maintain its course, reflecting continued improvement in overseas economic conditions,

although the pace of increase was likely to moderate gradually as the growth rate of

overseas economies slowed toward a sustainable pace.

Many members said that business fixed investment was showing signs of picking

up. Some members said that business fixed investment on a real GDP basis and shipments

of capital goods continued to increase in the January-March quarter. Most members

pointed to the increase in machinery orders and construction starts in terms of floor area -
leading indicators of business fixed investment -- and expressed the view that signs of a

pick-up in business fixed investment were likely to gradually become evident with the

improvement in corporate profits. Many members expressed the view that the pace of

improvement in business fixed investment was nevertheless likely to remain moderate for

the time being, given the strong sense among firms of excessive capital stock.

Members concurred that private consumption was picking up partly due to policy

measures. Many members said that sales of electrical appliances climbed further in March,

prior to the tightening of the application standards of the eco-point system. Some

members expressed the view that the pick-up in private consumption was becoming

11


-----

widespread, as evidenced by the recent improvement in sales of luxury goods at department

stores -- whose sales had not been directly affected by policy measures. In relation to this

point, a few members said that the improvement in indicators of consumer confidence had

recently become evident. In consideration of the continued severe employment and

income situation, members shared the view that the pace of pick-up in private consumption

was likely to be only moderate for the time being despite the underpinning effect of policy

measures.

Many members were of the view that housing investment had leveled out, as

evidenced by the fact that the number of housing starts had continued to pick up gradually,

albeit remaining at a low level, and inventory adjustments of condominiums in the Tokyo

metropolitan area had been progressing.

Members agreed that production had been increasing, mainly reflecting high

growth in emerging economies. Many members said that information obtained, for

example, from interviews with corporate managers suggested that production was likely to

continue rising as a trend reflecting the recovery in overseas economies, although the pace

of increase in production would moderate gradually due to the waning effects of policy

measures.

Most members expressed the view that the employment and income situation had

remained severe but the degree of severity had eased somewhat. Some members said that

there were signs of the decline in household income coming to a halt: the pace of decline in

the number of employees continued to moderate on a year-on-year basis; and nominal

wages per employee, which had previously plunged, registered an increase in March on a

year-on-year basis. Many members, however, said that they maintained their assessment

that the employment and income situation was severe because firms persistently regarded

their workforces as excessive, as evidenced by the fact that a large number of firms

continued to apply for employment subsidies, for example.

Members concurred that the CPI (excluding fresh food) was declining on a

year-on-year basis due to the substantial slack in the economy as a whole, but the

moderating trend in the pace of decline had continued. As for the outlook, they agreed

that the year-on-year pace of decline in the CPI was likely to slow as the aggregate supply

and demand balance improved gradually. Some members noted that the preliminary

year-on-year rates of decline in both the CPI in Tokyo excluding fresh food and that

12


-----

excluding food and energy moderated clearly in April compared with March, when adjusted

for the effects of the introduction of a subsidy for high school tuition. They continued that

the lagged effects of the narrowing of the negative output gap since 2009 might have started

to appear. A few members pointed out that one-year-ahead inflation expectations of

households estimated by using the figures in the Consumer Confidence Survey had recently

been rising. A few members referred to developments in import prices as a risk factor for

prices, and pointed to the need to closely monitor how the heightened uncertainty in

European economies would affect prices of commodities such as crude oil and foreign

exchange rates, and eventually prices in Japan.

**B. Financial Developments**

Members shared the view that financial conditions, with some lingering severity,

had continued to show signs of easing.

As for the money market, most members said that interest rates on term

instruments had been stable at low levels. On this point, many members were of the

opinion that the Bank's conduct of the fixed-rate funds-supplying operation against pooled

collateral had increased market confidence in the Bank's provision of ample funds.

Some members said that long-term interest rates had declined in parallel with

those in the United States and Europe, but the decline was marginal. Many members

expressed the view that Japanese stock prices had been weak due to the decline in U.S. and

European stock prices and the appreciation of the yen.

Members agreed that issuing conditions for CP and corporate bonds had remained

favorable. Most members noted that issuing spreads on CP and corporate bonds had been

stable at low levels, reflecting solid demand from investors. Many members expressed the

opinion that issuing conditions for low-rated corporate bonds continued to improve, as

evidenced by the fact that the number of firms issuing BBB-rated corporate bonds

continued to increase.

Some members said that several surveys indicated that small firms judged their

financial positions as less tight than the average situation since 1990. On this basis, one

member said that small firms' financial positions were also easing.

Based on the above discussion, members agreed that the effects on Japan's

financial conditions of the increased strains in European financial markets stemming from

13


-----

the Greek problem had so far been limited to developments in the stock market, and

financial conditions had continued to show signs of easing. Some members nevertheless

underscored the importance of bearing in mind the possibility that financial conditions in

Japan might be forced to tighten through various economic and financial channels if

European financial markets became more unstable and this resulted in an appreciation of the

yen and weaker stock prices. Some members said that, despite the difference between

Japan and Greece with respect to the situation and framework of the economy and financial

markets, two lessons could be learned from the Greek problem: (1) it was important to

make efforts to fully gain market confidence in fiscal sustainability, bearing in mind that

market conditions could suddenly change; and (2) it was important for the central bank to

firmly maintain its monetary policy stance of aiming to realize sustainable growth with

price stability.

**IV. Summary of Discussions on Monetary Policy for the Immediate Future**

Regarding the guideline for money market operations for the intermeeting period

ahead, members agreed that, given the above assessment of economic activity and prices, it

was appropriate to maintain the current guideline that the Bank would encourage the

uncollateralized overnight call rate to remain at around 0.1 percent.

As for the future conduct of monetary policy, members agreed that, in order for

Japan's economy to overcome deflation and return to a sustainable growth path with price

stability, the Bank should continue to consistently make contributions as central bank.

They concurred that, in the conduct of monetary policy, the Bank would continue to aim at

maintaining the extremely accommodative financial environment.

Members discussed the fund-provisioning measure to facilitate strengthening of

the foundations for economic growth, based on the reports made by the staff earlier in this

meeting.

Members first discussed their basic thoughts on the measure.

Members shared the view that Japan's economy faced the major challenge of

dealing with the decline in the potential growth rate, as well as the underlying problems of

the shrinking of the population and sluggish productivity growth, and that the deflation was

also a manifestation of the fundamental problem facing the economy, namely, the decline in

growth expectations. They concurred that the Bank should use its central banking

14


-----

functions to support strengthening the growth foundations of the economy from the

financial side. In this regard, one member commented that the synergy of networks -- in

which the usefulness of a new technology was largely determined by the size of the market

for products that used it -- would play a vital role in the development of new fields and

revitalization of existing fields, and that financial institutions' constructive efforts to provide

funds to specific fields would therefore attract investments in such fields and promote the

expansion of their markets, thereby leading to a strengthening of the foundations for

economic growth. Some members expressed the opinion that such a strengthening

required the efforts of various entities: firms and financial institutions in the private sector

should play a primary role in the strengthening, and the government and government

financial institutions should extend effective support for the private sector's efforts. These

members continued that the Bank could provide a catalyst by supporting private financial

institutions in terms of fund provisioning. Many members said that the fund-provisioning

measure should be formulated with a view toward (1) maintaining consistency with the

Bank's conduct of the interest rate policy and money market operations, (2) avoiding the

Bank's involvement in microeconomic resource allocation among individual industries and

firms, and (3) ensuring the Bank's financial health. One member said that the Bank should

formulate the new measure very carefully so that financial institutions' lending activity

would be in line with the intention of the measure.

Based on the above discussion about the basic thoughts on the measure, members

next discussed specifics of the measure.

In terms of formulating a basic scheme for the measure, members agreed that it

was appropriate to devise one whereby the Bank would provide long-term funds at a low

interest rate to effectively finance private financial institutions' lending and investment, in

view of the perceived need among such institutions.

Some members expressed the opinion that the type of lending and investment the

measure covered should be determined by taking due account of the actual lending and

investment activity by financial institutions toward strengthening the foundations for

economic growth. Many members were of the view that the scope of such lending and

investment seemed to vary, and it was therefore desirable that the measure be formulated to

cover a wide range of lending and investment, taking into consideration growth strategies

proposed by the government and private-sector organizations.

15


-----

As for the total amount of the loans provided through the measure, a few members

said that an adequate amount should be determined after identifying how much lending and

investment financial institutions would make, based on their plans toward strengthening the

foundations for economic growth. Some members expressed the view that the total

amount of the loans should be determined carefully in order to avoid any constraint on the

conduct of interest rate policy, given that the term of the loans would not likely be short.

One member said that it was important that a predetermined total amount of the loans not be

mistaken for a target.

Members discussed the deadline for new applications for these loans, as well as

the possible number of rollovers. In relation to the former, some members -- stating that

implementing such a measure was extraordinary for a central bank -- expressed the view

that the Bank should emphasize that the measure was a temporary one aimed at effectively

supporting financial institutions' efforts toward strengthening the foundations for economic

growth. As for the latter, a few members said that, given that it would take a long time for

such efforts to bear fruit, the Bank should allow the loans to be rolled over an adequate

number of times, so that it would be able to support the institutions' efforts for a relatively

long period.

Based on the above discussion, members agreed that it was appropriate to compile

and make public a preliminary framework of the measure. Many members commented

that the Bank needed to further exchange views with financial institutions based on the

preliminary framework to be made public immediately after the meeting, and draw up

concrete plans for the measure that included operational details.

**V. Remarks by Government Representatives**

The representative from the Ministry of Finance made the following remarks.

(1) The Japanese economy had been picking up steadily, but it was only self-sustaining at a

weak level and the situation remained difficult, as evidenced by the high unemployment

rate. As for short-term prospects, in addition to risk factors such as international

financial developments and deflation, there was continued concern that the employment

situation could deteriorate further, and the basis for the economy's return to a path of

strong private demand-led growth remained fragile.

16


-----

(2) Faced by the current severe economic conditions, the government, with the aim of

overcoming deflation and ensuring economic recovery, would carry out the emergency

economic countermeasures and steadily implement the budget for fiscal 2010, and

would also draw up concrete plans for the "New Growth Strategy (Basic Policies)" and

implement the plans.

(3) Regarding the Bank's new measure to facilitate strengthening of the foundations for

economic growth through fund provisioning, which was discussed at this meeting, the

government expected the Bank to make the measure an effective one.

(4) The government -- while recognizing that the Bank showed its determination to

consistently make contributions to overcome deflation -- expected the Bank to continue

to support the economy from the financial side, for example, with a view to overcoming

deflation, by conducting monetary policy in an appropriate and flexible manner.

The representative from the Cabinet Office made the following remarks.

(1) According to the first preliminary estimates released on May 20, GDP grew at an

annualized quarter-on-quarter rate of 4.9 percent in the January-March quarter, both on

real and nominal bases. The task for the Japanese economy in the immediate future

was to ensure economic recovery and overcome deflation while securing employment.

The year-on-year rate of change in the CPI was likely to continue declining moderately,

although the pace of decline was expected to slow. The government considered it

important that the government and the Bank work together to achieve a positive

inflation rate as early as possible.

(2) The government would implement the emergency economic countermeasures and the

measures laid out in the budget for fiscal 2010 in a steady and appropriate manner. To

fulfill its responsibility, it would swiftly formulate an overall picture of the "New

Growth Strategy (Basic Policies)" and present to the public a path toward sound public

finance.

(3) The government recognized the following. First, regarding the level of CPI inflation

that the Bank's Policy Board members understood as being consistent with price

stability over the medium to long term, or the "understanding," each Policy Board

member's "understanding" fell in a positive range of 2 percent or lower and the

midpoints of most members' "understanding" were around 1 percent. And second, the

17


-----

Bank had presented a projection in the April 2010 Outlook Report that the year-on-year

rate of change in the CPI was likely to turn positive in fiscal 2011. In view of these

facts, the government hoped that the Bank -- for such a projection to be achieved -
would continue to aim at overcoming deflation swiftly and underpin the economy by

conducting monetary policy in an appropriate and flexible manner, while sufficiently

exchanging views and working together with the government.

(4) Financial markets had recently been volatile. The government hoped that they would

stabilize and that the Bank, as had been stated earlier during the meeting, would

continue to monitor market developments carefully.

**VI. Votes**

Based on the above discussions, members agreed that it was appropriate to

maintain the current guideline for money market operations, which encouraged the

uncollateralized overnight call rate to remain at around 0.1 percent.

To reflect this view, the chairman formulated the following proposal and put it to a

vote.

**The Chairman's Policy Proposal on the Guideline for Money Market Operations:**

1. The guideline for money market operations for the intermeeting period ahead will be as

follows.

The Bank of Japan will encourage the uncollateralized overnight call rate

to remain at around 0.1 percent.

2. A public statement will be decided separately.

Votes for the proposal: Mr. M. Shirakawa, Mr. H. Yamaguchi, Mr. K. G. Nishimura,

Ms. M. Suda, Mr. T. Noda, Mr. S. Nakamura, Mr. H. Kamezaki, and Mr. R. Miyao.

Votes against the proposal: None.

18


-----

**VII. Discussion on the Statement on Monetary Policy**

Members discussed the Statement on Monetary Policy, and put it to a vote. The

Policy Board decided the text by a unanimous vote. It was confirmed that the statement

would be released immediately after the meeting (see Attachment 1).

**VIII. Approval of the Minutes of the Monetary Policy Meeting**

The Policy Board approved unanimously the minutes of the Monetary Policy

Meeting of April 30, 2010 for release on May 26, 2010.

19


-----

Attachment 1

May 21, 2010

Bank of Japan

**Statement on Monetary Policy**

1. At the Monetary Policy Meeting held today, the Policy Board of the Bank of Japan

decided, by a unanimous vote,[6] to set the following guideline for money market

operations for the intermeeting period:

The Bank of Japan will encourage the uncollateralized overnight call rate

to remain at around 0.1 percent.

2. Japan's economy is starting to recover moderately, induced by improvement in overseas

economic conditions. Exports and production have been increasing mainly against a

backdrop of high growth in emerging economies. In these circumstances, business

fixed investment is showing signs of picking up. Private consumption, notably

durable goods consumption, is picking up partly due to policy measures. Public

investment is declining. Meanwhile, financial conditions, with some lingering

severity, have continued to show signs of easing. The CPI (excluding fresh food) is

declining on a year-on-year basis due to the substantial slack in the economy as a whole,

but the moderating trend in the pace of decline has continued.

3. The Bank's baseline scenario projects that the economy is likely to be on a recovery

trend. With regard to prices, based on the assumption that medium- to long-term

inflation expectations remain stable, the year-on-year rate of decline in the CPI

6 Voting for the action: Mr. M. Shirakawa, Mr. H. Yamaguchi, Mr. K. G. Nishimura, Ms. M. Suda,
Mr. T. Noda, Mr. S. Nakamura, Mr. H. Kamezaki, and Mr. R. Miyao.
Voting against the action: None.

20


-----

(excluding fresh food) is expected to slow as the aggregate supply and demand balance

improves gradually.

4. With regard to economic activity, while there are some upside risks such as faster

growth in emerging and commodity-exporting economies, there are also downside risks

such as those related to international financial developments. In this regard, attention

should be paid to the effects of developments regarding fiscal conditions in some

European economies on international finance and the global economy. With regard to

prices, there is a possibility that inflation will rise more than expected due to a rise in

commodity prices brought about by higher growth rates in emerging and

commodity-exporting economies, while there is also a risk that the rate of inflation

might decline due, for example, to a decline in medium- to long-term inflation

expectations.

5. The Bank recognizes that Japan's economy faces the critical challenge of overcoming

deflation and returning to a sustainable growth path with price stability. To this end,

the Bank will continue to consistently make contributions as central bank. In the

conduct of monetary policy, the Bank will aim to maintain the extremely

accommodative financial environment.

6. At the Monetary Policy Meeting held on April 30, 2010, with a view to strengthening

the foundations for economic growth, the Bank announced to support private financial

institutions in terms of fund provisioning, and has since been examining possible ways

of implementation. At today's Meeting, based on a report from staff, the Bank

decided to compile and announce a preliminary framework for the fund provisioning,

as in Attachment 2, and to examine further operational details.

21


-----

Attachment 2

**Preliminary Framework for the Fund-Provisioning Measure to**

**Facilitate Strengthening of the Foundations for Economic Growth**

1. Eligible Counterparties

Financial institutions that are already counterparties in the Bank's Funds-Supplying

Operations against Pooled Collateral at All Offices and wish to be counterparties for this

measure.

2. Form of Loans

Loans shall be provided against pooled collateral (the same form as the Bank's

Funds-Supplying Operations against Pooled Collateral).

3. Duration of Loans

Duration of each loan shall be 1 year, in principle, and the loan can be rolled over.

4. Loan Rates

The Bank's target for the uncollateralized overnight call rate at the time of loan

disbursement.

5. Amount of Loans per Counterparty

Each counterparty shall submit its plan for strengthening the foundations for economic

growth to the Bank. The Bank shall provide loans to each counterparty based on its actual

amount of lending and investment that were carried out under the plan.

6. Total Amount of Loans, Deadline of New Application for Loans, etc.

The Bank shall determine, at the time of commencement of this measure, the total amount

of loans, the deadline of new application for loans, and the number of roll-overs possible,

taking into account, for example, financial institutions' approaches to carry out lending and

investment for strengthening the foundations for economic growth.

22


-----

