Not to be released until 8:50 a.m.
Japan Standard Time on Monday,
May 10, 2010.

May 10, 2010

Bank of Japan

# Minutes of the Monetary Policy Meeting
## on April 6 and 7, 2010

(English translation prepared by the Bank's staff based on the Japanese original)


-----

Please contact the Bank of Japan at the address below in advance to request permission

when reproducing or copying the content of this document for commercial purposes.

Secretariat of the Policy Board, Bank of Japan

P.O. Box 30, Nihonbashi, Tokyo 103-8660, Japan

Please credit the source when quoting, reproducing, or copying the content of this

document.


-----

A Monetary Policy Meeting of the Bank of Japan Policy Board was held in the

Head Office of the Bank of Japan in Tokyo on Tuesday, April 6, 2010, from 2:00 p.m. to

4:56 p.m., and on Wednesday, April 7, from 8:59 a.m. to 11:58 a.m.[1]

**Policy Board Members Present**

**Mr. M. Shirakawa, Chairman, Governor of the Bank of Japan**

**Mr. H. Yamaguchi, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Japan**

**Mr. K. G. Nishimura, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Japan**

**Ms. M. Suda**

**Mr. T. Noda**

**Mr. S. Nakamura**

**Mr. H. Kamezaki**

**Mr. R. Miyao**

Government Representatives Present

Mr. S. Kagawa, Deputy Vice Minister for Policy Planning and Coordination, Ministry of

Finance

Mr. K. Umetani, Deputy Director-General, Economic and Fiscal Management, Cabinet

Office

Reporting Staff

Mr. A. Horii, Executive Director (Assistant Governor)

Mr. K. Ido, Executive Director

Mr. H. Nakaso, Executive Director

Mr. M. Amamiya, Director-General, Monetary Affairs Department

Mr. T. Kato, Associate Director-General, Monetary Affairs Department

Mr. H. Toyama, Director-General, Financial Markets Department

Mr. K. Momma, Director-General, Research and Statistics Department

1 The minutes of this meeting were approved by the Policy Board at the Monetary Policy Meeting
held on April 30, 2010 as "a document describing an outline of the discussion at the meeting"
stipulated in Article 20, paragraph 1 of the Bank of Japan Act of 1997. Those present are referred
to by their titles at the time of the meeting.

1


-----

Mr. T. Sekine, Associate Director-General, Research and Statistics Department

Mr. H. Ono, Director-General, International Department

Secretariat of the Monetary Policy Meeting

Mr. Y. Iino, Director-General, Secretariat of the Policy Board

Mr. T. Tachibana, Director, Deputy Head of Secretarial Services for the Board,

Secretariat of the Policy Board

Mr. A. Okuno, Senior Economist, Monetary Affairs Department

Mr. K. Nishizaki, Senior Economist, Monetary Affairs Department

2


-----

**I. Summary of Staff Reports on Economic and Financial Developments[2]**

**A. Money Market Operations in the Intermeeting Period**

The Bank conducted money market operations in accordance with the guideline

decided at the previous meeting on March 16 and 17, 2010.[3] The uncollateralized

overnight call rate had been at around 0.1 percent.

With a view to ensuring market stability, the Bank continued to conduct money

market operations in a flexible manner in response to changes in the market situation, as

evidenced by its steady provision of funds maturing over the fiscal year-end and its active

purchases of Japanese government securities (JGSs) under repurchase agreements. On

March 23, the Bank started to increase the amount of funds to be provided through the

fixed-rate funds-supplying operation against pooled collateral. The special

funds-supplying operation to facilitate corporate financing was completed at the end of

March as scheduled.

**B. Recent Developments in Financial Markets**

In Japan's money market, interest rates, including longer-term ones, had been at

low levels as confidence in the Bank's provision of ample funds took hold among market

participants. General collateral (GC) repo rates had been stable at around 0.1 percent.

Interest rates on term instruments on the whole had declined somewhat. Yields on treasury

discount bills (T-Bills), including those with a one-year maturity, had been in the range of

0.10-0.15 percent. Euroyen rates had declined somewhat. In the CP market, issuance

rates had remained at low levels.

Japanese stock prices rose, reflecting the depreciation of the yen against the U.S.

dollar and the firmness in U.S. and European stock prices. The Nikkei 225 Stock Average

had been in the range of 11,000-11,500 yen. With regard to long-term interest rates in

Japan, the benchmark rate had risen somewhat and had recently been at around 1.4 percent.

The yen had recently been around 94 yen against the U.S. dollar, which had gained

strength following the rise in U.S. interest rates.

2 Reports were made based on information available at the time of the meeting.
3 The guideline was as follows:
The Bank of Japan will encourage the uncollateralized overnight call rate to remain at
around 0.1 percent.

3


-----

**C. Overseas Economic and Financial Developments**

The world economy had continued to recover moderately.

The U.S. economy was recovering, albeit at a moderate pace. Exports were

increasing, private consumption was expanding at a moderate rate, and the decline in

business fixed investment as a whole was leveling out. Reflecting such developments in

demand, production was recovering, albeit moderately. In the labor market, the

unemployment rate had been more or less unchanged at a high level, and the pace of

decrease in the number of employees was slowing. As for prices, the year-on-year rate of

increase in the consumer price index (CPI) for all items had been in the range of 2.0-3.0

percent, with some fluctuations caused by changes in energy prices. The year-on-year rate

of increase in the CPI for all items less energy and food, or the core CPI, had been

moderating against the backdrop of slack in supply and demand conditions and slower

growth in wages.

Economic activity in the euro area was picking up, with some differences in

growth by country. Private consumption had been relatively weak as a whole, while

production had been picking up as exports increased and the pace of decline in business

fixed investment moderated. As for prices, the year-on-year rate of increase in the

Harmonized Index of Consumer Prices (HICP) excluding energy and unprocessed food had

been declining moderately against the backdrop of slack in supply and demand conditions

and slower growth in wages. The U.K. economic activity had started to pick up.

The Chinese economy had continued to grow at a relatively rapid pace, led mainly

by domestic demand. Growth in private consumption had been firm and fixed asset

investment had been increasing, although at a slower pace. Exports had also been rising.

Under these circumstances, production had continued to increase. Economic conditions in

the NIEs and the ASEAN countries were recovering. Exports and production, notably of

IT-related goods, had continued to rise. In addition, private consumption and business

fixed investment had been on an increasing trend. The Indian economy had also continued

to grow at a relatively rapid pace. With regard to prices, the year-on-year rate of increase

in the CPI had been on a rising trend in many Asian economies.

As for global financial markets, interest rates on term instruments had been more

or less unchanged at low levels. U.S. stock prices had risen slightly, mainly because some

economic indicators were better than market expectations. European stock prices had also

4


-----

risen slightly, mainly because leaders within the euro area agreed to a rescue package for

Greece. U.S. long-term interest rates had risen against the background of concern about

deterioration in the supply-demand balance of U.S. Treasuries, and their European

counterparts had been more or less unchanged.

**D. Economic and Financial Developments in Japan**

1. Economic developments

Exports had been increasing, due to the improvement in overseas economic

conditions. The uptrend in exports was expected to continue, reflecting continued

improvement in overseas economic conditions, although the pace of increase was likely to

moderate gradually.

Public investment was declining, and this trend was likely to continue.

With regard to domestic private demand, business fixed investment was leveling

out. Although business fixed investment was likely to remain more or less unchanged for

the time being as the sense of excessive capital stock was strong among firms, it was

expected to pick up gradually with the improvement in corporate profits.

Private consumption, notably durable goods consumption, was picking up mainly

due to policy measures, despite the continued severe employment and income situation. It

was likely to remain more or less unchanged for the time being amid the severe

employment and income situation, despite the underpinning effect of policy measures.

The decline in housing investment had been coming to a halt. It was likely to

gradually start showing clearer evidence of leveling out, given the recent developments in

housing starts.

Production had been increasing. It was likely to continue rising as a trend in

parallel with exports, although the pace of increase was expected to moderate gradually.

On the price front, commodity prices were on a moderate rising trend. The

three-month rate of change in the domestic corporate goods price index (CGPI) had recently

risen somewhat, reflecting the increase in commodity prices, in spite of the persistent slack

in supply and demand conditions for products. The CGPI was likely to rise somewhat for

the time being. The CPI (excluding fresh food) was declining on a year-on-year basis due

to the substantial slack in the economy as a whole, but the moderating trend in the pace of

decline had continued. The year-on-year pace of decline in the CPI was likely to moderate

5


-----

as a trend as the aggregate supply and demand balance improved gradually.

2. Financial environment

Financial conditions, with some lingering severity, had shown increasing signs of

easing. The overnight call rate had remained at an extremely low level, and the declining

trend in firms' funding costs had continued. With economic activity and corporate profits

at current levels, the stimulative effects from low interest rates were still partly constrained,

but the degree of constraint had decreased mainly due to the improvement in corporate

profits. With regard to credit supply, although many firms still saw financial institutions'

lending attitudes as severe, firms as a whole regarded the situation as improving. Issuing

conditions for CP and corporate bonds had remained favorable, and even those for

low-rated corporate bonds had shown signs of improvement. As for credit demand, firms'

need to fund working capital and fixed investment had declined, and some firms had

reduced the on-hand liquidity that they had accumulated. Against this backdrop, bank

lending had declined on a year-on-year basis, partly due to the high growth of a year before.

The amount outstanding of corporate bonds had exceeded the previous year's level, while

that of CP had declined. In these circumstances, although many small firms still saw their

financial positions as weak, on the whole financial positions of firms, including small ones,

had continued to show signs of easing. Meanwhile, the year-on-year rate of change in the

money stock had been in the range of 2.5-3.0 percent.

**II. Summary of Discussions by the Policy Board on Economic and Financial**

**Developments**

**A. Economic Developments**

Members shared the view that overseas economies had continued to recover

moderately, and this trend was likely to continue. Some members said that the world

economy had been growing somewhat more rapidly than expected, led by higher growth in

emerging economies. With regard to emerging economies, a few members commented

that the virtuous circle of growth in production, income, and spending remained intact.

Some members, referring to the fact that some emerging economies were increasingly

showing signs of overheating, expressed the view that the key to sustainable global

economic growth lay in whether their authorities could restrain overheating. Some

6


-----

members expressed the opinion that the pace of recovery in advanced economies was likely

to remain only moderate, as there was not yet sufficient momentum to support

self-sustaining recovery in private demand and balance-sheet adjustment pressure continued

to weigh on economic activity. With regard to overseas price developments, a few

members said that (1) in Europe and the United States, the year-on-year rates of increase in

the core CPI had been moderating because of the downward pressure exerted by slack in

supply and demand conditions, as in Japan; and (2) in emerging economies, on the other

hand, the rates of price increases had started to climb, giving rise to strong concerns about

inflation among some economies.

Many members were of the view that global financial markets had regained

stability on the whole, mainly reflecting the fact that the world economy had been on a

recovery trend and market concerns about the fiscal deficit problem in some European

countries had subsided. A few members pointed to developments that suggested the start

of a recovery in investors' risk tolerance, such as a rise in various countries' stock prices, the

appreciation of emerging and commodity-exporting economies' currencies, and a substantial

increase in the issuance of U.S. high-yield bonds. Some members, however, said that

there were a number of concerns in global financial markets, including the fiscal deficit

problem in advanced economies, and that attention should be paid to the possibility that the

market might become unstable again if some particular event sharply unsettled investors.

A few members, referring to changes in the monetary easing stance in emerging and

commodity-exporting economies, said that close attention should be paid to how these

developments would affect global financial markets.

Members concurred that the U.S. economy was recovering, albeit at a moderate

pace. Many members commented that the Institute for Supply Management (ISM) indices

for manufacturing and nonmanufacturing activities were at high levels in March, and many

indicators of business fixed investment and private consumption had continued to improve.

Regarding the employment and income situation, some members noted a clear increase in

the number of employees in March, and one member said that the U.S. economy might be

approaching a turning point at which employment would start to grow. Many members,

however, were of the view that the employment and income situation remained severe, as

exemplified by the persistently high unemployment rate and the extension of the longest

average duration of unemployment. Many members pointed to the recent decrease in

7


-----

home sales and low home prices. Some members said that it would still take some time

for the housing market to show clear signs of recovery, and that some concerns had arisen

about the risk of a double dip in the housing market. One member said that banks were

reducing loans in a situation where adjustments in the real estate market continued to

adversely affect the quality of their assets. As for the outlook for the U.S. economy,

members shared the view that the recovery trend was likely to continue as a whole. Many

members, however, commented that the pace of recovery was likely to be moderate for the

time being, with gradual abatement of various policy effects and with persistent adjustment

pressure on balance sheets. One member said that a decline in home prices had restrained

workers from moving from one place to another, perpetuating a mismatch between the

supply and demand of labor on a regional basis. This member continued that, if the

housing market deteriorated again, an adverse feedback loop between employment and

housing might occur and become a downside risk to the U.S. economy.

With regard to the economy of the euro area, members said that economic activity

was picking up, led mainly by an increase in exports to outside the euro area and in

production, and was likely to show a moderate recovery. A few members, however,

commented that the momentum for economic recovery was weaker than in other advanced

economies, mainly because of relatively weak private consumption amid a lack of positive

signs in the employment and income situation. Some members pointed to the risk that

such factors as continuing balance-sheet adjustments in the banking sector and the fiscal

deficit problem in some European countries might further slow the pace of economic

recovery.

Members agreed that the Chinese economy had continued to grow at a rapid pace,

led mainly by domestic demand, and this trend was likely to continue. One member added

that, although growth in bank lending and fixed asset investment had recently slowed

slightly due to the Chinese authorities' moderate policy tightening, the trend of economic

growth had not changed. A few members expressed the view that the risk of inflation had

increased further against the backdrop of the continued rise in real estate prices, wage

increases in the coastal area, and the rise in food prices resulting from droughts in southwest

China. Based on this discussion, some members said that full attention should continue to

be paid to developments in China's macroeconomic policy, including monetary policy, and

their possible effects.

8


-----

Based on the above discussions on economic and financial conditions abroad,

members discussed the state of Japan's economy. They concurred that the economy had

been picking up. Many members said that, in addition to the increase in exports and

production and the continuing pick-up in private consumption, business fixed investment

was leveling out more clearly. Many members commented that, according to the March

2010 _Tankan (Short-Term Economic Survey of Enterprises in Japan), improvement in_

business confidence continued, among not only large manufacturers but also

nonmanufacturing and small firms. Some members said that in Japan's economy, signs of

a self-sustaining recovery might have finally started to appear, given, for example, the fact

that corporate profits had increased and deterioration in the employment situation was

coming to a halt. Some members expressed the view that the trend of sustainable

improvement in the economy, assumed in the interim assessment as of January 2010, was

becoming more evident. A few members were of the opinion that recovery had been

somewhat more rapid compared with the assessment. However, many members, including

these members, commented that the recent improvement in the economy had been

underpinned by better overseas economic conditions and various policy measures, and there

was not yet sufficient momentum to support self-sustaining recovery in domestic private

demand.

As for the outlook, many members said that the pace of improvement of Japan's

economy was likely to be moderate for the time being, given the waning effects of various

policy measures. Some members, however, expressed the view that the earlier concern

among market participants about a possible double dip had dissipated considerably as

overseas economies, especially emerging economies, continued to recover. One member

commented that a significant point in projecting economic developments was whether the

signs of the self-sustaining economic recovery, which had just appeared, would grow

steadily before various policy effects disappeared. In relation to this, a different member

said that attention should be paid to how structural factors, such as firms' stances on

restraining wages amid global competition, would affect economic conditions.

With regard to risk factors for economic activity, some members mentioned that

firms' medium- to long-term growth expectations had not shown clear improvement, and

this continued to be a downside risk factor. In relation to this, a few members said that

many firms inevitably remained cautious about changing the size of capital stock and the

9


-----

number of employees, because the level of economic activity was still low and they were

not yet able to clearly envisage a path toward economic recovery and the future state of

Japan's economy in the longer run. Some members expressed the view that faster growth

in emerging economies might be an upside risk factor for Japan's economy, but it could turn

out to be a downside risk factor if emerging economies' policy measures caused an

economic slowdown or a significant unwinding of economic activity following the

overheating.

Turning to developments in each demand component, members agreed that exports

had been increasing, mainly due to the faster-than-expected growth in emerging economies.

Many members expressed the view that the uptrend was likely to continue, reflecting

continued improvement in overseas economic conditions.

Members shared the view that public investment was declining, and this trend was

likely to continue.

Many members said that business fixed investment was leveling out more clearly.

Some members noted that shipments of capital goods -- a coincident indicator of business

fixed investment -- continued to increase, and large firms' fixed investment plans for fiscal

2010 provided in the March 2010 Tankan were at a level where the annual rate of change

was around 0 percent, matching their historical average in past March surveys. Many

members expressed the view that, although the strong sense of excessive capital stock

among firms warranted due attention, business fixed investment was likely to pick up

gradually on the back of the improvement in corporate profits and reduced strains on

funding. One member, noting that in the March 2010 _Tankan the perception of future_

business conditions among firms in the capital goods-related industry had improved

considerably, said that firms' fixed investment plans for fiscal 2010 might exceed the

previous year's level in the June 2010 Tankan.

Members concurred that private consumption, notably durable goods consumption,

continued to pick up. Some members noted that there had recently been some

improvement in industries not having been directly affected by policy measures, such as

retailing, accommodations, and eating and drinking services. In relation to this, a few

members raised the possibility that the recent rise in stock prices and reduced anxiety about

losing jobs might be underpinning consumer confidence. Many members expressed the

view that private consumption largely depended on the pace of abatement in the policy

10


-----

effects and the degree of improvement in the employment and income situation, and

attention should continue to be paid to developments in private consumption.

Some members were of the view that the decline in housing investment had been

coming to a halt, as evidenced by the fact that the number of housing starts had picked up,

albeit remaining at a low level, and inventory adjustments of condominiums in the

metropolitan area had been progressing.

Members agreed that production had been increasing, mainly reflecting high

growth in emerging economies. Some members said that information obtained, for

example, from interviews with corporate managers suggested that production was likely to

continue rising as a trend reflecting the recovery in overseas economies, although the pace

of increase in production would moderate gradually due to the waning effects of various

policy measures.

Some members were of the view that the employment and income situation was

exiting the worst phase, as evidenced by a slower pace of decline in nominal wages, a

leveling-off of the unemployment rate, and an improving trend in the ratio of job offers to

applicants. Many members, however, said that they maintained their assessment that the

employment and income situation was severe because firms continued to regard their

workforces as excessive, as evidenced by the fact that a large number of firms continued to

apply for employment subsidies, for example.

Members concurred that the CPI (excluding fresh food) was declining on a

year-on-year basis due to the substantial slack in the economy as a whole, but the

moderating trend in the pace of decline had continued. Some members commented that

the year-on-year rate of decline in the trimmed mean CPI, regarded as an indicator of the

underlying trend, continued to moderate, and that the difference between the number of

items for which prices had declined and of items for which prices had risen narrowed in

February compared with the previous month, for the first time since November 2008.

Some members said that the effects of the narrowing of the negative output gap since spring

2009 might have started to appear on prices, with some time lag. As for the outlook,

members agreed that the year-on-year pace of decline in the CPI was likely to moderate as

the aggregate supply and demand balance improved gradually. Some members, however,

said that the pace of price declines would decelerate only moderately, given the modest

improvement in supply and demand conditions. Meanwhile, some members noted the

11


-----

following as factors that might exert upward pressure on prices: a possible rise in

commodity prices brought about by higher growth in emerging economies, and a possible

abatement of downward pressure on domestic prices caused by a rise in prices of imports

from emerging economies that were experiencing inflation. Based on this, one member

said that the year-on-year rate of change in the CPI (excluding fresh food) might turn

positive slightly earlier than the member had previously expected. Some members said

that, although the related data and survey results suggested that medium- to long-term

inflation expectations had been generally stable recently, careful monitoring was necessary

to detect any decline in such expectations. Regarding the effects of the introduction of a

subsidy for high school tuition and other policy measures, members agreed that, in

assessing the trend in price developments, it was appropriate to exclude such one-off factors

that would disappear in twelve months.

**B. Financial Developments**

Members shared the view that financial conditions, with some lingering severity,

had recently seen further improvement and shown increasing signs of easing.

As for the money market, many members commented that, due to the Bank's

provision of ample funds, interest rates had been stable at low levels and the market was not

under stress during the run-up to the fiscal year-end. Some members said that interest

rates on term instruments had declined further since the introduction of a fixed-rate

funds-supplying operation against pooled collateral (hereafter the fixed-rate operation) in

December 2009, and on the whole had recently declined somewhat. A few members

added that the completion of the special funds-supplying operation to facilitate corporate

financing at the end of March had not caused any market disruptions.

Members agreed that issuing conditions for CP and corporate bonds had remained

favorable. Some members said that issuing spreads on BBB-rated corporate bonds, which

investors had been hesitant to purchase, were narrowing and the number of firms issuing

such bonds was increasing gradually. Many members expressed the opinion that, in view

of these developments, signs of improvement in issuing conditions for low-rated corporate

bonds were also becoming more evident.

As for corporate funding activity, a few members said that bank lending had

continued to decline on a year-on-year basis, partly due to reduced demand for funds among

12


-----

firms and the high growth of such lending a year before. Some members commented that

the declining trend in firms' funding costs, including those for issuing CP and corporate

bonds, had continued. Many members expressed the view that there were continued signs

of easing on the whole in lending attitudes of financial institutions as perceived by firms

and in firms' financial positions, albeit with differences in funding conditions according to

firm size.

Based on the above discussion, some members noted that, from a macroeconomic

perspective, financial conditions were not putting downward pressure on economic activity,

including spending by firms. In this regard, some members expressed the opinion that

many small firms, including very small ones, still saw their financial positions as weak, and

it was necessary to continue examining the situation faced by these firms, including their

business environment and the structure of their industries.

**III. Summary of Discussions on Monetary Policy for the Immediate Future**

Regarding the guideline for money market operations for the intermeeting period

ahead, members agreed that, given the above assessment of economic activity and prices, it

was appropriate to maintain the current guideline that the Bank would encourage the

uncollateralized overnight call rate to remain at around 0.1 percent. With regard to the

effects of such an interest rate policy, one member expressed the opinion that maintenance

of the policy rate at the extremely low level of 0.1 percent in a situation where corporate

profits were recovering clearly was enhancing the stimulative effects of monetary easing on

Japan's economy.

As for the future conduct of monetary policy, members agreed that, in order for

Japan's economy to overcome deflation and return to a sustainable growth path with price

stability, the Bank should continue to consistently make contributions as central bank.

They concurred that, in the conduct of monetary policy, the Bank would continue to aim at

maintaining the extremely accommodative financial environment.

Members discussed the effects of the expansion of the fixed-rate operation

conducted in March, which was a move that involved increasing the amount of funds to be

provided through such operation. One member expressed the view that additional effects

on interest rates on term instruments had been marginal so far, partly because room for a

further decline in these interest rates had already been limited. With regard to the effects

13


-----

on longer-term interest rates, some members pointed to the fact that interest rates on term

instruments on the whole had declined somewhat: yields on T-Bills had been stable at low

levels and Euroyen rates, which had previously been more or less unchanged, had decreased.

Some members expressed the view that the expansion of the fixed-rate operation conducted

in March had reaffirmed the Bank's stance of continuing to consistently make contributions

as central bank, and this had helped underpin business confidence. A few members said

that such reaffirmation of the Bank's stance and the consequent improvement in business

confidence might have affected, to some extent, stock prices and foreign exchange rates

recently. One member commented that close examination was necessary with regard to

how the recent policy measures affected bank lending rates. Some members expressed the

opinion that the Bank should continue to conduct funds-supplying operations appropriately,

with due consideration to ensuring the functioning of the market, even when continuing to

provide ample funds through, for example, the fixed-rate operation.

**IV. Remarks by Government Representatives**

The representative from the Ministry of Finance made the following remarks.

(1) The Japanese economy had been picking up steadily, but it was only self-sustaining at a

weak level and the situation remained difficult, as evidenced by the high unemployment

rate. As for short-term prospects, in addition to risk factors such as international

financial developments and deflation, there was continued concern that the employment

situation could deteriorate further, and the basis for the economy's return to a path of

strong private demand-led growth remained fragile.

(2) On March 24, the Diet approved the budget for fiscal 2010. Faced by the current

severe economic conditions, the government, with the aim of overcoming deflation and

ensuring economic recovery, would implement the second supplementary budget for

fiscal 2009 and the budget for fiscal 2010 in an integrated and seamless manner. In

addition, it would draw up concrete plans for the "New Growth Strategy (Basic

Policies)" and implement those plans.

(3) The government recognized that the Bank had made clear that it did not tolerate a

negative inflation rate. It expected the Bank to continue to support the economy from

the financial side, for example, with a view to overcoming deflation, by conducting

14


-----

monetary policy in an appropriate and flexible manner, while working together with the

government.

The representative from the Cabinet Office made the following remarks.

(1) The Japanese economy had been picking up steadily, but it was only self-sustaining at a

weak level and the situation remained difficult, as evidenced by the high unemployment

rate.

(2) The task for the Japanese economy in the immediate future was to ensure economic

recovery and overcome deflation while securing employment. The government

considered it important that the government and the Bank work together to achieve a

positive inflation rate as early as possible.

(3) The government would implement the emergency economic countermeasures and the

measures laid out in the recently approved budget for fiscal 2010 in an integrated and

seamless manner. To fulfill its responsibility, it would also put forward additional

measures for the "New Growth Strategy (Basic Policies)" and draw up concrete plans

for it, thereby showing a clear picture of future economic growth, and present to the

public a path toward sound public finance. It would conduct economic and fiscal

policy measures to create new jobs and increase employment.

(4) The government recognized that the Bank was conducting monetary policy in an

appropriate manner, as evident from the Bank's decision made at the previous meeting

to increase the amount of funds to be provided through the fixed-rate operation, while

working together with the government. The government also recognized that,

regarding the level of CPI inflation that the Bank's Policy Board members understood as

being consistent with price stability over the medium to long term, or the

"understanding," they had adopted a clearer expression that they did not tolerate a

year-on-year rate of change in the CPI equal to or below 0 percent and that each Policy

Board member's "understanding" fell in a positive range of 2 percent or lower and the

midpoints of most members' "understanding" were around 1 percent. The government

hoped that the Bank, bearing this in mind, would continue to aim at overcoming

deflation swiftly and underpin the economy by conducting monetary policy in an

appropriate and flexible manner, while sufficiently exchanging views and working

together with the government.

15


-----

**V. Votes**

Based on the above discussions, members agreed that it was appropriate to

maintain the current guideline for money market operations, which encouraged the

uncollateralized overnight call rate to remain at around 0.1 percent.

To reflect this view, the chairman formulated the following proposal and put it to a

vote.

**The Chairman's Policy Proposal on the Guideline for Money Market Operations:**

1. The guideline for money market operations for the intermeeting period ahead will be as

follows.

The Bank of Japan will encourage the uncollateralized overnight call rate

to remain at around 0.1 percent.

2. A public statement will be decided separately.

Votes for the proposal: Mr. M. Shirakawa, Mr. H. Yamaguchi, Mr. K. G. Nishimura,

Ms. M. Suda, Mr. T. Noda, Mr. S. Nakamura, Mr. H. Kamezaki, and Mr. R. Miyao.

Votes against the proposal: None.

**VI. Discussion on the Statement on Monetary Policy**

Members discussed the Statement on Monetary Policy, and put it to a vote. The

Policy Board decided the text by a unanimous vote. It was confirmed that the statement

would be released immediately after the meeting (see Attachment).

**VII. Approval of the Minutes of the Monetary Policy Meeting**

The Policy Board approved unanimously the minutes of the Monetary Policy

Meeting of March 16 and 17, 2010 for release on April 12, 2010.

16


-----

Attachment

April 7, 2010

Bank of Japan

**Statement on Monetary Policy**

1. At the Monetary Policy Meeting held today, the Policy Board of the Bank of Japan

decided, by a unanimous vote,[4] to set the following guideline for money market

operations for the intermeeting period:

The Bank of Japan will encourage the uncollateralized overnight call rate

to remain at around 0.1 percent.

2. Japan's economy has been picking up mainly due to improvement in overseas economic

conditions and to various policy measures, although there is not yet sufficient

momentum to support a self-sustaining recovery in domestic private demand. Exports

and production have been increasing mainly against a backdrop of high growth in

emerging economies. Business sentiment has been improving. Business fixed

investment is leveling out. Private consumption, notably durable goods consumption,

is picking up mainly due to policy measures, despite the continued severe employment

and income situation. Public investment is declining. Meanwhile, financial

conditions, with some lingering severity, have shown increasing signs of easing. The

CPI (excluding fresh food) is declining on a year-on-year basis due to the substantial

slack in the economy as a whole, but the moderating trend in the pace of decline has

continued.

4 Voting for the action: Mr. M. Shirakawa, Mr. H. Yamaguchi, Mr. K. G. Nishimura, Ms. M. Suda,
Mr. T. Noda, Mr. S. Nakamura, Mr. H. Kamezaki, and Mr. R. Miyao.
Voting against the action: None.

17


-----

3. The Bank's baseline scenario projects that the pace of improvement of the economy is

likely to be moderate for the time being. Thereafter, as improvements in the corporate

sector originating from exports are expected to spill over to the household sector, the

growth rate of the economy is likely gradually to rise. With regard to prices,

assuming that medium- to long-term inflation expectations remain stable, the

year-on-year rate of decline in the CPI (excluding fresh food) is likely to moderate as

the aggregate supply and demand balance improves gradually.[5]

4. With regard to economic activity, while there are some upside risks, such as faster

growth in emerging and commodity-exporting economies, there remain downside risks,

although somewhat diminished; downside risk factors include the possible

consequences of balance-sheet adjustments in the United States and Europe as well as

potential changes in firms' medium- to long-term growth expectations. Attention

should continue to be paid to various recent international financial developments and

their effects. With regard to prices, there is a possibility that inflation will rise more

than expected due to a rise in commodity prices brought about by higher growth rates

in emerging and commodity-exporting economies. On the other hand, there is also a

risk that the rate of inflation might decline due, for example, to a decline in medium- to

long-term inflation expectations.

5. The Bank recognizes that it is a critical challenge for Japan's economy to overcome

deflation and return to a sustainable growth path with price stability. To this end, the

Bank will continue to consistently make contributions as central bank. In the conduct

of monetary policy, the Bank will aim to maintain the extremely accommodative

financial environment.

5 The year-on-year rate of change in the CPI will fluctuate substantially for a year following the
introduction of subsidy for high school tuition and other policy measures in fiscal 2010. In
assessing the trend of price developments, it is deemed appropriate to exclude such one-off factors
that will disappear in 12 months.

18


-----

