Not to be released until 8:50 a.m.
Japan Standard Time on Friday,
January 28, 2011.

January 28, 2011

Bank of Japan

# Minutes of the Monetary Policy Meeting
## on December 20 and 21, 2010

(English translation prepared by the Bank's staff based on the Japanese original)


-----

Please contact the Bank of Japan at the address below in advance to request permission

when reproducing or copying the content of this document for commercial purposes.

Secretariat of the Policy Board, Bank of Japan

P.O. Box 30, Nihonbashi, Tokyo 103-8660, Japan

Please credit the source when quoting, reproducing, or copying the content of this

document.


-----

A Monetary Policy Meeting of the Bank of Japan Policy Board was held in the

Head Office of the Bank of Japan in Tokyo on Monday, December 20, 2010, from 2:00 p.m.

to 4:50 p.m., and on Tuesday, December 21, from 9:00 a.m. to 12:50 p.m.[1]

**Policy Board Members Present**

**Mr. M. Shirakawa, Chairman, Governor of the Bank of Japan**

**Mr. H. Yamaguchi, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Japan**

**Mr. K. G. Nishimura, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Japan**

**Ms. M. Suda**

**Mr. T. Noda**

**Mr. S. Nakamura**

**Mr. H. Kamezaki**

**Mr. R. Miyao**

**Mr. Y. Morimoto**

Government Representatives Present

Mr. M. Sakurai, Senior Vice Minister of Finance, Ministry of Finance[2]

Mr. Y. Kinoshita, Deputy Vice Minister for Policy Planning and Coordination, Ministry

of Finance[3]

Mr. H. Inoue, Deputy Director-General, Economic and Fiscal Management, Cabinet

Office

Reporting Staff

Mr. K. Yamamoto, Executive Director

Mr. H. Nakaso, Executive Director (Assistant Governor)

Mr. M. Amamiya, Executive Director

Mr. N. Kinoshita, Executive Director

1 The minutes of this meeting were approved by the Policy Board at the Monetary Policy Meeting
held on January 24 and 25, 2011 as "a document describing an outline of the discussion at the
meeting" stipulated in Article 20, paragraph 1 of the Bank of Japan Act of 1997. Those present are
referred to by their titles at the time of the meeting.
2 Mr. M. Sakurai was present on December 21.
3 Mr. Y. Kinoshita was present on December 20.

1


-----

Mr. S. Kushida, Director-General, Monetary Affairs Department

Mr. T. Umemori, Deputy Director-General, Monetary Affairs Department[4]

Mr. T. Kato, Head of Policy Planning Division, Monetary Affairs Department

Mr. H. Toyama, Director-General, Financial Markets Department

Mr. K. Momma, Director-General, Research and Statistics Department

Mr. T. Sekine, Head of Economic Research Division, Research and Statistics Department

Mr. H. Ono, Director-General, International Department

Secretariat of the Monetary Policy Meeting

Mr. Y. Iino, Director-General, Secretariat of the Policy Board

Mr. T. Tachibana, Director, Deputy Head of Planning and Coordination Division,

Secretariat of the Policy Board

Mr. H. Chida, Head of Policy Infrastructure Division, Monetary Affairs Department[4]

Mr. S. Ohyama, Senior Economist, Monetary Affairs Department

Mr. H. Ichiue, Senior Economist, Monetary Affairs Department

4 Messrs. T. Umemori and H. Chida were present on December 21 from 9:00 a.m. to 9:13 a.m.

2


-----

**I. Summary of Staff Reports on Economic and Financial Developments[5]**

**A. Money Market Operations in the Intermeeting Period**

The Bank, in accordance with the guideline decided at the previous meeting on

November 4 and 5, 2010 and in consideration of the recent formation of market rates,

conducted money market operations in a flexible manner.[6] The uncollateralized overnight

call rate had been slightly below the 0.1 percent level.

**B. Recent Developments in Financial Markets**

Money market rates had generally been at low levels while those with relatively

longer terms had risen somewhat. General collateral (GC) repo rates had recently been at

around 0.1 percent, following a slight temporary rise. As for interest rates on term

instruments, yields on treasury discount bills (T-Bills), including those with a one-year

maturity, had risen somewhat while remaining in the range of 0.1-0.2 percent.

Longer-term interbank rates had been more or less unchanged.

Long-term interest rates in Japan had increased somewhat sharply, mainly due to

the rise in U.S. long-term interest rates and subsequent position adjustments made by

investors; the benchmark rate had recently been in the range of 1.1-1.2 percent. Yield

spreads between corporate bonds and Japanese government bonds (JGBs) had been

narrowing, particularly those on corporate bonds with a relatively shorter remaining

maturity eligible to be purchased by the Bank. Stock prices had risen, partly reflecting the

pause in the appreciating trend of the yen, and the Nikkei 225 Stock Average had been in

the range of 10,000-10,500 yen.

In the foreign exchange market, the U.S. dollar had been bought back, mainly

because market expectations of further monetary easing had receded in the United States.

The yen's appreciating trend against the U.S. dollar had come to a halt, and the yen had

recently been in the range of 83-84 yen.

5 Reports were made based on information available at the time of the meeting.
6 The guideline was as follows:
The Bank of Japan will encourage the uncollateralized overnight call rate to remain at
around 0 to 0.1 percent.

3


-----

**C. Overseas Economic and Financial Developments**

The world economy had been slowing but continued to recover.

The U.S. economy had continued to recover at a moderate pace. Exports were

continuing to increase and business fixed investment was rising moderately. Private

consumption had continued to increase, but the pace of recovery remained moderate in a

situation where the employment situation had not improved noticeably, as seen in the high

unemployment rate, for example. Housing investment remained at a depressed level. In

a situation where the economy faced balance-sheet adjustments and it had therefore

remained difficult for the self-sustaining virtuous circle of growth in production, income,

and spending to operate properly, economic activity still looked unlikely to accelerate and

remained vulnerable to the downside. As for prices, the year-on-year rate of increase in

the consumer price index (CPI) for all items less energy and food, or the core CPI, had been

moderating due to slack in supply and demand conditions and a decline in unit labor costs.

Economic activity in the euro area as a whole was recovering moderately, with

some differences in pace by country. Exports and production had continued to increase,

although the pace was slowing, and domestic demand components such as private

consumption had been rising gradually. As for prices, although the year-on-year rate of

increase in the Harmonized Index of Consumer Prices (HICP) excluding energy and

unprocessed food had been accelerating somewhat, partly due to effects of the earlier

depreciation of the euro and of the rise in international commodity prices, slack in supply

and demand conditions and slower growth in wages continued to exert downward pressure

on prices. U.K. economic conditions were recovering at a moderate pace.

The Chinese economy continued to show relatively high growth. Growth in

private consumption had been firm due mainly to households' higher income levels, and

fixed asset investment had continued to show high growth. Exports were on a rising trend,

and the pace of increase in production was accelerating again. The Indian economy had

also continued to grow at a relatively rapid pace. Meanwhile, economic conditions in the

NIEs and the ASEAN countries, despite the deceleration resulting from slower growth in

exports and production, had been on a recovery trend as a whole as private consumption

and business fixed investment had been increasing. In many of these Asian economies,

upward pressure on prices had been increasing gradually due to higher food and materials

prices and greater utilization of production factors.

4


-----

As for global financial markets, U.S. and European stock prices fell temporarily,

partly due to the resurgence of the sovereign risk problem in Europe, but rebounded mainly

in reflection of improvement in the outlook for the U.S. economy. Amid such

improvement, long-term interest rates in the United States and Europe rose substantially

following the waning of market expectations of further monetary easing and introduction of

additional fiscal stimulus measures in the United States. Meanwhile, financial

developments in some peripheral European countries had been volatile, as evidenced by the

yield spreads of government bonds issued by some countries over those issued by Germany;

specifically, the yield spreads remained at a high level in such countries as Ireland and

Portugal.

**D. Economic and Financial Developments in Japan**

1. Economic developments

Exports had been more or less flat. They were likely to remain so for the time

being, but were expected to increase moderately again, reflecting the improvement in

overseas economic conditions.

Public investment was declining, and this trend was likely to continue.

With regard to domestic private demand, corporate profits had continued to grow,

albeit at a slower pace, and in this situation business fixed investment had started to pick up.

Signs of picking up in business fixed investment were expected to gradually become more

evident as the improvement in corporate profits continued. However, with firms'

persistent sense of excessive capital stock, the pace of improvement in business fixed

investment was likely to remain moderate.

The employment and income situation had remained severe, but the degree of

severity had eased somewhat. In this situation, with regard to private consumption,

demand for some goods had suffered a reverse after the sharp increase seen previously.

Private consumption was expected to pick up again as the reverse following the sharp

increase in demand became less pronounced.

Housing investment had leveled out. It was expected to gradually head for

recovery given the recent developments in housing starts.

Production had recently declined slightly and business sentiment had also been

somewhat weak, particularly in the manufacturing sector. It was expected to increase after

5


-----

showing temporary weakness, primarily in durable consumer goods.

As for prices, international commodity prices had increased. The three-month

rate of change in the domestic corporate goods price index (CGPI) was rising moderately,

mainly due to the increase in international commodity prices. The CGPI was expected to

remain on a moderate uptrend for the time being, reflecting movements in international

commodity prices. The CPI (excluding fresh food) was declining on a year-on-year basis

due to the substantial slack in the economy as a whole, but the slowing trend in the pace of

decline had continued. The year-on-year pace of decline in the CPI was likely to slow as a

trend as the aggregate supply and demand balance improved gradually.

2. Financial environment

Financial conditions had shown further signs of easing, as seen in the declining

trend in firms' funding costs and the improvement in lending attitudes of financial

institutions. The overnight call rate had remained at an extremely low level, and the

declining trend in firms' funding costs had continued. While stimulative effects from low

interest rates were still partly constrained given current developments in economic activity

and prices, such effects were beginning to strengthen in light of improved corporate profits.

With regard to credit supply, firms saw financial institutions' lending attitudes as further

improving. Issuing conditions for CP and corporate bonds had remained favorable. As

for credit demand, firms' need to fund working capital and fixed investment had declined,

and some firms had reduced the on-hand liquidity that they had accumulated. Against this

backdrop, bank lending had declined on a year-on-year basis. On the other hand, the

outstanding amount of corporate bonds had exceeded the previous year's level, and the pace

of decline in that of CP had decelerated. In these circumstances, firms' financial positions

had been improving as a whole. Meanwhile, the year-on-year rate of increase in the

money stock had been at around 2.5 percent.

**II. Extension of the Effective Period of the U.S. Dollar Funds-Supplying Operation**

**against Pooled Collateral**

**A. Staff Proposal**

The Federal Reserve Bank of New York proposed to extend its temporary U.S.

dollar liquidity swap arrangements with several central banks including the Bank through

6


-----

August 1, 2011 and announce the extension at 9:00 a.m. New York time (11:00 p.m. JST)

on December 21, 2010. Although there were no particular concerns about Japanese

financial institutions' funding in foreign currencies, the staff proposed that the Bank, with

the aim of facilitating money market operations and maintaining the smooth functioning of

the money market as well as ensuring stability in financial markets, extend the effective

period as proposed, as part of the coordinated central bank actions, and take necessary steps

such as making amendments to principal terms and conditions relating to the U.S. dollar

funds-supplying operation against pooled collateral.

**B. Discussion by the Policy Board and Vote**

Members voted unanimously to approve the staff proposal, and agreed that the

decision should be announced at 9:00 a.m. New York time (11:00 p.m. JST) on December

21 together with the other central banks, in line with the proposal from the Federal Reserve

Bank of New York. With regard to the amendments to, for example, principal terms and

conditions, they concurred that accordingly the staff should make these public.

**III. Summary of Discussions by the Policy Board on Economic and Financial**

**Developments**

**A. Economic Developments**

Members discussed the economic and financial conditions abroad, and agreed that

overseas economies had been slowing but continued to recover, and that their growth rates

were likely to start increasing again led by high growth in emerging and

commodity-exporting economies.

Members shared the view that the U.S. economy had continued to recover at a

moderate pace. Many members were of the view that the economy was moving out of its

deceleration phase and returning to a moderate recovery path, given that most economic

indicators released since November had been better than market expectations. Many

members said that private consumption had been firm, as suggested by the good start in

Christmas sales and continued improvement in consumer sentiment. However, many

members said that the pace of recovery in private consumption had remained moderate in a

situation where the employment and income situation had not improved noticeably.

Meanwhile, many members pointed to the following as factors behind the significant rise in

7


-----

U.S. long-term interest rates: (1) market participants had revised their pessimistic views

about the outlook for the U.S. economy following the release of positive economic

indicators; (2) market expectations of further monetary easing had waned; and (3)

additional fiscal stimulus measures had been agreed upon. In terms of the outlook,

members concurred that the recovery trend would continue on the back of relatively high

growth in emerging economies and the accommodative financial environment.

Nevertheless, many members were of the view that the pace of recovery in domestic private

demand was likely to remain moderate, in a situation where households faced balance-sheet

adjustments and the employment and income situation remained severe, and with regard to

risks, economic activity still looked unlikely to accelerate and remained vulnerable to the

downside. Some members commented on the possibility that downside risks had subsided

somewhat due mainly to the fact that additional stimulus measures, both from the monetary

and fiscal side, had been implemented and stock prices had been firm. Meanwhile, a few

members said that careful attention should be paid to how the recent substantial rise in

long-term interest rates would affect developments in the economy, especially in housing

investment.

Members agreed that economic activity in the euro area as a whole was recovering

moderately, with some differences in pace by country. Some members said that the

recovery in the euro area economy was led by Germany, where growth in exports had been

strong. As for the outlook, members shared the view that the euro area economy, despite

noticeable differences in growth by country, would continue to recover moderately as a

whole. Most members, however, expressed the opinion that expected fiscal austerity and

possible continuation of instability in financial markets, such as long-term interest rates

remaining at a high level amid lurking sovereign risks in some peripheral countries, could

weigh on economic recovery for a protracted period.

Members shared the view that the Chinese economy had continued to show

relatively high growth. Most members said that various economic indicators released

since November had been strong and the pace of economic growth had increased somewhat.

A few members expressed concern that, amid the monetary easing adopted among advanced

economies, capital was flowing into China, and that not only real estate but also agricultural

products were the target of speculation. As for the outlook, members agreed that, although

monetary tightening measures had begun to be implemented amid the rise in consumer

8


-----

prices, the economy was likely to continue to grow at a relatively high rate in a situation

where the circle of growth in production, income, and spending operated. Many members

expressed the view that, while expecting that the shift in the monetary policy stance would

allow for adjustments toward a more sustainable pace of economic growth, the economy

could grow even faster to subsequently face some significant adjustments barring interest

rate rises or the implementation of a more flexible foreign exchange regime.

Some members said that economic conditions in the NIEs and the ASEAN

countries, despite the slower growth in exports and production, had been on a recovery

trend as a whole as private consumption and business fixed investment had been increasing.

One member said that the economies in Central and South America had grown at a

relatively high rate, reflecting a self-sustaining expansion in domestic demand in addition to

the increase in global demand for natural resources.

Members agreed that, although investors' risk tolerance had declined temporarily

reflecting the resurgence of the sovereign risk problem in Europe, global financial markets

were in a lull mainly due to responses taken by authorities. One member, pointing to the

significant swings in market sentiment about the U.S. economy -- from the optimistic views

observed in spring 2010 to pessimistic ones in summer 2010, and back again to optimism

recently -- noted that in this kind of situation it would become difficult for a central bank to

communicate to market participants its thinking concerning the conduct of monetary policy.

With regard to financial markets in Europe, most members expressed anxiety that the

sovereign risk problem in some peripheral countries would remain a potential concern for

the time being as it was deep-rooted, and this made it difficult to launch persuasive

measures in the short term.

Some members expressed the view that, with regard to the aggressive monetary

easing measures taken by advanced economies, one of the significant issues to keep in mind

was how these measures would affect the sustainable growth of the world economy via

channels such as foreign exchange rates, commodity prices, and capital flows, given the

significant differences in the pace of recovery between advanced and emerging economies.

On this point, one member said that some emerging economies were adopting relatively

inflexible foreign exchange rate policies, and in this instance it was important to bear in

mind that capital inflows would directly result in economic expansion at home. A

different member noted that international commodity prices had remained at a high level

9


-----

overall, due to speculative activities stemming from expectations of monetary easing in

advanced economies together with the ongoing high growth in emerging economies. This

member continued that future developments in international commodity prices therefore

warranted careful attention.

Based on the above deliberations on economic and financial conditions abroad,

members discussed the state of Japan's economy. They concurred that the economy still

showed signs of a moderate recovery, but the recovery seemed to be pausing. In relation

to this, some members said that, although the diffusion index of business conditions among

firms in the Tankan (Short-Term Economic Survey of Enterprises in Japan) had declined in

December 2010 for the first time in seven quarters, it had not declined as substantially as

had been forecasted in the September Tankan and the decline had only been moderate. As

factors behind this, one member pointed to the pause in the ongoing appreciation of the yen

in the foreign exchange market and favorable corporate profits in the first half of fiscal 2010.

As for the economic outlook, members shared the view that Japan's economy was likely to

grow at a slower pace for some time but return to a moderate recovery path thereafter.

Many members referred to the following as factors behind this outlook: (1) exports were

likely to increase moderately again as the growth rate of the global economy started to

increase once more; and (2) private consumption was likely to pick up again as the effects

of the reverse following the sharp increase in demand seen previously became less

pronounced. However, many members noted that the forecast in the December _Tankan_

suggested that business conditions, especially in manufacturing industries, were likely to

continue deteriorating, and thus expressed concern that the decline in demand following the

sharp increase was considerable, and that uncertainty regarding the global economy and

foreign exchange market had not yet subsided.

As for risks to the outlook for Japan's economic activity and prices, members

concurred that faster growth in emerging and commodity-exporting economies continued to

be an upside risk. Members shared the view that there was a possibility that emerging

economies would grow faster than expected in the short term because, although these

economies had been conducting tighter policies such as adjustments to accommodative

monetary policy, the circle of growth in production, income, and spending was operating

and capital continued to flow from advanced economies into these economies. They

agreed that downside risks remained significant in advanced economies burdened with

10


-----

balance-sheet adjustments. A few members, however, said that concern about a possible

slowdown had subsided in the United States after the release of favorable economic

indicators and the introduction of additional fiscal stimulus measures, but there was an

increasing risk in Europe that the persistent high level of long-term interest rates, brought

about by the resurgence of the sovereign risk problem, and fiscal austerity might act as

drags on the economy. Meanwhile, one member cited the possibility of prolonged

inventory adjustments in IT-related goods on a global basis as a downside risk. A different

member expressed concern that a rise in international commodity prices would bring about

a worsening of Japan's terms of trade. Another member said that, given that market

sentiment had tended to fluctuate in the United States, optimistic views about the outlook

for the U.S. economy might eventually dissipate and long-term interest rates might decline,

and in such a situation the yen could continue to appreciate in the foreign exchange market,

thereby exerting downward pressure on Japan's economy.

Turning to developments in each demand component, members agreed that exports

had been more or less flat, mainly due to inventory adjustments in some IT-related goods

and the yen's appreciation to date. They shared the view that exports, after remaining

more or less flat for the time being, were likely to increase moderately again as the growth

rates in overseas economies, particularly emerging economies, started to increase once more.

One member, however, said that there was considerable uncertainty regarding the timing of

when exports would start to pick up, since this depended partly on the effects of the yen's

appreciation to date and the extent of the progress in inventory adjustments in IT-related

goods.

Members shared the view that business fixed investment had started to pick up.

One member pointed out that, according to the December _Tankan, business fixed_

investment plans for fiscal 2010 had been following the usual revision pattern, and that

machinery orders -- a leading indicator of business fixed investment -- seemed to have hit

bottom. Many members expressed the view that signs of picking up in business fixed

investment were likely to gradually become more evident as the improvement in corporate

profits continued, but the pace of improvement in business fixed investment was likely to

remain moderate with firms' persistent sense of excessive capital stock. One member

mentioned that some firms had said that they were maintaining their cautious stance on

business fixed investment since a future increase in demand was not yet in prospect -
11


-----

despite their funding conditions, over which there were no particular concerns.

Members agreed that the employment and income situation had remained severe,

but the degree of severity had eased somewhat. In relation to the recent difficult job

market conditions, one member expressed concern that a lack of job opportunities for the

younger generation would lead to a decline in its future productivity, thereby pushing down

the potential growth rate of Japan's economy. In this situation, with regard to private

consumption, members shared the view that, while sales of electrical appliances had

increased due to the sharp rise in demand ahead of revisions to the eco-point system, sales

of passenger cars had been decreasing substantially due to the reverse following the

last-minute rise in demand upon the expiration of subsidies for purchasers of

environmentally friendly cars. They shared the view that private consumption was likely

to pick up again as the reverse following the sharp increase in demand became less

pronounced. A few members, however, expressed concern that the outlook for private

consumption remained highly uncertain. One member said that housing investment had

leveled out, supported by tax measures that effectively promoted housing purchases, but it

was still likely to take more time before improvement became evident, mainly because the

employment and income situation was likely to remain severe.

Members agreed that production had recently declined slightly, partly because

domestic car sales, in light of the expiration of subsidies for purchasers of environmentally

friendly cars, had decreased following the sharp increase, in a situation where exports had

been flat. They shared the view that production was likely to increase, as inventory

adjustments in IT-related goods were making progress and the effects of the reverse

following the last-minute rise in demand would dissipate, after showing temporary

weakness primarily in durable consumer goods. A few members said that the outlook for

production depended largely on the degree of the decrease in sales of durable consumer

goods following the sharp increase and the pace of inventory adjustments in IT-related

goods at home and abroad. They continued that developments in these areas therefore

warranted careful monitoring.

Members concurred that the CPI (excluding fresh food) was declining on a

year-on-year basis due to the substantial slack in the economy as a whole, but the slowing

trend in the pace of decline had continued and was likely to be maintained. One member

said that, in the October CPI data, the figure representing the difference between the number

12


-----

of items for which prices had declined and of items for which prices had risen was smaller

than that of the previous month, and this suggested that the spread of price declines to a

wider range of goods and services had come to a halt. Many members raised the

possibility that the effects of the rise in international commodity prices would spill over to

consumer prices as a risk factor for the outlook for prices. On the other hand, members

shared the view that, if downside risks to Japan's economy increased, the possibility that

weaker-than-expected economic activity would affect price developments required

vigilance. Some members said that the time was approaching for the Bank to consider

possible outcomes of the revision of the base year for the CPI, which was expected to take

place in summer 2011, when examining developments in prices.

**B. Financial Developments**

Members shared the view that financial conditions had shown further signs of

easing, as seen in the declining trend in firms' funding costs and the further improvement in

lending attitudes of financial institutions as perceived by firms.

As for the money market, a few members said that interest rates on term

instruments had generally been at low levels, although some of these rates had increased

somewhat with the rise in long-term interest rates. One member commented that such a

rise in some of these rates -- despite the clarification of the policy time horizon as part of

the Bank's comprehensive monetary easing -- might suggest that the arbitrage function of

the money market had begun to be impaired.

Regarding the environment for corporate finance, members agreed that the

monetary easing effects had been spreading, as evidenced by the following factors: (1) bank

lending rates were on a downtrend; (2) issuing conditions for CP and corporate bonds had

been favorable; and (3) the December _Tankan confirmed that firms saw financial_

institutions' lending attitudes as further improving and that firms' financial positions had

been improving. In addition to these positive changes, one member noted that the

stimulative effects from low interest rates were becoming less constrained given current

developments in economic activity and prices, and the cumulative effects of monetary

easing had been increasing.

Members shared the view that the rise in Japanese long-term interest rates was

partly induced by the rise in U.S. long-term interest rates amid the globalization of financial

13


-----

markets. Most members cited, along with such movement, the position adjustments made

by financial institutions as an additional factor behind the rise in Japanese long-term interest

rates. In relation to this, some members expressed the view that these rates were likely to

regain stability if the temporary effect stemming from financial institutions' position

adjustments abated. Furthermore, some members commented that long-term interest rates

were at around the level observed in spring 2010, and the recent rise could be partly

interpreted as an adjustment for the significant decline observed in summer 2010.

However, many members expressed the opinion that future developments in and effects of

long-term interest rates needed to be examined carefully, since fluctuations in these rates

would have an impact particularly on funding costs of firms and households and financial

institutions' profits, thereby affecting economic activity and prices as well as financial

conditions.

**IV. Summary of Discussions on Monetary Policy for the Immediate Future**

Regarding the guideline for money market operations for the intermeeting period

ahead, members agreed that, given the above assessment of economic activity and prices, it

was appropriate to maintain the current guideline that the Bank would encourage the

uncollateralized overnight call rate to remain at around 0 to 0.1 percent.

As for the future conduct of monetary policy, members confirmed that the Bank

would steadily purchase various financial assets and provide longer-term funds through the

35 trillion yen Asset Purchase Program (hereafter the Program), so that the effects of

comprehensive monetary easing would spread. They concurred that, in order for Japan's

economy to overcome deflation and return to a sustainable growth path with price stability,

it was necessary that the Bank continue to consistently make contributions as the central

bank through the three-pronged approach of pursuing powerful monetary easing consisting

of comprehensive monetary easing, ensuring financial market stability, and providing

support to strengthen the foundations for economic growth. They also agreed that the

Bank would continue to carefully examine the outlook for economic activity and prices, and

take policy actions in an appropriate manner as the central bank.

Next, members discussed the effects of the Bank's comprehensive monetary easing.

As for the effects of encouraging a decline in longer-term interest rates, most members

shared the view that purchases of various financial assets and provision of longer-term

14


-----

funds through the Program had been exerting downward pressure on such rates, as

evidenced by the decline in interest rates following the introduction of the Program. Many

members, however, commented that the effects of encouraging such a decline were difficult

to see at present, partly because Japanese long-term interest rates had risen following the

rise in overseas long-term interest rates. In relation to this point, some members said that

it was important to clearly reaffirm that the clarification of the policy time horizon as part of

the Bank's comprehensive monetary easing had the effect of stabilizing short-term market

rates at low levels. As for the effects of encouraging a decline in risk premiums, members

shared the view that, considering that credit spreads had narrowed on corporate bonds -
especially those with low ratings -- and prices had increased for Japan real estate investment

trusts (J-REITs) -- including those not subject to the Bank's purchases through the Program

-- the Bank's comprehensive monetary easing had been effective in encouraging investors to

take an active stance and in enhancing the financial intermediary function. Moreover,

many members expressed the view that corporate financing conditions were also improving

steadily as seen in an increased variety of corporate bond issuers, and the Bank's

comprehensive monetary easing had been effective in further enhancing accommodative

financial conditions overall. Meanwhile, many members commented that it was important

for market participants and the public to properly understand the substance of

comprehensive monetary easing in order to maximize the policy effects. These members

continued that, in order to achieve this, timely and sufficient communication by the Bank

was essential.

Members then discussed the fund-provisioning measure to support strengthening

the foundations for economic growth. Many members said that the measure clearly was

establishing itself, as (1) the total amount of loans disbursed by the Bank and the number of

borrower financial institutions had more or less doubled in the second new loan

disbursement conducted on December 7, 2010, compared with the first new loan

disbursement; and (2) lending or investment covered broad areas for strengthening the

foundations for economic growth, as in the first new loan disbursement. Members shared

the view that the measure was gradually producing positive effects as a catalyst -- its

intended purpose -- as (1) financial institutions were more actively making a range of efforts,

taking into account the characteristics of their customer base and the regions they served;

and (2) with the introduction of the measure, financial institutions were establishing new

15


-----

dedicated funds and lending schemes, and some of them in certain cases had set a higher

ceiling on the total amount of lending or investment than the total amount of the loans that

they had obtained from the Bank. One member noted that the introduction of the

fund-provisioning measure served as an opportunity to generate widespread awareness of

issues related, for example, to productivity and the aging of the population, which were

factors behind the decline in the growth rate of Japan's economy. Some members,

however, added that some negative effects of the fund-provisioning measure had been

raised, in that lending competition among financial institutions had intensified.

Meanwhile, a few members said that the Bank should deepen discussions regarding how the

fund-provisioning measure should be managed, taking account of the measure's purpose to

support voluntary efforts by financial institutions while carefully monitoring the progress

made through such efforts.

**V. Remarks by Government Representatives**

The representative from the Ministry of Finance made the following remarks.

(1) The economic movements in Japan appeared to be pausing recently and the situation

remained difficult, as evidenced by the high unemployment rate. There was a risk that

the economy might be depressed further by a possible slowdown in overseas economies

as well as fluctuations in foreign exchange rates and stock prices. It should be noted

that there was still a risk of deflation adversely influencing the economy and a concern

about a possible deterioration of the employment situation.

(2) In view of the current severe economic conditions, particularly the ongoing appreciation

of the yen, the government -- based on the "Three-Step Economic Measures for the

Realization of the New Growth Strategy" (hereafter "Three-Step Economic Measures")

-- had decided the economic measures included in the second step. In order for the

government to carry out the measures, the Diet approved the supplementary budget for

fiscal 2010 on November 26. As part of the third step, the government was doing its

utmost to formulate the budget for fiscal 2011 so that the "New Growth Strategy" would

be fully implemented. Together with the formulation of the budget, the government -
as stated in the "New Growth Strategy" -- considered it important to, for example,

develop regulatory reforms as a means of efficiently and effectively promoting firms'

research and development efforts, and to review the supporting framework.

16


-----

(3) The government regarded the Bank's sequential purchases of assets through the

Program as an appropriate action. The government expected that the Bank -- taking

into account firms' concerns about their funding conditions toward the calendar and

fiscal year-ends -- would support the economy from the financial side by continuing to

conduct monetary policy in an appropriate and flexible manner while keeping close

contact with the government. The government welcomed, as a swift response, the

Bank's proposal made at this meeting to extend the effective period of the U.S. dollar

funds-supplying operation against pooled collateral, which would form part of central

banks' coordinated measures to ensure financial stability.

The representative from the Cabinet Office made the following remarks.

(1) The economic movements in Japan appeared to be pausing, as evidenced by the

decrease in production against the background of weakness in exports. In addition, the

economy was faced with significant risks of experiencing further deterioration from the

possibility of prolonged appreciation of the yen and a slowdown in overseas economies.

As for prices, deflation was in a chronic condition. The government, which placed

overcoming deflation as the top-priority task in its macroeconomic policy management,

as stated in the "New Growth Strategy," would work together with the Bank to launch

vigorous and comprehensive policy efforts.

(2) In view of the current severe economic conditions and concerns about economic

deterioration, the government -- based on the "Three-Step Economic Measures" -- had

implemented the first step, financed by reserve funds, and was implementing the second

step, financed by the supplementary budget for fiscal 2010. Furthermore, as part of

the third step, the government would prepare the budget for fiscal 2011, which

emphasized achieving economic growth and employment, and would implement a tax

reform including corporate tax cuts with a view to overcoming deflation and to

revitalizing the economy with a focus on employment. By making such policy efforts

in a seamless manner, the government would do its utmost to help the economy

overcome deflation and achieve a self-sustaining recovery.

(3) The government expected the Bank to examine the effects of the comprehensive

monetary easing policy. At the same time, it expected the Bank to continue to aim at

overcoming deflation swiftly and underpin the economy, by conducting monetary

17


-----

policy in an appropriate and flexible manner while sufficiently exchanging views and

working closely with the government. It welcomed the Bank's decision as an

appropriate action to extend the effective period of the U.S. dollar funds-supplying

operation against pooled collateral -- with a view to ensuring stability in global financial

markets -- in coordination with central banks in North America and Europe.

**VI. Votes**

Based on the above discussions, members shared the view that it was appropriate

to maintain the current guideline for money market operations, which encouraged the

uncollateralized overnight call rate to remain at around 0 to 0.1 percent.

To reflect this view, the chairman formulated the following proposal and put it to a

vote.

**The Chairman's Policy Proposal on the Guideline for Money Market Operations:**

1. The guideline for money market operations for the intermeeting period ahead will be as

follows.

The Bank of Japan will encourage the uncollateralized overnight call rate

to remain at around 0 to 0.1 percent.

2. A public statement will be decided separately.

Votes for the proposal: Mr. M. Shirakawa, Mr. H. Yamaguchi, Mr. K. G. Nishimura,

Ms. M. Suda, Mr. T. Noda, Mr. S. Nakamura, Mr. H. Kamezaki, Mr. R. Miyao, and

Mr. Y. Morimoto.

Votes against the proposal: None.

**VII. Discussion on the Statement on Monetary Policy**

Members discussed the Statement on Monetary Policy, and put it to a vote. The

Policy Board decided the text by a unanimous vote. It was confirmed that the statement

would be released immediately after the meeting (see Attachment 1).

18


-----

**VIII. Approval of the Minutes of the Monetary Policy Meetings**

The Policy Board approved unanimously the minutes of the Monetary Policy

Meetings of October 28, 2010 and November 4 and 5 for release on December 27, 2010.

**IX. Approval of Changes in the Scheduled Dates of the Monetary Policy Meetings in**

**July 2010-June 2011 and of the Scheduled Dates in January-December 2011**

At the end of the meeting, the Policy Board approved changes in the dates of the

Monetary Policy Meetings in July 2010-June 2011 and also approved the dates of the

Monetary Policy Meetings to be held in January-December 2011, for immediate release (see

attachments 2 and 3).

19


-----

Attachment 1

December 21, 2010

Bank of Japan

**Statement on Monetary Policy**

1. At the Monetary Policy Meeting held today, the Policy Board of the Bank of Japan

decided, by a unanimous vote,[7] to set the following guideline for money market

operations for the intermeeting period:

The Bank of Japan will encourage the uncollateralized overnight call rate

to remain at around 0 to 0.1 percent.

2. Japan's economy still shows signs of a moderate recovery, but the recovery seems to be

pausing. Exports have been more or less flat. Corporate profits have continued to

grow, albeit at a slower pace. In this situation, business fixed investment has started

to pick up. The employment and income situation has remained severe, but the degree

of severity has eased somewhat. As for private consumption, demand for some goods

has suffered a reverse after the sharp increase seen previously. Reflecting these

developments in demand both at home and abroad, production has recently declined

slightly and business sentiment has also been somewhat weak, particularly in the

manufacturing sector. Meanwhile, financial conditions have shown further signs of

easing, as seen in the declining trend in firms' funding costs and the improvement in

lending attitudes of financial institutions. The CPI (excluding fresh food) is declining

on a year-on-year basis due to the substantial slack in the economy as a whole, but the

slowing trend in the pace of decline has continued.

7 Voting for the action: Mr. M. Shirakawa, Mr. H. Yamaguchi, Mr. K. G. Nishimura, Ms. M. Suda,
Mr. T. Noda, Mr. S. Nakamura, Mr. H. Kamezaki, Mr. R. Miyao, and Mr. Y. Morimoto.
Voting against the action: None.

20


-----

3. The Bank's baseline scenario projects that Japan's economy is likely to grow at a slower

pace for some time, but is expected to return to a moderate recovery path thereafter as

the growth rate of the global economy is likely to start increasing again led by

emerging and commodity-exporting economies. As for prices, the year-on-year rate

of decline in the CPI is expected to continue slowing.

4. In the area of economic activity, there are some upside risks such as faster growth in

emerging and commodity-exporting economies. However, amid continued heightened

uncertainty about the outlook for the U.S. and European economies, attention should

also be paid to downside risks to Japan's economy. Regarding the outlook for prices,

there is a possibility that inflation will rise more than expected due to an increase in

commodity prices brought about by high growth rates in emerging and

commodity-exporting economies, while there is also a risk that the rate of inflation will

deviate downward from the Bank's baseline scenario due, for example, to a decline in

medium- to long-term inflation expectations.

5. The Bank has started its asset purchases in all the asset categories in the Asset Purchase

Program. The Bank will steadily purchase various financial assets and provide

longer-term funds through the 35 trillion yen Program, so that the effects of

comprehensive monetary easing spread. In order for Japan's economy to overcome

deflation and return to a sustainable growth path with price stability, the Bank will

continue to consistently make contributions as the central bank through the

three-pronged approach of pursuing powerful monetary easing consisting of

comprehensive monetary easing, ensuring financial market stability, and providing

support to strengthen the foundations for economic growth. The Bank will continue

to carefully examine the outlook for economic activity and prices, and take policy

actions in an appropriate manner.

21


-----

Attachment 2

December 21, 2010

Bank of Japan

**Scheduled Dates of Monetary Policy Meetings in July 2010-June 2011**
**Revised**
Dates underlined are revised dates (those crossed out were released previously on October 28, 2010).


(Reference)
Publication of
Monthly Report


Publication of
Date of MPM
MPM Minutes


Publication of
Outlook Report
(The Bank's View)


July 2010 14 (Wed.), 15 (Thurs.) Aug. 13 (Fri.) -- 16 (Fri.)

Aug. 9 (Mon.), 10 (Tues.) Sep. 10 (Fri.) -- 11 (Wed.)

30 (Mon.) Oct. 8 (Fri.) -- -
Sep. 6 (Mon.), 7 (Tues.) Oct. 8 (Fri.) -- 8 (Wed.)

Oct. 4 (Mon.), 5 (Tues.) Nov. 2 (Tues.) -- 6 (Wed.)

28 (Thurs.) Dec. 27 (Mon.) 28 (Thurs.) -
Nov. 4 (Thurs.), 5 (Fri.) Dec. 27 (Mon.) -- 8 (Mon.)

Dec. 20 (Mon.), 21 (Tues.) Jan. 28 (Fri.) -- 22 (Wed.)

Jan. 2011 24 (Mon.), 25 (Tues.) Feb. 18 (Fri.) -- 26 (Wed.)
Feb. 22 (Tues.)

Feb. 14 (Mon.), 15 (Tues.) Mar. 18 (Fri.) -- 16 (Wed.)
16 (Wed.), 17 (Thurs.) 18 (Fri.)

Mar. 14 (Mon.), 15 (Tues.) Apr. 12 (Tues.) -- 16 (Wed.)

Apr. 6 (Wed.), 7 (Thurs.) May 9 (Mon.) -- 8 (Fri.)

28 (Thurs.) May 25 (Wed.) 28 (Thurs.) -
May 19 (Thurs.), 20 (Fri.) June 17 (Fri.) -- 23 (Mon.)

June 13 (Mon.), 14 (Tues.) July 15 (Fri.) -- 15 (Wed.)
To be announced

Note: The time of release will be, in principle, as follows.
MPM Minutes will be released at 8:50 a.m.
_Outlook for Economic Activity and Prices (Outlook Report):_
"The Bank's View" in the Outlook Report will be released at 3:00 p.m., and the full text at 2:00 p.m. on the next
business day. As an exception to this principle, the full text of the _April 2011_ _Outlook Report will be released at 2:00_
p.m. on April 29 (Fri.), 2011, which is the national holiday in Japan.
_Monthly Report of Recent Economic and Financial Developments (Monthly Report):_
The Japanese original and the English translation for summary will be released at 2:00 p.m. (the English translation for
the full text will be published at 4:30 p.m. on the next business day).

22


-----

Attachment 3

December 21, 2010

Bank of Japan

**Scheduled Dates of Monetary Policy Meetings in January 2011-December 2011**


(Reference)
Publication of
Monthly Report


Publication of
Date of MPM
MPM Minutes


Publication of
Outlook Report
(The Bank's View)


Jan. 2011 24 (Mon.), 25 (Tues.) Feb. 18 (Fri.) -- 26 (Wed.)

Feb. 14 (Mon.), 15 (Tues.) Mar. 18 (Fri.) -- 16 (Wed.)

Mar. 14 (Mon.), 15 (Tues.) Apr. 12 (Tues.) -- 16 (Wed.)

Apr. 6 (Wed.), 7 (Thurs.) May 9 (Mon.) -- 8 (Fri.)

28 (Thurs.) May 25 (Wed.) 28 (Thurs.) -
May 19 (Thurs.), 20 (Fri.) June 17 (Fri.) -- 23 (Mon.)

June 13 (Mon.), 14 (Tues.) July 15 (Fri.) -- 15 (Wed.)

July 11 (Mon.), 12 (Tues.) Aug. 10 (Wed.) -- 13 (Wed.)

Aug. 4 (Thurs.), 5 (Fri.) Sep. 12 (Mon.) -- 8 (Mon.)

Sep. 6 (Tues.), 7 (Wed.) Oct. 13 (Thurs.) -- 8 (Thurs.)

Oct. 6 (Thurs.), 7 (Fri.) Nov. 1 (Tues.) -- 11 (Tues.)

27 (Thurs.) Nov. 21 (Mon.) 27 (Thurs.) -
Nov. 15 (Tues.), 16 (Wed.) Dec. 27 (Tues.) -- 17 (Thurs.)

Dec. 20 (Tues.), 21 (Wed.) To be announced -- 22 (Thurs.)

Note: The time of release will be, in principle, as follows.
MPM Minutes will be released at 8:50 a.m.
_Outlook for Economic Activity and Prices (Outlook Report):_
"The Bank's View" in the Outlook Report will be released at 3:00 p.m., and the full text at 2:00 p.m. on the next
business day. As an exception to this principle, the full text of the _April 2011_ _Outlook Report will be released at 2:00_
p.m. on April 29 (Fri.), 2011, which is the national holiday in Japan.
_Monthly Report of Recent Economic and Financial Developments (Monthly Report):_
The Japanese original and the English translation for summary will be released at 2:00 p.m. (the English translation for
the full text will be published at 4:30 p.m. on the next business day).

23


-----

