**BANK OF ISRAEL**

Office of the Spokesperson and Economic Information

September 5, 2022

# Report on the Bank of Israel’s discussions prior to deciding
 on the interest rate

## The discussions took place on August 21 and 22, 2022.

 General

The Monetary Committee sets the interest rate in a process that includes two
discussions––the first in a broad forum, and the second in a narrower one.

In the broad-forum discussion, the relevant background economic conditions are
presented, including the real and financial-monetary developments in Israel’s economy,
and developments in the global economy. Participants in this discussion include the
members of the Monetary Committee, senior representatives from the various
departments of the Bank, and economists from the economic departments (Research
and Markets), who prepare and present the material for discussion.

In the narrow forum—which consists of the Monetary Committee and a representative
of the Markets Department—the Research and the Markets Departments present their
views of the main considerations that should guide the setting of the monetary policy.
An open discussion on monetary policy follows, which ends with a vote on the level of
the interest rate. According to Section 18(c) of the Bank of Israel Law, 5770–2010, the
decision on the interest rate is reached by majority vote of the members of the Monetary
Committee who participate in the voting.

A summary view of the economic situation available at the time of the Committee’s
discussion is presented in the [notice regarding the interest rate decision, which was](https://www.boi.org.il/en/NewsAndPublications/PressReleases/Pages/22-08-2022.aspx)
[published on August 22, and in the data file that accompanied the notice.](https://www.boi.org.il/he/NewsAndPublications/PressReleases/Documents/%d7%a8%d7%99%d7%91%d7%99%d7%aa.%2022.8.22%20%d7%a2.pptx)

Page 1 of 4


-----

## THE NARROW-FORUM DISCUSSION

The members of the Monetary Committee participating in the discussion decide on the
appropriate rate of interest. After the discussion, it was decided to increase the interest
rate by 0.75 percentage points, to 2 percent. The decision was unanimous.

The discussion focused on inflation in Israel, its deviation above the upper bound of the
target range, the robust economic activity, the tight labor market, wage developments,
and the housing market. In addition, the Committee discussed developments in the
global economy, including the ramifications of the continued increase in inflation in
many countries, the monetary contraction, the slight easing in supply and production
chains, commodity prices, and a downward revision of global growth forecasts.

## Main points of discussion
The Committee discussed the continued increase of the inflation rate in Israel, and its
standing above the upper bound of the target range. The inflation rate over the preceding
12 months increased to 5.2 percent. Alongside this, there was a decline in 1-year
inflation expectations among the various sources, and all of them, except for
expectations derived from the capital market, are within the target range. In addition,
expectations derived from the capital market beginning from the second year and
onward remain within the target range, and expectations for longer terms are anchored
around the midpoint of the target range. The Committee members noted that despite the
increase in the inflation rate in recent months, it remains relatively low, as it is in the
lowest decile of OECD countries.

The Committee discussed the good data on activity. The Committee members noted
that National Accounts data indicate that for three quarters, the level of output in the
economy has been higher than the pre-COVID-19 crisis trend line. The labor market is
tight. The unemployment rate and employment rate are similar to, and even partly better
than, their level of 2019, before the COVID-19 crisis. However, there are signs of a
shortage of workers in a manner that limits the ongoing activity of businesses in certain
industries. The Committee members noted that the tight labor market is reflected in
wage pressures in industries characterized by high wages and professional workers.

The Committee discussed housing market developments. Home prices increased in the
past 12 months by 17.8 percent, a markedly high rate compared to the pace of recent
years. There was also an acceleration in the rate of monthly increase in rents, which
increased in July by 0.7 percent. Alongside that, in recent months, the number of

Bank of Israel—Minutes of interest rate discussion on August 21–22, 2022. Page **2** Of **4**


-----

transactions declined and the extent of mortgages granted in July contracted, but it
remains high from a historical perspective.

The Monetary Committee discussed global activity, which continues to moderate. The
IMF revised its global growth forecast downward, as did various investment houses.
Alongside that, equity markets posted sharp gains, the price of oil declined, and the
commodity prices index returned to its level of the beginning of the year.

The Committee members discussed extensively the continued process of contractionary
monetary policy worldwide against the background of the high inflation environment.
The Committee members noted that in the US, the interest rate was increased by 75
basis points as the Federal Reserve emphasized its commitment to reducing the inflation
rate. The ECB accelerated the monetary tightening process and increased the interest
rate by 50 basis points. There were interest rate increases in several additional countries
in which the inflation rate is above the central bank’s target.

**All six members of the Monetary Committee were of the opinion that the interest**
**rate should be increased by 0.75 percentage points, to 2 percent. The Committee**
**members noted that the Israeli economy is recording strong growth, accompanied**
**by a tight labor market and an increase in the inflation environment. The**
**Committee has therefore decided to continue the process of increasing the interest**
**rate. The pace of raising the interest rate will be determined in accordance with**
**activity data and the development of inflation, in order to continue supporting the**
**attainment of the policy goals.**

**Participants in the narrow-forum discussion:**

**Members of the Monetary Committee:**
Prof. Amir Yaron, Governor of the Bank and Chairperson
Mr. Andrew Abir, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Israel
Prof. Naomi Feldman
Prof. Moshe Hazan
Prof. Zvi Hercowitz
Prof. Michel Strawczynski

**Other participants in the narrow-forum discussion:**
Mr. Nadav Eshel, Assistant to the Governor
Mr. Tal Biber, Head of the Markets Division, Markets Department
Dr. Golan Benita, Director of the Markets Department
Mr. Uri Barazani, Spokesperson of the Bank
Mr. Gilad Brand, Research Department
Mr. Ari Kutai, Research Department
Dr. Sigal Ribon, Head of the Monetary Division, Research Department
Ms. Esti Schwartz, Secretary of the Monetary Committee

Bank of Israel—Minutes of interest rate discussion on August 21–22, 2022. Page **3** Of **4**


-----

Mr. Daniel Shlomiuk, Bank Spokesperson’s Office

Bank of Israel—Minutes of interest rate discussion on August 21–22, 2022. Page **4** Of **4**


-----

