**HIGHLIGHTS OF THE MEETING OF THE MONETARY BOARD ON THE MONETARY POLICY**


**STANCE HELD ON 23 JUNE 2016[1]**

**I.** **Monetary Policy Decision**

The Monetary Board (MB) decided to:

a) Maintain the overnight RRP (borrowing) rate at 3.0 percent;

b) Maintain the current overnight deposit and overnight lending rates; and

c) Maintain the current reserve requirement ratios.

**II.** **Key Considerations in the Formulation of the Monetary Policy Stance**

  - The Monetary Board’s decision to keep its monetary policy settings unchanged is based on

its assessment that the inflation environment continues to be manageable.

    - Average inflation is expected to settle near the lower edge of the

3.0 percent ± 1.0 percentage point target range in 2016 and rise toward the mid-point
of the target range in 2017 and 2018. Meanwhile, inflation expectations remain
broadly consistent with the inflation target over the policy horizon.

    - The overall balance of risks surrounding the inflation outlook is now deemed to be

broadly balanced. With global oil prices recovering, the risk of second-round effects
from lower oil prices is likely to recede in the period ahead. Nevertheless, slower global
economic activity remains a key downside risk to the inflation outlook. Given improved
rainfall conditions and the shift to neutral weather conditions in the May-July period,
the upside risks to food and utility prices due to El Niño are also seen to recede in the
coming months. However, pending petitions for adjustments in electricity rates remain
an upside risk to inflation.

  - The Monetary Board also observed that prospects for global economic growth have

remained subdued since the previous meeting, but with increased downside risks to global
activity. On the other hand, domestic economic activity continues to be firm, supported by
solid private household consumption and investment, buoyant business and consumer
sentiment, and adequate credit and domestic liquidity. Higher fiscal spending is also
expected to further boost domestic demand.

1 The discussions herein reflect the assessment made by the Monetary Board based on a comprehensive set of economic information available at
the time of the policy meeting. The highlights of the discussions during the 23 June 2016 meeting were approved by the Monetary Board during its

l i h ld 7 J l 2016 Th i f h M B d h li i h d l d 11 A 2016


-----

**III.   Recent Developments and Inflation Outlook**

The MB considered the following developments in deciding on the monetary policy stance:

**A. Domestic price conditions**

  - Year-on-year headline inflation rose to an 11-month high at 1.6 percent in May from

1.1 percent in April due largely to price increases in key food items offsetting the
continued decline in rice prices. Food inflation went up due largely to tighter domestic
supply caused by drought; this resulted in higher prices for key food items, particularly
meat, fish, fruit, milk, cheese, and eggs as well as vegetables during the month. In contrast,
year-on-year rice inflation remained negative in May. At the same time, non-food inflation
rose slightly as the negative inflation rate for electricity, gas, and other fuels was
counterbalanced by the higher inflation rates recorded for other non-food items.

  - All indicators of core inflation increased in May: trimmed mean, weighted median, and net

of volatile items rose to  1.5 percent (from 1.2 percent), 1.7 percent (from 1.4 percent),
and 1.3 percent (from 1.2 percent), respectively. Moreover, the number of CPI items with
inflation rates below the threshold dropped in May relative to the previous month.

  - By geographical location, inflation for both National Capital Region (NCR) and areas

outside NCR increased by 1.0 percent (from 0.4 percent) and 1.7 percent (from
1.3 percent), respectively. Likewise, the weighted average inflation rates for the major
island groupings Luzon, Visayas and Mindanao were higher in May compared to April.

**B.  Inflation expectations**

  - Inflation expectations remain broadly consistent with the within-target inflation outlook.

Results of the May 2016 BSP’s survey of private sector economists yielded a lower mean
inflation forecast for 2016 while mean inflation forecasts for 2017 and 2018 were steady
and within target. Likewise, results of the May 2016 Consensus Economics survey showed
lower mean inflation forecasts for 2016 and 2017 from last month’s survey. Meanwhile,
the Q2 2016 Business Expectations Survey indicated that more respondents expected
inflation to increase for the current and next quarters compared to those who said
otherwise.

**C.  Inflation outlook**

  - The latest baseline inflation forecasts show that inflation could settle near the low end of

the government’s target range of 3.0 percent ± 1.0 percentage point in 2016 and the
midpoint of the target in 2017-2018. Inflation is projected to steadily increase towards the
target range in the middle of this year, driven by impact of election spending, increase in
non-agriculture minimum wage in June 2016, and positive base effects.

  - The risks to future inflation are deemed to be broadly balanced. Slower global economic

activity remains a significant downside risk to the inflation outlook. Global growth is
expected to remain gradual due to modest recoveries in advanced economies and weaker


-----

prospects for emerging market economies. Meanwhile, pending petitions for adjustments
in electricity rates continue to be viewed as an upside risk to inflation.[2]

**D. Demand conditions**

  - Recent demand indicators continued to show that domestic demand conditions remain

firm. The economy grew by 6.9 percent in Q1 2016, faster than the quarter- and year-ago
growth rates of 6.5 percent and 5.0 percent, respectively. GDP growth is supported by
household spending, capital formation, and public spending on the expenditure side and
services and industry sectors in the production side. Moreover, the Philippine composite
PMI remained above the 50-point expansion threshold at 55.3 in April due to the faster
rate of expansion in the manufacturing sector. Consumer confidence was broadly steady
for Q2 2016 while the Philippine Business Cycle (PBC) indicator continued its upward trend
for the fourth consecutive quarter and exceeded the trend rate of growth (of 5.9 percent)
in Q1 2016.

**E.  Supply-side indicators**

Developments in Agriculture

  - Agriculture, Hunting, Forestry and Fishing (AHFF) contracted by 4.4 percent in Q1 2016, a

reversal of the 1.0-percent growth in Q1 2015. In particular, the agriculture subsector
declined by 4.3 percent in Q1 2016, down from a 2.3-percent growth in the same period
last year. Declines in production were noted for commodities such as palay, corn, coconut
including copra, sugarcane, banana, mango, rubber, and other crops. Lower agricultural
production for the above-mentioned crops was due mainly to dry weather conditions
brought by El Niño and the adverse effect of typhoons _Nona and_ _Lando, as well as pest_
infestation in several crop-producing areas.

  - International food prices increased in May. The FAO food price index (FPI) averaged

155.8 points in May 2016, up by 3.2 points (2.1 percent) from last month’s average of
152.5 points. The increase in the index could be attributed to the higher prices of cereals,
dairy, meat, and sugar which outweighed the decline in the price of vegetable oil.

  - According to the Climate Prediction Center (CPC) and the International Research Institute

(IRI) for Climate and Society, measured sea surface temperatures (SST) across the
equatorial Pacific averaged near zero in end-May 2016, indicating that El Niño has ended.
Recent forecasts by CPC and IRI now point to neutral conditions for May-June-July 2016
and for La Niña conditions to develop in the third quarter of the year.

Oil Price Developments

  - Dubai crude oil prices continued to rise in the first week of June 2016 due largely to

production disruptions, lower US crude inventory, and market speculation on the
prospects for target quotas of the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC).

2 Various petitions for rate adjustments by Meralco and the Power Sector Assets and Liabilities Management (PSALM) Corporation are considered
as upside risks to inflation. These include Meralco’s petitions based on generation and transmission charges, among other things, and the
December 2013 rate adjustment, which remains under judicial review. Meanwhile, PSALM’s petitions are based on adjustments for fuel and foreign

h


-----

 - Latest estimates by the US Energy Information Administration (EIA) suggest that the global

oil oversupply is likely to continue in 2016 but could narrow in 2017 with demand
exceeding supply in the Q3 2017. The EIA has reported higher supply forecasts for 2016
and 2017 upward due largely to rising crude production from Iran and Saudi Arabia as well
as project commitments of investors. Meanwhile, demand forecast for 2016 was adjusted
upward which can be attributed to increased demand from China and India particularly for
transportation use. Overall demand estimates were generally steady for 2017 as lower
consumption from OECD Europe and Japan is offset by increased demand from the US and
South Korea.

Developments in the Utilities Sector

 - Electricity rates dropped in June due to lower generation costs. According to Meralco, the

reductions in generation charges from the Wholesale Electricity Spot Market (WESM) and
Independent Power Producers (IPPs) were driven mainly by lower fuel costs, higher
dispatch of power plants, and fewer power plant outages during the month.

**F. Financial market developments**

 - Recent movements in domestic financial markets were largely in response to economic

developments overseas. In early June, the local stock market rallied while the peso
strengthened against the US dollar on improved investor sentiment on emerging market
assets following the release of weaker-than-expected US jobs data, which raised
expectations of a continued delay in the US Fed rate increase. Moreover, the sustained
inflows of foreign exchange from overseas Filipino remittances, foreign direct and portfolio
investments, BPO and tourism receipts, as well as the ample level of the country’s gross
international reserves and the country’s robust economic growth provided stability to the
peso.

**G. Domestic liquidity and credit conditions**

 - Liquidity and credit conditions indicate that overall monetary conditions remain

sufficiently accommodative to support domestic economic activity.

   - Domestic liquidity (M3) grew by 12.7 percent year-on-year in April to reach

P8.6 trillion. This was faster than the 11.7-percent expansion recorded in March. On a
month-on-month seasonally-adjusted basis, M3 increased by 1.7 percent.

   - Money supply expansion was supported largely by sustained demand for credit.

Outstanding loans of commercial banks, net of reverse repurchase (RRP) placements
with the BSP, expanded by 15.6 percent in April from 14.8 percent in March. Similarly,
bank lending inclusive of RRPs grew by 14.8 percent in April from 13.5 percent in the
previous month. On a month-on-month seasonally-adjusted basis, commercial bank
lending increased by 1.5 percent for loans net of RRPs and by 1.7 percent for loans
inclusive of RRPs.


-----

**H.  Fiscal developments**

 - The National Government (NG) recorded a fiscal deficit of P112.5 billion for the period

January-March 2016, higher by 236.0 percent from the P33.5 billion deficit incurred in
January-March 2015 as fiscal authorities increased government spending. Excluding
interest payments from NG expenditures, the primary deficit amounted to P9.9 billion, a
reversal of the P67.1 billion primary surplus recorded in the same period a year ago.

**I.  External developments**

 - Global growth remains subdued. Indicators of economic activity showed a modest pace of

growth in the US and the euro area, while manufacturing activity continued to decline in
Japan and China.

   - In the IMF’s April 2016 World Economic Outlook Update report, downside risks to the

global growth outlook have become more apparent. While market sentiment has
calmed down in recent months, the renewed episodes of financial market volatility
earlier in the year point to a need for policy-makers to further bolster confidence.

   - Risks associated with the upcoming elections in the US, the ongoing refugee crisis in

the Middle East and Europe, and the possible exit of the UK from the European Union
have also been identified as key downside risks to the global economic outlook.

 - Most central banks, including the US Federal Reserve, maintained their monetary policy

settings.

   - On 15 June 2016, the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) left unchanged the

target range for the federal funds rate at 0.25 percent to 0.50 percent. The FOMC
noted that although growth in US household spending has strengthened and the
unemployment rate has declined, the pace of job creation has slowed and inflation has
continued to run below its 2-percent objective.

   - Meanwhile, on 4 May 2016, the Reserve Bank of Australia reduced its cash rate by

25 bps to a record low of 1.75 percent on concerns over inflation following the release
of its CPI, which turned out to be lower than expected. Australia’s inflation eased anew
in Q1 2016 to 1.3 percent from 1.7 percent in the previous quarter. Downward price
pressures were traced to temporary factors, though growth in wage earnings has also
been subdued.

   - On 16 June 2016, Bank Indonesia (BI) decided to reduce its (12-month) BI rate and

7-day reverse repurchase (RR) rate by 25 bps each to 6.50 percent and 5.25 percent,
respectively, to help strengthen the country’s growth momentum. Indonesia posted
real GDP growth of 4.9 percent year-on-year in Q1 2016, lower than the announced
5.0-5.4 percent projection for 2016. Inflation also eased for the second consecutive
month to 3.3 percent in May from 3.6 percent—at the low-end of their
4.0 ± 1.0 percent target.


-----

