**HIGHLIGHTS OF THE MEETING OF THE MONETARY BOARD ON THE MONETARY POLICY**


**STANCE HELD ON 12 MAY 2016[1]**

**I.** **Monetary Policy Decision**

The Monetary Board (MB) decided to:

a) Maintain the BSP’s key policy interest rates at 4.00 percent for the overnight RRP

(borrowing) facility and 6.00 percent for the overnight RP (lending) facility;

b) Maintain the current interest rates on term RRPs, RPs and SDAs; and

c) Maintain the current reserve requirement ratios.

**II.** **Key Considerations in the Formulation of the Monetary Policy Stance**

  - The Monetary Board’s assessment of a manageable inflation outlook and robust growth

conditions continues to support keeping monetary policy settings unchanged.

`o` Average inflation is projected to settle within the target range of 3.0 percent

± 1 percentage point for 2016-2017, while inflation expectations continue to be
firmly anchored within the inflation target band over the policy horizon. At the
same time, inflation continues to be driven mainly by supply-side factors.

`o` The risks surrounding the inflation outlook have remained tilted to the downside,

with potential downward price pressures associated with slower-than-expected
global economic activity and possible second-round effects from lower
international oil prices. Upside risks could come from the impact of El Niño dry
weather conditions on food prices and utility rates as well as pending petitions for
power rate adjustments.

  - The Monetary Board also recognized that global economic conditions have become

weaker since the previous meeting on the monetary policy stance. Nonetheless, prospects
for domestic economic activity remain robust, supported by solid private household
consumption and investment, buoyant business sentiment, and adequate credit and
domestic liquidity. Higher public spending is also expected to boost domestic demand.

1 The discussions herein reflect the assessment made by the Monetary Board based on a comprehensive set of economic information available at
the time of the policy meeting. The highlights of the discussions during the 12 May 2016 meeting were approved by the Monetary Board during its

l i h ld 9 J 2016 Th i f h M B d li i i h d l d 23 J 2016


-----

**III.   Recent Developments and Inflation Outlook**

The MB considered the following developments in deciding on the monetary policy stance:

**A. Domestic price conditions**

  - April inflation held steady at 1.1 percent from the same rate in March, as inflation for food

and non-alcoholic beverages remained unchanged while non-food inflation only posted a
marginal increase compared to the previous month’s level. Higher price increases of key
food items such as meat, vegetables, fruits, as well as oils and fats offset the continued
decline in rice prices compared to their year-ago levels. Likewise, higher year-on-year
inflation rates from non-food items (clothing and footwear, health, recreation and culture,
as well as restaurant and miscellaneous goods and services) tempered the negative
inflation outturn in housing, water, electricity, gas and other fuels during the month.

  - Most indicators of core inflation, including the official rate, trimmed mean, and net of

volatile items, were also steady in April. Meanwhile, the number of CPI items with inflation
rates below the threshold declined during the month relative to the previous month.

  - By geographical location, inflation in the National Capital Region (NCR) increased to

0.4 percent from 0.2 percent, while inflation in areas outside NCR remained the same as
the previous month’s rate at 1.3 percent.

**B.  Inflation expectations**

  - Inflation expectations remain consistent with the within-target inflation outlook. For April

2016, results of the BSP’s survey of private economists showed unchanged mean inflation
forecasts for 2016 and 2017 at 1.9 percent and 2.7 percent, respectively, relative to the
March 2016 survey. Meanwhile, results of the April 2016 Consensus Economics inflation
forecast survey showed lower mean inflation forecasts for both 2016 and 2017 at
1.9 percent (from 2.2 percent in March) and 3.0 percent (from 3.1 percent in the previous
month), respectively.

**C.  Inflation outlook**

  - The latest baseline inflation forecasts for 2016-2017 are broadly unchanged compared to

the previous forecast round, as the impact of the increase in oil prices and higher-thanprojected inflation outturn for March 2016 was offset by expectations of slower global
economic activity and a stronger peso.

  - The prevailing balance of risks to future inflation remains tilted to the downside. Slower

global economic activity and potential second-round effects coming from persistently low
international oil prices pose downside risks, while pending petitions for adjustments in
electricity rates and the impact of El Niño conditions on food prices and utility rates are
seen as key upside risks to inflation.


-----

**D. Demand conditions**

 - Latest indicators of domestic demand continued to point to firm growth prospects over

the policy horizon. The Philippine composite purchasing managers’ index (PMI) remained
above the 50-point expansion threshold at 56.1 as of March. The latest results of the BSP’s
Consumer Expectations Survey (CES) also indicated improved sentiment for Q1 and Q2
2016. Fiscal spending also increased by 15 percent year-on-year in January 2016.

**E.  Supply-side indicators**

Developments in Agriculture

 - The average retail price of rice was slightly higher in April relative to the previous month as

_palay production declined due to the lack of rainfall and intense heat brought about by dry_
weather conditions during the recent optional cropping season.

 - International food prices were likewise broadly higher in April. The Food and Agriculture

Organization (FAO) food price index (FPI) averaged 151.8 points in April, higher than the
average of 150.6 points in the previous month. The marginal increase was attributed to the
higher prices of cereals, vegetable oil, and meat, which outweighed the decline in the
prices of dairy and sugar products.

 - The strong El Niño continues to weaken and majority of climate models suggest that the

condition in the tropical Pacific will return to neutral levels by mid-2016. However, the
chance of a La Niña episode in July-August-September 2016 has increased.

Oil Price Developments

 - Dubai crude oil prices continued to rise in April. While negotiations for a possible output

freeze agreement among major oil producers resulted in an impasse, oil prices were
bolstered by supply disruptions in Kuwait due to a workers’ strike and by the reduced tight
oil output in the US.

 - Global oil supply is still expected to outstrip global oil demand for the rest of 2016.

Nonetheless, the gap could narrow in 2017, with demand projected to exceed supply by
the second half of the year as shale oil production in the US declines. Meanwhile, higher
oil demand in 2017 could be attributed to higher consumption in the Middle East, Eurasia,
and the US, although lower oil demand in China and Japan continued to pose a downside
risk to global oil demand.

Developments in the Utilities Sector

 - Electricity rates increased in April due to higher generation costs. According to Meralco,

the increase in generation costs was driven mainly by higher charges from the Wholesale
Electricity Spot Market (WESM) due to the surge in demand amid the summer season.
Water rates likewise increased during the month due to higher foreign currency
differential adjustments.


-----

**F. Financial market developments**

 - The global and domestic financial environment remained generally calm in April. Cautious

trading reined in gains in the Philippine equities market towards the latter part of the
month. Nonetheless, the sustained inflows of foreign exchange from overseas Filipino
remittances, foreign direct and portfolio investments, BPO and tourism receipts, as well as
the ample level of the country’s gross international reserves and the country’s robust
economic growth provided stability to the peso. Debt spreads also narrowed as market
participants welcomed further monetary stimulus measures from the People’s Bank of
China and the further easing of monetary policy settings by the European Central Bank.

**G. Domestic liquidity and credit conditions**

 - Liquidity and credit are growing at a reasonable pace. Domestic liquidity (M3) grew by

11.7 percent year-on-year in March to reach P8.5 trillion. This was faster than the
11.2-percent (revised) year-on-year expansion recorded in February. On a month-onmonth seasonally-adjusted basis, M3 increased by 1.7 percent. Money supply continued to
expand due largely to sustained demand for credit.

 - Outstanding loans of commercial banks, net of reverse repurchase (RRP) placements with

the BSP, expanded by 14.8 percent year-on-year in March from 16.9 percent year-on-year
in February. Similarly, bank lending inclusive of RRPs increased by 13.5 percent year-onyear in March from 15.7 percent year-on-year in the previous month. On a month-onmonth seasonally-adjusted basis, commercial bank lending increased by 0.3 percent for
loans net of RRPs and by 0.1 percent for loans inclusive of RRPs.

**H.  Fiscal developments**

 - The National Government (NG) recorded a fiscal deficit of P3.47 billion in January 2016,

lower by 46 percent from the P6.47-billion deficit incurred in the same month in 2015.
Excluding the interest payments from total NG expenditures, the primary surplus
amounted to P42.1 billion, P2.8 billion or 6.0 percent lower than the level recorded in the
same period a year ago.

**I.  External developments**

 - The JP Morgan Global All-Industry Output Index rose to 51.3 in March from 50.8 in

February as output growth accelerated in both the manufacturing and service sectors.
Output growth was faster in the US, euro area, UK, and Russia. By contrast, the pace of
production held steady in Japan, while the downturn in Brazil continued. Indicators also
continued to point to subdued economic activity in China.

 - Meanwhile, the IMF downgraded its global growth projections for 2016 and 2017, taking

into account a possible renewed episode of financial market volatility, the loss of growth
momentum in advanced economies, and continuing headwinds in emerging economies at
the onset of 2016. Moreover, downside risks to the outlook have become more apparent.
While market sentiment has calmed down in recent months, the renewed episode of
financial market volatility earlier in the year point to a need to further bolster confidence.


-----

- Most central banks in Asia maintained their monetary policy settings in April and early

May. By contrast, the Reserve Bank of India (RBI) and the Reserve Bank of Australia (RBA)
both decided to ease their monetary policy settings to provide support to their respective
domestic economies. The RBA, in particular, also noted its concerns over low inflation.
Meanwhile, Bank Indonesia (BI) announced some operational adjustments, shifting its key
policy rate from the BI rate to the 7-day reverse repo rate starting in August 2016 to
enhance the transmission of monetary policy. Meanwhile, the US Fed left its policy rate
unchanged on 27 April.


-----

