Not to be released until 8:50 a.m.
Japan Standard Time on Tuesday,
September 26, 2017.

September 26, 2017

Bank of Japan

# Minutes of the
 Monetary Policy Meeting

## on July 19 and 20, 2017

(English translation prepared by the Bank's staff based on the Japanese original)


-----

Please contact the Bank of Japan at the address below in advance to request permission

when reproducing or copying the content of this document for commercial purposes.

Secretariat of the Policy Board, Bank of Japan

P.O. Box 30, Nihonbashi, Tokyo 103-8660, Japan

Please credit the source when quoting, reproducing, or copying the content of this

document.


-----

A Monetary Policy Meeting of the Bank of Japan Policy Board was held in the

Head Office of the Bank of Japan in Tokyo on Wednesday, July 19, 2017, from 2:00 p.m. to

3:32 p.m., and on Thursday, July 20, from 9:00 a.m. to 12:03 p.m.[1]

**Policy Board Members Present**

**Mr. H. Kuroda, Chairman, Governor of the Bank of Japan**

**Mr. K. Iwata, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Japan**

**Mr. H. Nakaso, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Japan**

**Mr. T. Sato**

**Mr. T. Kiuchi**

**Mr. Y. Harada**

**Mr. Y. Funo**

**Mr. M. Sakurai**

**Ms. T. Masai**

Government Representatives Present

Mr. T. Otsuka, State Minister of Finance, Ministry of Finance[2]

Mr. T. Kabe, Deputy Vice Minister for Policy Planning and Coordination, Ministry of

Finance[3]

Mr. T. Ochi, State Minister of Cabinet Office, Cabinet Office[2 ]

Mr. M. Maekawa, Vice Minister for Policy Coordination, Cabinet Office[3 ]

Reporting Staff

Mr. M. Amamiya, Executive Director

Mr. S. Kuwabara, Executive Director

Mr. E. Maeda, Executive Director (Assistant Governor)

Mr. T. Kato, Director-General, Monetary Affairs Department

1 The minutes of this meeting were approved by the Policy Board at the Monetary Policy Meeting
held on September 20 and 21, 2017 as "a document describing an outline of the discussion at the
meeting" stipulated in Article 20, paragraph 1 of the Bank of Japan Act of 1997. Those present are
referred to by their titles at the time of the meeting.
2 Messrs. T. Otsuka and T. Ochi were present on July 20.
3 Messrs. T. Kabe and M. Maekawa were present on July 19.

1


-----

Mr. A. Okuno, Head of Policy Planning Division, Monetary Affairs Department

Mr. S. Shimizu, Director-General, Financial Markets Department

Mr. T. Sekine, Director-General, Research and Statistics Department

Mr. H. Ichiue, Head of Economic Research Division, Research and Statistics Department

Mr. Y. Nakata, Director-General, International Department

Secretariat of the Monetary Policy Meeting

Mr. Y. Onozawa, Director-General, Secretariat of the Policy Board

Mr. H. Nakamoto, Director, Deputy Head of Planning and Coordination Division,

Secretariat of the Policy Board

Mr. T. Nagahata, Senior Economist, Monetary Affairs Department

Mr. K. Yoshimura, Senior Economist, Monetary Affairs Department

Mr. J. Ide, Senior Economist, Monetary Affairs Department

2


-----

**I. Summary of Staff Reports on Economic and Financial Developments[4]**

**A. Money Market Operations in the Intermeeting Period**

The Bank, in accordance with the short-term policy interest rate of minus 0.1

percent and the target level of the long-term interest rate, both decided at the previous

meeting on June 15 and 16, 2017, had been providing funds through purchases of Japanese

government bonds (JGBs) and other measures.[5] In this situation, 10-year JGB yields had

been at around 0 percent, and the shape of the JGB yield curve had been consistent with the

guideline for market operations. Meanwhile, with regard to JGB purchases, the Bank, on

July 7, conducted outright purchases of long-term JGBs through the fixed-rate method

(fixed-rate purchase operations).

**B. Recent Developments in Financial Markets**

In the money market, interest rates on both overnight and term instruments had

generally been in negative territory. The uncollateralized overnight call rate had been in the

range of around minus 0.04 to minus 0.06 percent. As for interest rates on term instruments,

yields on three-month treasury discount bills (T-Bills) had been at around minus 0.1

percent.

The Nikkei 225 Stock Average had been moving at around 20,000 yen in a

situation where the yen had been depreciating. In the foreign exchange market, the yen had

been depreciating against the U.S. dollar, reflecting the widening interest rate differential

between Japan and the United States. Meanwhile, it had been depreciating against the euro,

mainly due to speculation about a reduction in monetary accommodation by the European

Central Bank (ECB).

**C. Overseas Economic and Financial Developments**

Overseas economies continued to grow at a moderate pace on the whole.

The U.S. economy continued to recover firmly, mainly in household spending,

owing to a steady improvement in the employment and income situation. Exports had been

on a pick-up trend, while business fixed investment also continued to pick up. As for prices,

4 Reports were made based on information available at the time of the meeting.
5 The target level of the long-term interest rate was as follows:

The Bank will purchase JGBs so that 10-year JGB yields will remain at around zero

percent.

3


-----

both the year-on-year rate of increase in the personal consumption expenditure (PCE)

deflator for all items and that for all items excluding food and energy had been at around 1.5

percent.

The European economy continued to recover steadily, albeit at a moderate pace,

mainly in the household sector. Exports continued to pick up. Private consumption had been

increasing, partly supported by improvements in the labor market and consumer sentiment,

while business fixed investment also had recovered. With regard to prices, the year-on-year

rate of change in the Harmonized Index of Consumer Prices (HICP) for all items excluding

energy and unprocessed food had been in the range of 1.0-1.5 percent, and that for all items

had been at around 1.5 percent. Meanwhile, economic activity in the United Kingdom

generally continued to recover, although the recent rise in prices had been weighing on

private consumption.

With regard to emerging economies, the Chinese economy continued to see stable

growth on the whole, partly due to the effects of authorities' measures to support economic

activity. In the NIEs and the ASEAN countries, domestic demand had been resilient, as

business and household sentiment had improved, with exports continuing to pick up.

Economic activity in Russia and Brazil had picked up, mainly due to a bottoming out of

commodity prices and the past monetary easing measures. In India, an upheaval in the

economy stemming from the abolition of high denomination banknotes had come to a halt,

and the economy had been heading toward recovery. As for prices in emerging economies,

inflation rates had been more or less flat in many countries and regions.

With respect to overseas financial markets, U.S. and European long-term interest

rates had risen, mainly due to speculation about a reduction in monetary accommodation by

the ECB. Meanwhile, stock prices had been at high levels in many countries mainly against

the backdrop of solid economic indicators and corporate results, and capital inflows to

emerging economies continued.

**D. Economic and Financial Developments in Japan**

1. Economic developments

Japan's economy was expanding moderately, with a virtuous cycle from income to

spending operating.

4


-----

Exports had been on an increasing trend on the back of a pick-up in emerging

economies. Those to advanced economies continued on their increasing trend; those to

emerging economies had picked up, led mainly by electronic parts and capital goods to Asia.

Exports would likely continue their increasing trend for the time being, as those of capital

goods and IT-related goods were likely to be firm. Thereafter, they were expected to

continue on a moderate increasing trend, with the growth in overseas economies continuing.

Public investment had been turning toward an increase. It was likely to increase

for the time being as the effects resulting from the set of stimulus measures gradually took

hold. Thereafter, it was expected to start declining as the positive effects resulting from the

set of stimulus measures diminished, and then remain more or less flat at a high level

underpinned by Olympic Games-related construction.

Business fixed investment had been on a moderate increasing trend with corporate

profits improving. According to the June 2017 _Tankan (Short-Term Economic Survey of_

Enterprises in Japan), business fixed investment plans for fiscal 2017, especially those of

large firms, showed firms' solid stance. Reflecting this positive stance, machinery orders

and construction starts in terms of planned expenses for private and nondwelling

construction -- both of which were leading indicators of business fixed investment -
continued on an increasing trend, albeit with large monthly fluctuations. Business fixed

investment was likely to continue increasing moderately for the time being, mainly on the

back of an improvement in corporate profits, accommodative financial conditions, and

heightened growth expectations. Thereafter, particularly with cyclical adjustments in capital

stock becoming evident, downward pressure on business fixed investment was expected to

intensify.

As for the employment and income situation, supply-demand conditions in the

labor market continued to tighten steadily and employee income had increased moderately.

The active job openings-to-applicants ratio had followed a steady improving trend. The

unemployment rate continued on a moderate declining trend.

Private consumption had increased its resilience against the background of steady

improvement in the employment and income situation. The consumption activity index

(CAI) -- calculated by combining various sales and supply-side statistics -- for the

January-March quarter of 2017 had marked a fourth consecutive quarterly increase, and that

for the April-May period continued to increase at an accelerated pace relative to the

5


-----

January-March quarter. Private consumption was expected to follow a moderate increasing

trend, supported by an increase in employee income and the wealth effects stemming from

the rise in stock prices, as well as replacement demand for durable goods.

Housing investment had been more or less flat.

Industrial production had been on an increasing trend against the background of

increases in demand at home and abroad. It was likely to continue to increase firmly for the

time being on the back of the increases in demand at home and abroad. Thereafter, it was

projected to continue on a moderate increasing trend, mainly reflecting the recovery in

emerging economies and the effects resulting from the set of stimulus measures

materializing.

As for prices, the pace of increase in the producer price index (PPI) compared with

three months earlier had been slowing down, reflecting developments in international

commodity prices and foreign exchange rates. The year-on-year rate of change in the

consumer price index (CPI) for all items less fresh food was in the range of 0.0-0.5 percent.

The rate of change for all items less fresh food and energy had been at around 0 percent.

With regard to the outlook, the year-on-year rate of change in the CPI (all items less fresh

food) was likely to continue on an uptrend and increase toward 2 percent, mainly on the

back of an improvement in the output gap and a rise in medium- to long-term inflation

expectations.

2. Financial environment

Financial conditions were highly accommodative.

Inflation expectations remained in a weakening phase. Real long-term interest

rates -- calculated as long-term interest rates minus medium- to long-term inflation

expectations -- had been negative.

Firms' funding costs had been hovering at extremely low levels. With regard to

credit supply, financial institutions' lending attitudes -- as perceived by firms -- had been

highly accommodative. Issuing conditions for CP and corporate bonds had been favorable.

Firms' credit demand had been increasing, such as for funds related to mergers and

acquisitions, as well as for those for business fixed investment. Against this backdrop, the

year-on-year rate of increase in the amount outstanding of bank lending had accelerated at a

moderate pace to the range of 3.0-3.5 percent. The year-on-year rate of increase in the

6


-----

amount outstanding of CP and corporate bonds also had accelerated recently. Firms'

financial positions had been favorable.

The monetary base had been increasing at a high year-on-year growth rate of

around 20 percent. The year-on-year rate of growth in the money stock had been at around 4

percent.

**II. Summary of Discussions by the Policy Board on Economic and Financial**

**Developments and the July 2017 Outlook for Economic Activity and Prices**

**A. Economic Developments**

Regarding global financial markets, members shared the recognition that, since

late June, U.S. and European long-term interest rates had risen, mainly due to speculation

about a reduction in monetary accommodation by the ECB and the Bank of England. They

also shared the view that, despite the rise in long-term interest rates, investors had generally

maintained their risk-taking stance, as stock prices had been at high levels in many

countries mainly against the backdrop of solid economic indicators and corporate results,

and capital inflows to emerging economies continued. As for developments in global

financial markets going forward, some members said that particular attention should be paid

to the effects, such as of developments in monetary policies in the United States and Europe,

on each country's bond and stock markets as well as the global flow of funds.

With respect to overseas economies, members agreed that, as the global recovery

in trade activity and the manufacturing sector continued, advanced economies continued to

recover steadily and emerging economies had picked up on the whole. On this basis, they

shared the recognition that overseas economies continued to grow at a moderate pace on the

whole. As for the outlook, members concurred that the growth rates of overseas economies

were likely to increase moderately as advanced economies continued growing steadily and

the recovery in emerging economies took hold on the back of the steady growth in advanced

economies and the effects of policy measures taken by emerging economies.

With regard to developments in overseas economies by region, members

concurred that the U.S. economy continued to recover firmly, mainly in household spending,

amid a steady improvement in the employment and income situation, as seen, for example,

in a firm increase in the number of employees for the April-June quarter of 2017. One

member noted that, despite the policy rate hikes by the Federal Reserve since December

7


-----

2016, no remarkable changes in economic sentiment had been observed so far. As for the

outlook, members shared the view that the economy was likely to continue to see firm

growth driven by domestic private demand. However, some members said that attention

should be paid to future developments in private consumption, while pointing out that

motor vehicle sales for the April-June quarter of 2017 represented a second consecutive

quarterly decrease.

Members shared the recognition that the European economy continued to recover

steadily, albeit at a moderate pace, mainly in the household sector. One member pointed out

that various confidence indicators, such as those of consumer sentiment, continued on an

improving trend, partly due to the progress in addressing the nonperforming loan problems

of the banking sector and the waning political risks, in addition to the recovery in economic

activity. As for the outlook, members concurred that the economy would likely follow a

moderate recovery trend, while uncertainty -- associated with political issues, such as those

regarding negotiations on the United Kingdom's exit from the European Union (EU), and

with the European debt problem, including in the financial sector -- was likely to weigh on

economic activity.

Members shared the recognition that emerging economies had picked up on the

whole. Of these economies, most members shared the view that the Chinese economy

continued to see stable growth on the whole, as seen, for example, in the fact that exports

had picked up markedly, fixed asset investment -- public investment in particular -- had

increased, and private consumption had been resilient. One member added that the June

2017 results for the Purchasing Managers' Index (PMI) for manufacturing activity and retail

sales as well as the GDP growth rate for the April-June quarter were all firm, and that this

was encouraging for the global economy for the time being. In the NIEs and the ASEAN

countries, members concurred that domestic demand had been resilient, particularly

reflecting improvements in business and household sentiment and the effects of economic

stimulus measures, with exports picking up as a trend. As for the outlook, they agreed that

emerging economies were likely to see gradual increases in their growth rates, due mainly

to the effects of the economic stimulus measures and the spread of the effects of steady

growth in advanced economies. Members shared the view that the Chinese economy was

likely to broadly follow a stable growth path as authorities conducted fiscal and monetary

policy in a timely manner.

8


-----

Members concurred that financial conditions in Japan were highly accommodative.

They shared the view that, under Quantitative and Qualitative Monetary Easing (QQE) with

Yield Curve Control, firms' funding costs had been hovering at extremely low levels. One

member added that such accommodative financial conditions continued to strongly support

corporate activity in Japan.

Based on the above deliberations on economic and financial conditions abroad and

financial conditions in Japan, members discussed the state of Japan's economy.

With regard to economic activity, members shared the view that, with corporate

profits improving, which mainly reflected the growth in overseas economies, business fixed

investment plans were becoming solid on the whole. They also shared the recognition that

the employment and income situation had improved steadily and private consumption had

increased its resilience. Members then concurred that a positive output gap had taken hold,

given the recent tightening of labor market conditions and the increase in capacity

utilization rates, with the latter reflecting a rise in production. Based on this discussion, they

agreed to revise the Bank's economic assessment upward to one stating that Japan's

economy "is expanding moderately, with a virtuous cycle from income to spending

operating" from the previous one stating that the economy "has been turning toward a

moderate expansion." One member pointed out that Japan's economy was shifting from a

recovery dependent on external demand to a more self-sustaining expansion brought about

by an improvement in domestic demand. This member continued that it was also becoming

evident that improvements in economic activity had been spreading across a wider range of

areas, urban to regional.

Members shared the recognition that exports had been on an increasing trend on

the back of a pick-up in emerging economies. As for the outlook, they agreed that exports

would likely continue their increasing trend for the time being with global production and

trade activity of the manufacturing sector remaining at favorable levels. They continued that,

thereafter, exports were likely to continue increasing moderately on the back of the growth

in overseas economies, albeit with fluctuations resulting mainly from the subsequent

decline in IT-related demand following the current increase.

As for public investment, a few members pointed out that orders based on the

second supplementary budget for fiscal 2016 had started to become noticeable, as seen, for

example, in a significant increase in the amount of public construction completed for April

9


-----

2017. On this basis, members agreed that it was appropriate to revise the Bank's assessment

upward to one stating that public investment "has been turning toward an increase" from the

previous one stating that it "has been more or less flat."

Members shared the recognition that business fixed investment had been on a

moderate increasing trend. Some members pointed out that the ratio of current profits to

sales for all industries and enterprises had marked a record high level for two consecutive

quarters, in the October-December quarter of 2016 and the January-March quarter of 2017,

and that the diffusion index for business conditions for all industries and enterprises (the

proportion of firms responding that business conditions were "favorable" minus the

proportion of those responding that they were "unfavorable") in the June 2017 _Tankan had_

improved for four consecutive quarters. These members then said that corporate profits and

business sentiment had improved, and across a wider range of industries, and that this had

supported the increase in business fixed investment. Regarding the outlook, members

agreed that business fixed investment was likely to continue increasing moderately, mainly

on the back of accommodative financial conditions and heightened growth expectations.

As for the employment and income situation, members shared the recognition that

supply-demand conditions in the labor market continued to tighten steadily and employee

income had increased moderately. On this point, some members noted that wages of

part-time employees -- which were sensitive to labor market conditions -- had clearly

improved. With regard to the outlook, members shared the view that employee income was

likely to continue to increase moderately as labor market conditions kept tightening steadily

and corporate profits improved. One member said that the active job openings-to-applicants

ratio for regular employees -- which had been lower than that for part-time employees -
was approaching 1.0 recently. The member continued that this showed potential for further

improvement in the employment and income situation.

Members shared the recognition that private consumption had increased its

resilience against the background of steady improvement in the employment and income

situation. A few members said that private consumption was slightly gaining momentum

recently, as suggested by, for example, the fact that the CAI -- after having increased for

four consecutive quarters since the April-June quarter of 2016 -- had increased further

recently. In the outlook, members shared the view that private consumption was likely to

follow a moderate increasing trend, supported by an increase in employee income and the

10


-----

wealth effects stemming from the rise in stock prices, as well as replacement demand for

durable goods.

Members shared the recognition that housing investment had been more or less

flat.

Members shared the view that industrial production had been on an increasing

trend against the background of increases in demand at home and abroad. Regarding the

outlook, they agreed that industrial production was likely to continue to increase firmly for

the time being on the back of the increases in demand at home and abroad, and thereafter

continue on a moderate increasing trend, mainly reflecting a rise in the growth rates of

emerging economies.

As for prices, members shared the recognition that the year-on-year rate of change

in the CPI (all items less fresh food) was in the range of 0.0-0.5 percent, and that the rate of

change for all items less fresh food and energy had been at around 0 percent, partly due to

limited price rises at the start of the new fiscal year. On this point, many members expressed

the view that prices had been relatively weak despite the steady tightening of labor market

conditions amid the moderate expansion of the economy. Meanwhile, members shared the

recognition that inflation expectations remained in a weakening phase. Some members,

however, pointed out that some indicators showed a rise in such expectations recently, as

suggested by the results of some surveys conducted on firms and households.

**B. Outlook for Economic Activity and Prices**

In formulating the July 2017 Outlook for Economic Activity and Prices (hereafter

the Outlook Report), with regard to the baseline scenario of the outlook for Japan's

economic activity, members shared the view that the economy was likely to continue its

moderate expansion. They shared the recognition that, through fiscal 2018, domestic

demand was likely to follow an uptrend, with a virtuous cycle from income to spending

being maintained in both the corporate and household sectors, on the back of highly

accommodative financial conditions and fiscal spending through the government's

large-scale stimulus measures. Members also agreed that exports were likely to continue

their moderate increasing trend as the growth rates of overseas economies were likely to

increase moderately. They shared the recognition that, in fiscal 2019, the economy was

likely to continue expanding, supported by external demand, although the growth pace

11


-----

would probably decelerate due to a slowdown in domestic demand. Most members then

expressed the view that Japan's economy was likely to continue growing at a pace above its

potential, mainly through fiscal 2018. These members agreed that the growth rates for the

projection period of fiscal 2017-2019 were somewhat higher than those presented in the

April 2017 Outlook Report.

As for economic activity through fiscal 2018, members shared the view that

business fixed investment was likely to continue increasing moderately, supported by

accommodative financial conditions, heightened growth expectations, and increases in

Olympic Games-related investment, as well as in labor-saving investment to address the

labor shortage. They also agreed that private consumption was likely to follow a moderate

increasing trend as the employment and income situation continued to improve, and that

public investment was likely to increase through fiscal 2017, due mainly to the positive

effects resulting from the set of stimulus measures, and thereafter remain at a relatively high

level. Regarding fiscal 2019, members concurred that business fixed investment was likely

to decelerate, mainly reflecting cyclical adjustments in capital stock after the prolonged

economic expansion, as well as Olympic Games-related demand peaking out, and that

private consumption was likely to turn to a decline in the second half of the fiscal year due

to the effects of the scheduled consumption tax hike. They then shared the view that the

increase in exports on the back of the growth in overseas economies was likely to underpin

the economy. Members shared the recognition that, although the effects of the scheduled

consumption tax hike on economic activity were likely to be smaller than those in fiscal

2014, when the last consumption tax hike took place, they were highly uncertain and varied

depending, for example, on the income situation and price developments.

In relation to the effects of economic activity on prices, members focused in their

discussion on the point that prices had been relatively weak despite the steady tightening of

labor market conditions. As background to this, they shared the view that firms had been

making efforts to absorb a rise in labor costs by increasing labor-saving investment that

took advantage of IT and by taking measures such as a streamlining of the existing business

process -- for example, discontinuation of business late at night and early in the morning -
while limiting wage increases that corresponded to the labor shortage, mainly to wages of

part-time employees. On the point that firms' wage- and price-setting stance remained

cautious, as suggested by these developments, many members noted that this was

12


-----

attributable to the fact that the mindset and behavior based on the assumption that wages

and prices would not increase easily had been deeply entrenched among firms and

households. One of these members added that firms' cautious price-setting stance had been

brought about also by the weak recovery in consumption after the consumption tax hike in

2014.

Based on the above discussion, many members shared the view that, given that

there naturally seemed to be a limit to firms' ability to absorb labor costs amid the continued

tightening of labor market conditions, firms were likely to gradually shift their stance

toward raising wages and prices. A few members said that, although labor market conditions

had been tightening steadily, the unemployment rate and the output gap had not reached the

levels seen during the bubble period. These members continued that, in order to achieve the

price stability target of 2 percent, it was important that these indicators improve further. One

member pointed out that Japanese firms in the services sector, which faced large disparities

in labor productivity with U.S. firms, still had considerable room for a further increase in

such productivity through a streamlining of their business process; therefore, it would take

time before the tightening of labor market conditions led to rises in wages and prices. In

response, a different member noted that it was highly possible that Japanese firms'

price-setting stance would change even before they could reduce disparities in labor

productivity with U.S. and European firms. Another member pointed out that Japanese

firms -- which had been adaptive to the deflationary environment for a long time -- had no

choice but to transform their business models to ensure survival, with labor shortage

becoming more acute. This member then expressed the view that the conditions for a

change in the social norm were being put in place toward a rise in prices.

Some members noted that, although measures such as labor-saving investment and

a streamlining of firms' business process led to restraining price rises in the short run, such

measures should be considered positively as they were the outcome of individual firms'

reasonable decision-making so as to avoid a situation where their businesses were

constrained by labor shortage. A few members then said that, if these efforts improved labor

productivity of the economy as a whole and raised the long-term growth potential, a channel

in which demand would be pushed up through rises in growth expectations and permanent

income, thereby exerting upward pressure on prices, would be expected to operate.

13


-----

Moreover, some members referred to the importance of the government's

initiatives in order for firms to shift their stance toward raising wages and prices. One of

these members said that, to further improve the output gap, not only monetary policy, but

also government measures such as demand-creating structural reform would play a large

role. A different member pointed to the importance of implementing structural policies that

would raise growth expectations, since low growth expectations were a major factor that

made firms that faced labor shortage prioritize cost reductions and thereby avoid raising

prices.

Based on the above discussion, members exchanged views regarding the outlook

for prices. Most members shared the view that, although the recent developments in the CPI

had been relatively weak, the year-on-year rate of change was likely to continue on an

uptrend and increase toward 2 percent, mainly on the back of the improvement in the output

gap and the rise in medium- to long-term inflation expectations. These members agreed that,

comparing the current projections with those presented in the April Outlook Report,

although the projected rates of increase in the CPI were lower mainly for the first half of the

projection period, a virtuous cycle between a moderate rise in the inflation rate and wage

increases was likely to start operating gradually toward the end of the projection period -
that is, toward fiscal 2019. On this basis, they shared the recognition that the timing of the

year-on-year rate of change in the CPI reaching around 2 percent would likely be around

fiscal 2019. Meanwhile, a few members expressed the view that the rate of change would

not reach around 2 percent during the projection period.

Members discussed in detail the mechanism through which the virtuous cycle of

wages and prices would operate. First, they agreed that the output gap had improved

steadily with the tightening of labor market conditions becoming even more evident, as seen,

for example, in the active job openings-to-applicants ratio exceeding the peak level

observed during the bubble period. Most members shared the recognition that, going

forward, as the economy continued its moderate expansion, the output gap was likely to

widen further within positive territory through fiscal 2018 and remain substantially positive

in fiscal 2019. Next, most members shared the recognition that medium- to long-term

inflation expectations were likely to follow an increasing trend and gradually converge to

around 2 percent on the back of the following: (1) in terms of the adaptive component,

developments mainly in import prices were likely to push up the observed inflation rate for

14


-----

the time being, and firms' stance was likely to gradually shift toward raising wages and

prices thereafter with the improvement in the output gap, and (2) in terms of the

forward-looking component, the Bank would pursue monetary easing through its strong

commitment to achieving the price stability target.

Members also discussed upside and downside risk factors to the baseline scenario

of the outlook for economic activity and prices. Regarding the outlook for economic activity,

they noted the following three upside and downside risk factors: (1) developments in

overseas economies; (2) firms' and households' medium- to long-term growth expectations;

and (3) fiscal sustainability in the medium to long term. As upside and downside risks to

prices, members pointed to the following three factors: (1) developments in firms' and

households' medium- to long-term inflation expectations; (2) the fact that there were items

for which prices were not particularly responsive to the output gap; and (3) developments in

foreign exchange rates and international commodity prices going forward. On this basis,

they shared the recognition that risks to Japan's economic activity and prices were skewed

to the downside, especially those concerning developments in overseas economies and in

medium- to long-term inflation expectations. Members concurred that, with regard to the

latter, there was a risk that a rise in inflation expectations would lag further behind if it took

time for firms' stance to shift toward raising wages and prices and inflation consequently

remained relatively sluggish.

**III. Summary of Discussions on Monetary Policy for the Immediate Future**

Based on the above assessment of economic and financial developments, members

discussed monetary policy for the immediate future.

With regard to conducting monetary policy, most members shared the recognition

that, although it was necessary to carefully examine the fact that firms' wage- and

price-setting stance remained cautious, the momentum toward achieving the 2 percent price

stability target was being maintained. As background to this, many members noted the

following two points: (1) firms' stance was likely to gradually shift toward raising wages

and prices with the steady improvement in the output gap, and (2) while indicators of

medium- to long-term inflation expectations had stopped declining and some of them were

showing a rise, such expectations were likely to rise steadily as further price rises came to

be observed widely. Following this discussion, many members shared the recognition that it

15


-----

was appropriate for the Bank to pursue powerful monetary easing with persistence under the

current guideline for market operations. Some members, noting that the Bank should

maintain the current guideline, pointed out that the framework of QQE with Yield Curve

Control incorporated a mechanism in which the effects of accommodative monetary policy

would be further enhanced through a decline in real interest rates and a rise in the natural

rate of interest, with the economy continuing to expand moderately and the inflation and

potential growth rates rising. In addition, a few members noted that there were some

concerns that speculation about a reduction in monetary accommodation in the United

States and Europe could have effects on the Bank's policy conduct. They continued that

monetary policy, however, was decided based on the economic activity and prices of each

country with the aim of achieving price stability.

Meanwhile, most members concurred that it was important for Japan's economy

that the Bank achieve the 2 percent price stability target. As reasons for this, some members

pointed to the following: (1) the CPI's statistical tendency of demonstrating an upward bias;

(2) the need to secure a safety margin for future monetary policy; and (3) the fact that a

consumer price inflation rate of 2 percent was a global standard. With regard to the global

standard, these members noted that major economies pursuing the same rate of inflation

also would facilitate the stability of exchange rates in the long term. In relation to this

discussion, one member, pointing out that the repeated postponement of the timing of

achieving the price stability target could undermine the credibility of the Bank's outlook for

prices, said that it would be appropriate for the Bank to change the target to a medium- to

long-term and flexible one while maintaining its stance of achieving it at the earliest

possible time, given that price stability was a comprehensive concept that included

economic and financial stability. A different member was of the view that the Bank's policy

of achieving the 2 percent target at the earliest possible time was a constraint on the

flexibility of monetary policy and made it difficult to normalize monetary policy going

forward; therefore, the Bank should clearly change this target to a medium- to long-term

one.

With respect to yield curve control, members shared the recognition that, since the

previous meeting, the JGB yield curve had been formed smoothly in a manner consistent

with the guideline for market operations. One member expressed the view that, although

long-term interest rates temporarily came under upward pressure through early July 2017,

16


-----

the Bank had been smoothly controlling the levels of interest rates by, for example,

conducting fixed-rate purchase operations in a timely manner. Moreover, members

confirmed that, under the current policy framework, as a result of the Bank's JGB purchases

conducted so as to achieve the target level of the long-term interest rate specified by the

guideline for market operations, the actual amount of such purchases varied to some extent

depending on financial market conditions. One member pointed out that, should the range

of the target level of 10-year JGB yields of "around 0 percent" be interpreted too strictly, it

consequently could become difficult for the Bank to control long-term interest rates when a

change in the price development started to occur.

Based on the above discussions, regarding the guideline for market operations for

the intermeeting period, many members expressed the view that it was appropriate for the

Bank to maintain the following guideline. First, as for the short-term policy interest rate, it

would apply a negative interest rate of minus 0.1 percent to the Policy-Rate Balances in

current accounts held by financial institutions at the Bank. Second, as for the long-term

interest rate, the Bank would purchase JGBs so that 10-year JGB yields would remain at

around 0 percent. With regard to the amount of JGBs to be purchased, it would conduct

purchases at more or less the current pace -- an annual pace of increase in the amount

outstanding of its JGB holdings of about 80 trillion yen -- aiming to achieve the target level

of the long-term interest rate specified by the guideline.

With regard to asset purchases other than JGB purchases, many members shared

the recognition that it was appropriate for the Bank to implement the following guideline

for the intermeeting period. First, it would purchase exchange-traded funds (ETFs) and

Japan real estate investment trusts (J-REITs) so that their amounts outstanding would

increase at annual paces of about 6 trillion yen and about 90 billion yen, respectively.

Second, as for CP and corporate bonds, it would maintain their amounts outstanding at

about 2.2 trillion yen and about 3.2 trillion yen, respectively.

With respect to the Bank's thinking behind its future conduct of monetary policy,

many members shared the view that the Bank would (1) continue with QQE with Yield

Curve Control, aiming to achieve the price stability target of 2 percent, as long as it was

necessary for maintaining that target in a stable manner, (2) continue expanding the

monetary base until the year-on-year rate of increase in the observed CPI (all items less

fresh food) exceeded 2 percent and stayed above the target in a stable manner, and (3) make

17


-----

policy adjustments as appropriate, taking account of developments in economic activity and

prices as well as financial conditions, with a view to maintaining the momentum toward

achieving the price stability target.

On this point, a few members expressed different views. One of these members

argued that the Bank should set the amounts of its asset purchases as the operating targets

for monetary policy conduct and make sure to reduce them incrementally, as this would

make its asset purchases more sustainable and enhance the stability of the market, thereby

securing the monetary easing effects seen so far. This member expressed the recognition

that, under yield curve control, it would become difficult for the Bank over time to control

the amount of its JGB purchases while maintaining the target level of the long-term interest

rate specified by the guideline for market operations.

A different member said that the member was in dissent with the current guideline

for market operations, considering that it could lead to holding JGB yields in negative

territory up to a maturity of 10 years and thus could have an adverse impact on the

functioning of financial intermediation. This member, while noting that ETF purchases of

about 6 trillion yen annually would be excessive in light of their adverse impact on the

pricing mechanism in the stock market and the Bank's financial soundness, expressed the

hope that an in-depth discussion about the appropriateness of continuing such purchases

would take place going forward.

**IV. Remarks by Government Representatives**

The representative from the Ministry of Finance made the following remarks.

(1) At the Group of Twenty (G-20) meeting held on July 7 and 8, 2017, it was agreed to use

all policy tools -- monetary, fiscal, and structural -- individually and collectively in

order to respond to downside risks and strengthen global economic growth.

(2) At the Council on Economic and Fiscal Policy held on July 18, the government decided

the fiscal 2018 budget overview. It planned to decide the guidelines for budget requests

for fiscal 2018 in response to the prime minister's instructions provided during the

council. Regarding the budget formulation for fiscal 2018, the government would create

a focused budget by eliminating wasteful budgets and ensuring priority-based budgeting

that allocated funds to truly necessary measures such as investments in human resources

and productivity improvements.

18


-----

(3) The government expected the Bank to continue to work toward achieving the price

stability target under QQE with Yield Curve Control, in light of developments in

economic activity and prices, as well as financial conditions.

The representative from the Cabinet Office made the following remarks.

(1) The Japanese economy was on a moderate recovery. The government had revised its

economic assessment upward in June 2017 for the first time in six months, reflecting

further improvements in both the household and corporate sectors -- as seen, for

example, in the fact that the moderate pick-up in private consumption had shown its

sustainability and business fixed investment had picked up. As for the outlook, the

economy was expected to recover moderately, supported partly by the effects of the

government's policies, while the employment and income situation continued to

improve. However, attention should be given to the uncertainty in overseas economies

and the effects of volatility in financial markets. In the midyear economic projections

for fiscal 2017 and 2018, the real GDP growth rates were approximately 1.5 percent and

1.4 percent, respectively. In assessing price developments, it was important to

comprehensively examine a wide range of price indicators, including the GDP deflator.

(2) As suggested by the Economic and Fiscal Projections for Medium- to Long-Term

Analysis, the steady implementation of expenditure reform and sustainable economic

growth were essential to achieving fiscal soundness. To this end, the government's task

was to increase potential growth; it would focus on working-style reforms, and proceed

with budget formulation so as to ensure priority-based budgeting that allocated funds to

measures such as investments in human resources and productivity improvements. With

regard to working-style reforms, based on the Action Plan for the Realization of Work

Style Reform, the government would submit related bills to the Diet at an early date. It

also would promptly try to revise the relevant act to incorporate establishment of a

Sophisticated Professional System and revision to the Discretionary Working System

for Management-Related Work -- both of which would contribute to productivity

improvements.

(3) The government expected the Bank to steadily work toward achieving the price stability

target of 2 percent, in light of developments in economic activity and prices, as well as

financial conditions. It deemed it important that the Bank fully explain to the public its

19


-----

thinking behind the change in the projected timing of achieving the price stability target

of 2 percent.

**V. Votes**

**A. Vote on the Chairman's Policy Proposal on the Guideline for Market Operations**

Based on the above discussions, to reflect the majority view of the members, the

chairman formulated the following proposal and put it to a vote.

The Policy Board decided the proposal by a majority vote.

**The Chairman's Policy Proposal on the Guideline for Market Operations:**

The guideline for market operations for the intermeeting period will be as follows.

1. The Bank will apply a negative interest rate of minus 0.1 percent to the

Policy-Rate Balances in current accounts held by financial institutions at the

Bank.

2. The Bank will purchase JGBs so that 10-year JGB yields will remain at

around zero percent. With regard to the amount of JGBs to be purchased, the

Bank will conduct purchases at more or less the current pace -- an annual pace

of increase in the amount outstanding of its JGB holdings of about 80 trillion

yen -- aiming to achieve the target level of the long-term interest rate specified

by the guideline.

Votes for the proposal: Mr. H. Kuroda, Mr. K. Iwata, Mr. H. Nakaso, Mr. Y.

Harada, Mr. Y. Funo, Mr. M. Sakurai, and Ms. T. Masai.

Votes against the proposal: Mr. T. Sato and Mr. T. Kiuchi.

Mr. T. Sato dissented, considering that setting the short-term policy interest rate at

minus 0.1 percent and the target level of 10-year JGB yields at around 0 percent could lead

to holding JGB yields in negative territory up to a maturity of 10 years and thus could have

an adverse impact on the functioning of financial intermediation. Mr. T. Kiuchi dissented,

considering that, with a view to maintaining the stability of the JGB market and the

20


-----

functioning of financial intermediation, (1) the short-term policy interest rate should be set

at 0.1 percent and (2) the adoption of a target level for a long-term interest rate was not

appropriate because it would entail a risk that the Bank might need to further increase the

pace of its JGB purchases.

**B. Vote on the Chairman's Policy Proposal on the Guideline for Asset Purchases**

To reflect the majority view of the members, the chairman formulated the

following proposal to implement the guideline for asset purchases for the intermeeting

period and put it to a vote: (1) to purchase ETFs and J-REITs so that their amounts

outstanding would increase at annual paces of about 6 trillion yen and about 90 billion yen,

respectively, and (2) to maintain the amounts outstanding of CP and corporate bonds at

about 2.2 trillion yen and about 3.2 trillion yen, respectively.

The Policy Board decided the proposal by a majority vote.

Votes for the proposal: Mr. H. Kuroda, Mr. K. Iwata, Mr. H. Nakaso, Mr. Y.

Harada, Mr. Y. Funo, Mr. M. Sakurai, and Ms. T. Masai.

Votes against the proposal: Mr. T. Sato and Mr. T. Kiuchi.

Mr. T. Sato dissented, considering that ETF purchases of about 6 trillion yen

annually would be excessive in light of their adverse impact on the pricing mechanism in

the stock market and the Bank's financial soundness.

**C. Vote on Mr. T. Kiuchi's Policy Proposal on the Guideline for Asset Purchases**

Mr. T. Kiuchi proposed that the Bank use amounts of asset purchases as its

operating targets and that the guidelines for asset purchases for the intermeeting period be

set as follows: (1) to purchase JGBs so that their amount outstanding would increase at an

annual pace of about 45 trillion yen, and to make the average remaining maturity of the

Bank's JGB purchases about seven years; (2) to purchase ETFs and J-REITs so that their

amounts outstanding would increase at annual paces of about 1 trillion yen and about 30

billion yen, respectively; and (3) to maintain the amounts outstanding of CP and corporate

21


-----

bonds at about 2.2 trillion yen and about 3.2 trillion yen, respectively. The proposal was

then put to a vote.

The proposal was defeated by a majority vote.

Votes for the proposal: Mr. T. Kiuchi.

Votes against the proposal: Mr. H. Kuroda, Mr. K. Iwata, Mr. H. Nakaso, Mr. T.

Sato, Mr. Y. Harada, Mr. Y. Funo, Mr. M. Sakurai, and Ms. T. Masai.

**D. Vote on the Statement on Monetary Policy**

On the basis of the above results of votes, the chairman formulated the Statement

on Monetary Policy and put it to a vote. The Policy Board decided the text by a unanimous

vote. It was confirmed that the statement would be released immediately after the meeting

(see Attachment).

**VI. Discussion regarding the Outlook Report**

Members discussed the draft of "The Bank's View" in the July 2017 Outlook

Report (consisting of "The Bank's View" and "The Background") and formed a majority

view.

Mr. T. Sato, however, formulated a proposal to make the following changes. First,

with regard to the outlook for prices, he proposed deleting the expression that "the timing of

the year-on-year rate of change in the CPI reaching around 2 percent will likely be around

fiscal 2019." Second, with regard to the future conduct of monetary policy, he proposed

deleting the expression that the Bank "will continue expanding the monetary base until the

year-on-year rate of increase in the observed CPI (all items less fresh food) exceeds 2

percent and stays above the target in a stable manner." The proposal was then put to a vote.

The proposal was defeated by a majority vote.

Votes for the proposal: Mr. T. Sato.

Votes against the proposal: Mr. H. Kuroda, Mr. K. Iwata, Mr. H. Nakaso, Mr. T.

Kiuchi, Mr. Y. Harada, Mr. Y. Funo, Mr. M. Sakurai, and Ms. T. Masai.

22


-----

Mr. T. Kiuchi formulated a proposal to make the following changes. First, with

regard to the outlook for economic activity, he proposed a new expression that the economy

"is likely to continue expanding, mainly through fiscal 2018." Second, with regard to the

outlook for prices, he proposed a new expression that the year-on-year rate of change in the

CPI "is likely to increase very moderately for some time." Third, with regard to medium- to

long-term inflation expectations, he proposed a new expression that they "are likely to

remain stable at more or less the current level." Fourth, with regard to the outlook for the

output gap, he proposed a new expression that it "is likely to remain more or less at a

neutral level." Fifth, with regard to the future conduct of monetary policy, he proposed a

new expression that "the Bank will, with the aim to achieve the price stability target of 2

percent in the medium to long term, continue to provide consistent support from the

financial side. It will continue with asset purchases and a virtually zero short-term interest

rate policy as long as each of these policy measures is deemed appropriate under flexible

policy conduct based on the examination from the two perspectives of the monetary policy

framework -- that is, (1) the outlook deemed most likely by the Bank and (2) risks

considered most relevant to the conduct of monetary policy from a medium- to long-term

perspective." The proposal was then put to a vote.

The proposal was defeated by a majority vote.

Votes for the proposal: Mr. T. Kiuchi.

Votes against the proposal: Mr. H. Kuroda, Mr. K. Iwata, Mr. H. Nakaso, Mr. T.

Sato, Mr. Y. Harada, Mr. Y. Funo, Mr. M. Sakurai, and Ms. T. Masai.

To reflect the majority view, the chairman formulated a proposal on "The Bank's

View" and put it to a vote.

The Policy Board decided the text of "The Bank's View" by a majority vote. It was

confirmed that "The Bank's View" would be released immediately after the meeting on July

20, 2017 and the whole report would be made public on July 21.

23


-----

Votes for the proposal: Mr. H. Kuroda, Mr. K. Iwata, Mr. H. Nakaso, Mr. Y.

Harada, Mr. Y. Funo, Mr. M. Sakurai, and Ms. T. Masai.

Votes against the proposal: Mr. T. Sato and Mr. T. Kiuchi.

**VII. Approval of the Minutes of the Monetary Policy Meeting**

The Policy Board approved unanimously the minutes of the Monetary Policy

Meeting of June 15 and 16, 2017 for release on July 25.

24


-----

Attachment

July 20, 2017

Bank of Japan

**Statement on Monetary Policy**

At the Monetary Policy Meeting held today, the Policy Board of the Bank of Japan decided

upon the following.

(1) Yield curve control

The Bank decided, by a 7-2 majority vote, to set the following guideline for market

operations for the intermeeting period.[ [Note 1]]

The short-term policy interest rate:

The Bank will apply a negative interest rate of minus 0.1 percent to the Policy-Rate

Balances in current accounts held by financial institutions at the Bank.

The long-term interest rate:

The Bank will purchase Japanese government bonds (JGBs) so that 10-year JGB

yields will remain at around zero percent. With regard to the amount of JGBs to be

purchased, the Bank will conduct purchases at more or less the current pace -- an annual

pace of increase in the amount outstanding of its JGB holdings of about 80 trillion yen -
aiming to achieve the target level of the long-term interest rate specified by the guideline.

(2) Guidelines for asset purchases

With regard to asset purchases other than JGB purchases, the Bank decided, by a 7-2

majority vote, to set the following guidelines.[ [Note 2]]

a) The Bank will purchase exchange-traded funds (ETFs) and Japan real estate

investment trusts (J-REITs) so that their amounts outstanding will increase at annual

paces of about 6 trillion yen and about 90 billion yen, respectively.

b) As for CP and corporate bonds, the Bank will maintain their amounts outstanding at

about 2.2 trillion yen and about 3.2 trillion yen, respectively.

25


-----

[Note 1] Voting for the action: Mr. H. Kuroda, Mr. K. Iwata, Mr. H. Nakaso, Mr. Y. Harada, Mr. Y. Funo,

Mr. M. Sakurai, and Ms. T. Masai. Voting against the action: Mr. T. Sato and Mr. T. Kiuchi.
Mr. T. Sato dissented, considering that setting the short-term policy interest rate at minus 0.1 percent
and the target level of 10-year JGB yields at around 0 percent could lead to holding JGB yields in
negative territory up to a maturity of 10 years and thus could have an adverse impact on the
functioning of financial intermediation. Mr. T. Kiuchi dissented, considering that, with a view to
maintaining the stability of the JGB market and the functioning of financial intermediation, (1) the
short-term policy interest rate should be set at 0.1 percent and (2) the adoption of a target level for a
long-term interest rate was not appropriate because it would entail a risk that the Bank might need to
further increase the pace of its JGB purchases.

[Note 2] Voting for the action: Mr. H. Kuroda, Mr. K. Iwata, Mr. H. Nakaso, Mr. Y. Harada, Mr. Y. Funo,

Mr. M. Sakurai, and Ms. T. Masai. Voting against the action: Mr. T. Sato and Mr. T. Kiuchi.
Mr. T. Sato dissented, considering that ETF purchases of about 6 trillion yen annually would be
excessive in light of their adverse impact on the pricing mechanism in the stock market and the
Bank's financial soundness. Mr. T. Kiuchi proposed that the Bank use amounts of asset purchases as
its operating targets and set the guidelines for asset purchases as follows: the Bank would purchase
JGBs so that their amount outstanding would increase at an annual pace of about 45 trillion yen,
purchase ETFs so that their amount outstanding would increase at an annual pace of about 1 trillion
yen, and so on. The proposal was defeated by a majority vote.

26


-----

