Not to be released until 8:50 a.m.
Japan Standard Time on Friday,
January 26, 2018.

January 26, 2018

Bank of Japan

# Minutes of the
 Monetary Policy Meeting

## on December 20 and 21, 2017

(English translation prepared by the Bank's staff based on the Japanese original)


-----

Please contact the Bank of Japan at the address below in advance to request permission

when reproducing or copying the content of this document for commercial purposes.

Secretariat of the Policy Board, Bank of Japan

P.O. Box 30, Nihonbashi, Tokyo 103-8660, Japan

Please credit the source when quoting, reproducing, or copying the content of this

document.


-----

A Monetary Policy Meeting of the Bank of Japan Policy Board was held in the

Head Office of the Bank of Japan in Tokyo on Wednesday, December 20, 2017, from 2:00

p.m. to 3:27 p.m., and on Thursday, December 21, from 9:00 a.m. to 11:39 a.m.[1]

**Policy Board Members Present**

**Mr. H. Kuroda, Chairman, Governor of the Bank of Japan**

**Mr. K. Iwata, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Japan**

**Mr. H. Nakaso, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Japan**

**Mr. Y. Harada**

**Mr. Y. Funo**

**Mr. M. Sakurai**

**Ms. T. Masai**

**Mr. H. Suzuki**

**Mr. G. Kataoka**

Government Representatives Present

Mr. M. Kihara, State Minister of Finance, Ministry of Finance[2]

Mr. T. Kabe, Deputy Vice Minister for Policy Planning and Coordination, Ministry of

Finance[3]

Mr. T. Ochi, State Minister of Cabinet Office, Cabinet Office[2 ]

Mr. M. Maekawa, Vice Minister for Policy Coordination, Cabinet Office[3 ]

Reporting Staff

Mr. M. Amamiya, Executive Director

Mr. S. Kuwabara, Executive Director

Mr. E. Maeda, Executive Director (Assistant Governor)

Mr. T. Kato, Director-General, Monetary Affairs Department

1 The minutes of this meeting were approved by the Policy Board at the Monetary Policy Meeting
held on January 22 and 23, 2018 as "a document describing an outline of the discussion at the
meeting" stipulated in Article 20, paragraph 1 of the Bank of Japan Act of 1997. Those present are
referred to by their titles at the time of the meeting.
2 Messrs. M. Kihara and T. Ochi were present on December 21.
3 Messrs. T. Kabe and M. Maekawa were present on December 20.

1


-----

Mr. A. Okuno, Head of Policy Planning Division, Monetary Affairs Department

Mr. S. Shimizu, Director-General, Financial Markets Department

Mr. T. Sekine, Director-General, Research and Statistics Department

Mr. H. Ichiue, Head of Economic Research Division, Research and Statistics Department

Mr. Y. Nakata, Director-General, International Department

Secretariat of the Monetary Policy Meeting

Mr. Y. Onozawa, Director-General, Secretariat of the Policy Board

Mr. H. Nakamoto, Director, Deputy Head of Planning and Coordination Division,

Secretariat of the Policy Board

Mr. K. Yoshimura, Senior Economist, Monetary Affairs Department

Mr. J. Ide, Senior Economist, Monetary Affairs Department

2


-----

**I. Summary of Staff Reports on Economic and Financial Developments[4]**

**A. Money Market Operations in the Intermeeting Period**

The Bank, in accordance with the short-term policy interest rate of minus 0.1

percent and the target level of the long-term interest rate, both decided at the previous

meeting on October 30 and 31, 2017, had been providing funds through purchases of

Japanese government bonds (JGBs) and other measures.[5] In this situation, 10-year JGB

yields had been at around 0 percent, and the shape of the JGB yield curve had been

consistent with the guideline for market operations.

**B. Recent Developments in Financial Markets**

In the money market, interest rates on both overnight and term instruments had

generally been in negative territory. The uncollateralized overnight call rate had been in the

range of around minus 0.03 to minus 0.06 percent. As for interest rates on term instruments,

yields on three-month treasury discount bills (T-Bills) had been in the range of minus 0.15

to minus 0.20 percent recently.

The Nikkei 225 Stock Average remained in its highest range since the start of 2017,

mainly owing to solid corporate profits, and was moving in the range of 22,500-23,000 yen

recently. In the foreign exchange market, the yen had appreciated somewhat against the U.S.

dollar temporarily, but had generally been more or less flat throughout the intermeeting

period. Meanwhile, it had depreciated somewhat against the euro.

**C. Overseas Economic and Financial Developments**

Overseas economies continued to grow at a moderate pace on the whole.

The U.S. economy continued to recover firmly, mainly in household spending,

owing to a steady improvement in the employment and income situation. Exports had been

on a moderate increasing trend, while business fixed investment also continued to pick up.

As for prices, both the year-on-year rate of increase in the personal consumption

expenditure (PCE) deflator for all items and that for all items excluding food and energy

had been at around 1.5 percent.

4 Reports were made based on information available at the time of the meeting.
5 The target level of the long-term interest rate was as follows:

The Bank will purchase JGBs so that 10-year JGB yields will remain at around zero

percent.

3


-----

The European economy continued to recover steadily. Exports had been increasing

moderately. Private consumption had been on an increasing trend, partly supported by

improvements in the labor market and consumer sentiment, while business fixed investment

also had been on a moderate increasing trend. With regard to prices, the year-on-year rate of

change in the Harmonized Index of Consumer Prices (HICP) for all items had been at

around 1.5 percent, and that for all items excluding energy and unprocessed food had been

in the range of 1.0-1.5 percent. Meanwhile, the pace of economic recovery in the United

Kingdom had been slowing as the rise in prices had been weighing on private consumption.

With regard to emerging economies, the Chinese economy continued to see stable

growth on the whole, partly due to the effects of authorities' measures to support economic

activity. As for prices, the year-on-year rate of increase in the consumer price index (CPI)

had been in the range of 1.5-2.0 percent. In the NIEs and the ASEAN countries, domestic

demand had been resilient, as business and household sentiment had improved, with exports

being on an increasing trend. Economic activity in Russia and Brazil had been recovering

moderately, mainly on the back of the decline in their inflation rates. In India, an upheaval

in the economy due to the effects of the introduction of the Goods and Services Tax (GST)

was coming to an end, and the economy was recovering moderately.

With respect to overseas financial markets, although U.S. long-term interest rates

had declined temporarily, reflecting uncertainties surrounding the political situation in the

United States, these rates had been generally unchanged throughout the intermeeting period,

with factors such as expectations for U.S. tax reform exerting upward pressure on them.

Meanwhile, stock prices in advanced economies had been at high levels, mainly reflecting

solid corporate earnings and expectations for U.S. tax reform, and capital inflows to

emerging economies continued.

**D. Economic and Financial Developments in Japan**

1. Economic developments

Japan's economy was expanding moderately, with a virtuous cycle from income to

spending operating.

Exports had been on an increasing trend on the back of the growth in overseas

economies. Those to advanced economies continued on their increasing trend when

fluctuations were smoothed out; those to emerging economies had picked up for a wide

4


-----

range of items including electronic parts, intermediate goods, and capital goods to Asia.

Exports were expected to continue their moderate increasing trend, especially for IT-related

goods and capital goods.

Public investment had been more or less flat, remaining at a relatively high level.

It was likely to start declining as the positive effects resulting from the second

supplementary budget for fiscal 2016 diminished, and then maintain a relatively high level

underpinned by Olympic Games-related construction.

Business fixed investment continued on an increasing trend with corporate profits

and business sentiment improving. Looking at the _Financial Statements Statistics of_

_Corporations by Industry, Quarterly_ (FSSC), the ratio of current profits to sales for the

July-September quarter of 2017 had stayed at around 6 percent, a historically high level,

supported in part by solid domestic demand and the growth in overseas economies.

According to the second preliminary estimate of GDP for the July-September quarter, the

growth rate of real business fixed investment had marked 1.1 percent on a

quarter-on-quarter basis, representing a fourth consecutive quarterly increase. The

December 2017 Tankan (Short-Term Economic Survey of Enterprises in Japan) showed that

the year-on-year rate of change in business fixed investment plans for fiscal 2017 had

clearly exceeded the past average for the December _Tankan surveys during the period of_

fiscal 2004-2016. Machinery orders and construction starts in terms of planned expenses for

private and nondwelling construction -- both of which were leading indicators of business

fixed investment -- continued on an increasing trend, albeit with monthly fluctuations.

Business fixed investment was likely to continue increasing, mainly on the back of an

improvement in corporate profits, accommodative financial conditions, and heightened

growth expectations.

As for the employment and income situation, supply-demand conditions in the

labor market continued to tighten steadily and employee income had increased moderately.

The active job openings-to-applicants ratio had followed a steady improving trend, and the

unemployment rate had declined to the range of 2.5-3.0 percent.

Private consumption had been increasing moderately, albeit with fluctuations,

against the background of steady improvement in the employment and income situation.

The consumption activity index (CAI) -- calculated by combining various sales and

supply-side statistics -- had been more or less flat on the whole, although there had been a

5


-----

decline in durable goods recently that was due mainly to supply factors for automobiles and

mobile phones. Private consumption was expected to follow a moderate increasing trend,

supported by an increase in employee income and the wealth effects stemming from the rise

in stock prices, as well as replacement demand for durable goods.

Housing investment had been more or less flat.

Industrial production had been on an increasing trend against the background of

rises in demand at home and abroad. It was likely to continue to increase firmly for the time

being on the back of the rises in demand at home and abroad.

As for prices, the rate of increase in the producer price index (PPI) relative to three

months earlier -- adjusted for the effects of seasonal changes in electricity rates -- continued

to accelerate, reflecting developments in international commodity prices and foreign

exchange rates. The year-on-year rate of change in the CPI for all items less fresh food was

in the range of 0.5-1.0 percent, while the rate of change for all items less fresh food and

energy remained slightly positive. With regard to the outlook, the year-on-year rate of

change in the CPI (all items less fresh food) was likely to continue on an uptrend and

increase toward 2 percent, mainly on the back of an improvement in the output gap and a

rise in medium- to long-term inflation expectations.

2. Financial environment

Financial conditions were highly accommodative.

Inflation expectations remained in a weakening phase. Real long-term interest

rates -- calculated as long-term interest rates minus medium- to long-term inflation

expectations -- had been negative.

Firms' funding costs had been hovering at extremely low levels. With regard to

credit supply, financial institutions' lending attitudes -- as perceived by firms -- had been

highly accommodative. Issuing conditions for CP and corporate bonds had been favorable.

Firms' credit demand continued to increase, such as for funds related to mergers and

acquisitions, as well as for those for business fixed investment. Against this backdrop, the

year-on-year rate of increase in the amount outstanding of bank lending had been in the

range of 2.5-3.0 percent. The year-on-year rate of increase in the amount outstanding of CP

and corporate bonds had been at a relatively high level. Firms' financial positions had been

favorable.

6


-----

The monetary base had been increasing at a high year-on-year growth rate in the

range of 10-15 percent. The year-on-year rate of growth in the money stock had been at

around 4 percent.

**II. Summary of Discussions by the Policy Board on Economic and Financial**

**Developments**

**A. Economic Developments**

Regarding global financial markets, members shared the recognition that investors

had generally maintained their risk-taking stance, as stock prices in advanced economies

had been at high levels, mainly against the backdrop of solid corporate profits, and capital

inflows continued in many emerging economies. With regard to U.S. and European

long-term interest rates, a few members expressed the view that these were generally

unchanged, and in a stable manner recently, and that the policy rate hike by the Federal

Reserve in the United States in December 2017 had been calmly received by market

participants. A few other members pointed out that, as the background to the recent

flattening of the yield curve in the United States, there was a possibility that term premiums

had declined due to purchases of long-term U.S. Treasuries by the Federal Reserve and that

market participants had become relatively cautious about the outlook for U.S. economic

growth and inflation expectations. One member referred to the need to continue paying

close attention to the possibility that interest rates would rise with inflation gaining

momentum in the United States as well as other economies globally, since this could also

affect capital flows of emerging economies.

With respect to overseas economies, members shared the recognition that these

continued to grow at a moderate pace on the whole. They agreed that, amid trade activity

having become active globally, advanced economies continued to recover steadily and

emerging economies had been recovering moderately overall. One member noted that, as a

pick-up in emerging economies -- which had been lagging behind that in advanced

economies -- had been observed since around the second half of 2016, economies

worldwide seemed to be starting to see synchronous recovery. As for the outlook, members

concurred that overseas economies were likely to continue growing at a moderate pace, as

advanced economies kept growing steadily and a recovery in emerging economies took hold

7


-----

on the back of the steady growth in advanced economies as well as the effects of policy

measures taken by emerging economies.

With regard to developments in overseas economies by region, members

concurred that the U.S. economy continued to recover firmly, mainly in household spending,

as seen, for example, in the fact that the real GDP growth rate on an annualized

quarter-on-quarter basis for the July-September quarter of 2017 was 3.3 percent, marking

the highest level in three years. One member expressed the opinion that the economy

continued to grow in a well-balanced manner, including in the corporate sector, given the

increasing trend in positive contributions of business fixed investment and net exports to

real GDP growth. As for the outlook, members shared the view that the economy was likely

to continue to see firm growth driven by domestic private demand. Some members noted

that tax reform including corporate tax cuts was likely to exert upward pressure on U.S.

economic growth, but that its impact and timing continued to warrant due attention.

Members shared the recognition that the European economy continued to recover

steadily, with both domestic and external demand increasing moderately. One member

pointed out that the European Central Bank's December 2017 staff projections for economic

growth for 2018 had been revised upward from the September projections. This member

then expressed the view that European economic growth was higher than had been expected.

A different member added that recently released indicators had shown further improvements

in business sentiment and consumer confidence. As for the outlook, members concurred that

the European economy would likely continue to recover moderately, while factors such as

uncertainty regarding negotiations on the United Kingdom's exit from the European Union

(EU) were likely to weigh on economic activity.

Members shared the recognition that emerging economies had been recovering

moderately overall. They agreed that, of these economies, the Chinese economy continued

to see stable growth on the whole, although the pace had slowed somewhat compared to the

relatively high growth in the July-September quarter. As background to this stable growth, a

few members pointed to authorities' timely responses to economic fluctuations, and a

different member referred to a high level of new car sales and a rapid spread of IT business.

Members concurred that, in the NIEs and the ASEAN countries, with exports being on an

increasing trend, domestic demand also had been resilient, mainly reflecting improvements

in business and household sentiment and the effects of economic stimulus measures. One

8


-----

member expressed the recognition that commodity-exporting economies such as Russia and

Brazil had been improving steadily, shifting from just an initial pick-up to a moderate

recovery, mainly on the back of the decline in their inflation rates and the effects of

monetary easing measures. As for the outlook, members agreed that a recovery in emerging

economies was likely to take hold, due mainly to the spread of the effects of steady growth

in advanced economies and the effects of economic stimulus measures taken by emerging

economies. They shared the view that the Chinese economy was likely to broadly follow a

stable growth path as authorities conducted fiscal and monetary policy in a timely manner.

Members shared the recognition that factors such as U.S. economic policies,

negotiations on the United Kingdom's exit from the EU, and geopolitical risks continued to

be regarded as risks to developments in overseas economies. As for geopolitical risks, some

members added that uncertainties were high not only over the situation in East Asia but also

over that in the Middle East, the latter of which could affect commodity prices. A few

members said that, in a situation where U.S. economic policies were uncertain, it was

necessary to thoroughly monitor whether long-term interest rates and stock prices in the

country might become highly volatile, and whether this would affect financial markets and

the global economy. Meanwhile, one member expressed the view that uncertainties

regarding overseas economies had waned compared to a while ago, amid, for example, a

move forward in discussions on U.S. tax reform and some progress in negotiations on the

United Kingdom's exit from the EU, as well as recovery in emerging and

commodity-exporting economies.

Based on the above deliberations on economic and financial conditions abroad,

members discussed the state of Japan's economy.

With regard to economic activity, members agreed that the economy was

expanding moderately, with a virtuous cycle from income to spending operating. As for

developments in the corporate sector, they shared the recognition that exports had been on

an increasing trend and that business fixed investment also continued on an increasing trend,

with corporate profits being at a historically high level. Some members added that this

recognition was consistent with the fact that the real GDP growth rate for the

July-September quarter of 2017 registered relatively high growth of 2.5 percent on an

annualized quarter-on-quarter basis, driven by exports and business fixed investment.

Regarding the household sector, members shared the view that private consumption had

9


-----

been increasing moderately, albeit with fluctuations, against the background of steady

improvement in the employment and income situation. Based on these discussions, some

members noted that Japan's economy had been growing in a well-balanced manner in both

the corporate and household sectors. One member expressed the view that the ongoing

economic growth was attributable not only to cyclical factors on the demand side, but also

to an increase in the economy's medium- to long-term growth potential through the rises in

productivity and the labor force participation rate. As for the outlook for the economy,

members concurred that Japan's economy was likely to continue its moderate expansion. On

a more specific note, they shared the recognition that domestic demand was likely to follow

an uptrend, with a virtuous cycle from income to spending being maintained in both the

corporate and household sectors, on the back of highly accommodative financial conditions

and underpinnings through the government's past stimulus measures.

Members shared the recognition that exports had been on an increasing trend on

the back of the growth in overseas economies. One member added that the year-on-year

growth rate of the world trade volume, which had declined to around 1 percent earlier, had

recovered to the range of 4.0-5.0 percent recently, and that this had been exerting positive

effects on Japan's exports. As for the outlook, members concurred that exports would likely

continue their moderate increasing trend for the time being, with the global economy

continuing to grow at a moderate pace.

As for public investment, members shared the recognition that the real public fixed

capital formation had declined for the July-September quarter, after having marked a

relatively large increase for the April-June quarter due to progress with implementation of

the second supplementary budget for fiscal 2016, but that such developments were in line

with the initial projection. On this basis, as for the assessment of the current state of public

investment, they agreed that it had been more or less flat, remaining at a relatively high

level.

Members concurred that business fixed investment continued on an increasing

trend with corporate profits and business sentiment improving. As reasons for revising the

Bank's assessment upward from the previous one stating that business fixed investment "has

been on a moderate increasing trend," some members noted that the quarter-on-quarter

growth rate of real business fixed investment on a GDP basis for the July-September quarter

had been revised upward to 1.1 percent, marking a continued clear increase following 1.2

10


-----

percent for the April-June quarter. One member pointed out that, in the December Tankan,

with business sentiment improving, the rate of increase in business fixed investment plans

had been revised upward further from that of September. Regarding the outlook, members

agreed that business fixed investment was likely to continue increasing, mainly on the back

of accommodative financial conditions and heightened growth expectations. One member

expressed the view that, for the time being, it was highly likely that Japan's exports would

increase, supported by tailwinds of recovery in world trade, thereby leading to an increase

in domestic business fixed investment. One member was of the view that, while the ratio of

cash and deposit holdings to total assets at large firms had not been at an excessively high

level, they had been spending their funds on overseas investment rather than on domestic

business fixed investment as cross-border mergers and acquisitions in particular had been

contributing to an increase in their total assets.

As for the employment and income situation, members shared the recognition that

supply-demand conditions in the labor market continued to tighten steadily and employee

income had increased moderately. One member pointed out that labor shortages had been

prevailing nationwide -- despite varying degrees among regions -- with business sentiment

improving. With regard to the outlook, members shared the view that employee income was

likely to continue to increase moderately as labor market conditions kept tightening steadily

and corporate profits improved. One member said that, although there were views that the

increasing use of robotic process automation (RPA) and artificial intelligence (AI) could

ease labor market conditions, it was possible for them to tighten further because, amid

expectations of a decrease in the labor force, firms could increase their need for new

employees to provide new products and services brought about through innovation and to

make up for a reduction in overtime work hours under working-style reforms. Meanwhile,

many members noted that the recent labor shortage continued to promote firms' efforts to

raise labor productivity -- for example, through labor-saving investment and streamlining of

their business processes. One member then expressed the view that, in order to further drive

forward firms' investment in human capital and software, it would be effective to remove

regulations restricting competition and thereby encourage turnover of firms, and that real

wages would increase only after labor productivity rose through these initiatives. One

member pointed out that, with the prolonged shortage of demand and deflation, the labor

force participation rate had declined continuously, and firms' excessive services and price

11


-----

cuts had resulted in constraining productivity growth. This member then said that these

sorts of hysteresis effects had been waning against the background of the recent labor

shortage, and expressed the opinion that, if Japan's medium- to long-term growth potential

increased further with the waning of such effects, people's deflationary mindset and concern

over the future would diminish gradually.

Members shared the recognition that private consumption had been increasing

moderately, albeit with fluctuations. Many members agreed that, although relative weakness

had been observed in some indicators, due in part to the bad weather conditions in summer

2017, there was no significant change in the improving trend in private consumption, with

the employment and income situation improving steadily. In relation to this, some members

said that, recently, services consumption had been increasing firmly and indicators of

consumer confidence had been improving steadily. On the other hand, one member

expressed the view that household spending had been restrained by an expectation that the

burden to be borne by the public in the future was likely to increase in various ways,

including through the consumption tax hike scheduled in 2019. In the outlook, members

agreed that private consumption was likely to follow a moderate increasing trend, supported

by an increase in employee income and the wealth effects stemming from the rise in stock

prices, as well as replacement demand for durable goods. One member presented a view

that, in 2018, private consumption was likely to be firm as the rates of growth in wages and

salaries would probably rise further, in light of the situation of labor shortages and high

levels of corporate profits. A different member commented that, in order for the economy to

grow in a well-balanced manner, it was important for private consumption to become a

driving force of the growth, and therefore it was worth paying attention to the extent to

which consumption would improve firmly going forward amid the continued improving

trend in consumer sentiment.

Members shared the recognition that housing investment had been more or less

flat.

Members shared the view that industrial production had been on an increasing

trend against the background of rises in demand at home and abroad. Regarding the outlook,

they agreed that industrial production was likely to continue to increase firmly for the time

being on the back of the rises in demand at home and abroad.

12


-----

As for prices, members concurred that the year-on-year rate of change in the CPI

for all items less fresh food was in the range of 0.5-1.0 percent, while the rate of change for

all items less fresh food and energy remained slightly positive, partly as price rises by firms

continued to be limited. Most members shared the recognition that prices had been

relatively weak compared to the steady tightening of labor market conditions amid the

moderate expansion of the economy. A few members noted that media reports on price rises

had been increasing steadily, such as that prices of some standard and leading products in

food and dining-out industries had been raised for the first time in more than a decade.

However, these members continued that these actions taken by individual firms had not yet

been vigorous enough to influence price indices. With regard to this situation, some

members pointed out that many firms continued to avoid passing a rise in labor costs on to

prices by making labor-saving investment and other efforts. One member added that price

reductions were still being made at large retailers, for example, and that the effects of

intensified competition with e-commerce business were not negligible.

In terms of the outlook for prices, most members shared the view that the

year-on-year rate of change in the CPI was likely to continue on an uptrend and increase

toward 2 percent, mainly on the back of the improvement in the output gap and the rise in

medium- to long-term inflation expectations. A few members pointed out that, in addition to

the rises in services prices led by wage increases, prices of goods traded among firms had

risen, reflecting increases in commodity prices such as crude oil prices, and that these

developments might feed through into consumer prices. However, one of these members

added that consumers' responsiveness to prices -- such as those of daily necessities -
remained high; thus, it still might take more time for observed inflation to rise. A different

member also noted that an atmosphere in which consumers accepted a rise in prices was not

yet fully realized, and thus there remained considerable uncertainties as to whether an

increasing number of firms would shift their stances toward raising prices. A few members

then referred to the fact that the government recently had laid out measures such as tax cuts

for firms that raised wages proactively. These members expressed the view that these

initiatives could lead to a breakthrough for the current situation by simultaneously pushing

many firms that had been hesitant to raise wages toward changing their stances, as well as

to an increase in consumers' acceptance of price rises through growth in their income.

13


-----

Meanwhile, members shared the recognition that inflation expectations remained

in a weakening phase. One member said that short-term inflation expectations had stopped

declining on the whole. This member also noted that, regarding medium- to long-term

inflation expectations, some indicators showed an uptrend but such developments were still

limited. A different member pointed out that, since there remained an excess supply

capacity in capital stock and the labor market, the inflation rate excluding the effects of an

increase in energy prices had not risen and the dynamics through which inflation

expectations rose in an adaptive manner had not been clearly in place. However, many

members expressed the view that people's inflation expectations were likely to increase

through the adaptive expectation formation mechanism as the observed inflation rates had

been rising gradually recently and as prices were likely to increase going forward as well,

mainly on the back of the improvement in the output gap.

**B. Financial Developments**

Members concurred that financial conditions in Japan were highly accommodative.

They shared the view that, under Quantitative and Qualitative Monetary Easing (QQE) with

Yield Curve Control, firms' funding costs had been hovering at extremely low levels and

financial institutions' lending attitudes as perceived by both large and small firms continued

to be proactive. One member expressed the recognition that the pace of increase in lending

by regional banks remained relatively high, while that in lending by city banks to large

firms had decelerated compared to a while ago, which was largely attributable to the recent

absence of lending related to large-scale mergers and acquisitions.

**III. Summary of Discussions on Monetary Policy for the Immediate Future**

Based on the above assessment of economic and financial developments, members

discussed monetary policy for the immediate future.

With regard to conducting monetary policy, most members shared the recognition

that, although it was necessary to carefully examine the fact that firms' wage- and

price-setting stance remained cautious, the momentum toward achieving the 2 percent price

stability target was being maintained. As background to this, these members noted the

following two points: (1) firms' stance was likely to gradually shift toward raising wages

and prices with the steady improvement in the output gap, and (2) indicators of medium- to

14


-----

long-term inflation expectations had stopped declining, with some indicators showing an

uptrend, and such inflation expectations were likely to rise steadily as further price rises

came to be observed widely. Following this discussion, most members shared the

recognition that it was appropriate for the Bank to persistently pursue powerful monetary

easing under the current guideline for market operations. Many members expressed the

view that, as there was still a long way to go to achieve the price stability target of 2 percent,

it was necessary to maintain the current highly accommodative financial conditions. One

member pointed out that, in South Korea, which had decided on a policy rate hike recently,

the inflation rate had been anchored at around 1.5 percent and the real GDP growth rate had

been above 3 percent on average. This member then said that, even when compared with the

situation in South Korea, it was too early for the Bank of Japan to change its monetary

policy.

In relation to the conduct of monetary policy, one member pointed out that the

current environment of highly accommodative financial conditions provided a good

opportunity to accelerate structural reform and the growth strategy that aimed at unlocking

the potential of human resources in Japan to the fullest extent possible. On this point, a

different member said that, in order to raise productivity, it was necessary to have turnover

of firms brought about, for example, by regulatory reform, but that this often had been

hindered by increases in unemployment. This member then expressed the view that the

current monetary easing policy was also contributing to facilitating productivity growth by

providing economic conditions that could offer new job opportunities for the unemployed.

Members discussed the Bank's basic stance on conducting monetary policy. Some

members pointed out that it was important to continue to conduct a multifaceted monitoring

and assessment of the positive impacts and side effects of the current monetary easing

policy -- including its effects on the functioning of financial intermediation and the financial

system. One of these members expressed the view that, although the functioning of

financial intermediation had not been impaired at this point, the recent situation regarding

profits of banks showed that the effects of the low-interest rate environment on the financial

strength of financial institutions had been accumulating. On the other hand, a different

member said that, looking at the amount outstanding of lending and financial institutions'

lending attitudes, the current highly accommodative financial conditions continued to

strongly support corporate activity in Japan, and the risk of a gradual pullback in the

15


-----

functioning of financial intermediation had not been large so far. One member noted that, in

the course of the inflation rate increasing toward 2 percent and the economy's medium- to

long-term growth potential rising going forward, the effects of monetary easing measures

would be enhanced; therefore, in conducting monetary policy, it would be necessary to take

into account such changes in the environment as well as the side effects of the measures.

One member -- while noting that it was appropriate to maintain the current guideline for

money market operations at this point -- expressed the view that, when it was expected that

economic activity and prices would continue to improve going forward, a situation might

occur where the Bank would need to consider whether adjustments in the level of interest

rates would be necessary under the framework of QQE with Yield Curve Control, including

from the perspective of strengthening the sustainability of the framework. On the other hand,

a different member expressed the view that, when mainly considering the current situation

of economic activity and prices as well as risks to the outlook, the Bank should implement

additional monetary easing measures under the current policy framework to strengthen the

transmission effects of monetary easing on the output gap and inflation expectations,

thereby raising the probability of achieving the price stability target earlier. Meanwhile,

another member said that it was important for the Bank to engage in careful communication,

taking into account a wide range of entities, so that its future conduct of monetary policy

would not trigger unnecessary fluctuations in financial markets.

With respect to yield curve control, members shared the recognition that, since the

previous meeting, the JGB yield curve had been formed smoothly in a manner consistent

with the guideline for market operations. A few members expressed the view that real

interest rates being achieved under the current yield curve control had been well below the

natural rate of interest, strongly supporting the moderate expansion of Japan's economy.

Based on the above discussions, regarding the guideline for market operations for

the intermeeting period, most members expressed the view that it was appropriate for the

Bank to maintain the following guideline. First, as for the short-term policy interest rate, it

would apply a negative interest rate of minus 0.1 percent to the Policy-Rate Balances in

current accounts held by financial institutions at the Bank. Second, as for the long-term

interest rate, the Bank would purchase JGBs so that 10-year JGB yields would remain at

around 0 percent. With regard to the amount of JGBs to be purchased, it would conduct

purchases at more or less the current pace -- an annual pace of increase in the amount

16


-----

outstanding of its JGB holdings of about 80 trillion yen -- aiming to achieve the target level

of the long-term interest rate specified by the guideline.

On this point, one member expressed the opinion that, considering the risk of

weaker growth in Japan's economic activity and prices due to a possible economic

downturn in the United States and the consumption tax hike in Japan that was scheduled for

2019, the Bank should aim to achieve a situation in which the inflation rate would reach 2

percent in fiscal 2018 and overshoot 2 percent in fiscal 2019. This member continued that,

to this end, it was appropriate for the Bank to purchase JGBs so that yields on JGBs with

maturities of 10 years and longer would be broadly lowered.

With regard to asset purchases other than JGB purchases, members shared the

recognition that it was appropriate for the Bank to implement the following guideline for

the intermeeting period. First, it would purchase exchange-traded funds (ETFs) and Japan

real estate investment trusts (J-REITs) so that their amounts outstanding would increase at

annual paces of about 6 trillion yen and about 90 billion yen, respectively. Second, as for CP

and corporate bonds, it would maintain their amounts outstanding at about 2.2 trillion yen

and about 3.2 trillion yen, respectively. On this basis, one member -- while noting that there

was no marked overheating in the market at this point -- said that policy effects and the

possible side effects of the purchases of risky assets including ETFs should be examined

from every angle, given that stock prices and corporate profits had substantially improved

and were expected to continue to develop firmly going forward.

With respect to the Bank's thinking behind its future conduct of monetary policy,

most members shared the view that the Bank would (1) continue with QQE with Yield

Curve Control, aiming to achieve the price stability target of 2 percent, as long as it was

necessary for maintaining that target in a stable manner, (2) continue expanding the

monetary base until the year-on-year rate of increase in the observed CPI (all items less

fresh food) exceeded 2 percent and stayed above the target in a stable manner, and (3) make

policy adjustments as appropriate, taking account of developments in economic activity and

prices as well as financial conditions, with a view to maintaining the momentum toward

achieving the price stability target.

In response to this, one member said that, with a view to reinforcing the

inflation-overshooting commitment, it was appropriate for the Bank to introduce a new

commitment that it would take additional easing measures if -- with regard to the median of

17


-----

the Policy Board members' forecasts of the CPI in the Outlook for Economic Activity and

_Prices (Outlook Report) -- there was a delay in the timing of achieving the price stability_

target due to domestic factors.

**IV. Remarks by Government Representatives**

The representative from the Ministry of Finance made the following remarks.

(1) The budget for fiscal 2018 was planned to be decided at the Cabinet meeting to be held

on December 22, 2017. Therefore, the government was in the process of finalizing the

budget draft for fiscal 2018, with a view to achieving both economic revitalization and

fiscal consolidation, taking into account the Plan for Economic and Fiscal

Revitalization. In addition, it planned to formulate the supplementary budget for fiscal

2017 to properly deal with additional fiscal demand including that regarding disaster

response. The government was working toward a Cabinet decision regarding this

supplementary budget at the same time as the one regarding the budget for fiscal 2018.

(2) The ruling parties had compiled an outline on December 14 for the tax reform in fiscal

2018, which incorporated the following, in order to firmly ensure a growth trajectory

for the Japanese economy: (1) revision of personal income taxation with a view to

supporting workers of all working types; (2) tax measures that would encourage wage

increases and business fixed investment; and (3) the enhanced business succession tax

system to promote succession among small and medium-sized firms. The government

would prepare draft tax codes reflecting this outline.

(3) The government expected the Bank to continue to work toward achieving the price

stability target under QQE with Yield Curve Control, in light of developments in

economic activity and prices, as well as financial conditions.

The representative from the Cabinet Office made the following remarks.

(1) The Japanese economy was on a moderate recovery. In the government's economic

outlook -- approved by the Cabinet on December 19, 2017 -- the real GDP growth rates

for fiscal 2017 and 2018 were projected to be about 1.9 percent and about 1.8 percent,

respectively, which were higher than those in the midyear economic projections

released in July. The rate of increase in consumer prices for fiscal 2018 was projected to

rise to around 1.1 percent, reflecting the tightening in demand and supply conditions

18


-----

with the progress in economic recovery. In assessing price developments, it was

important to comprehensively examine a wide range of price indicators, including the

GDP deflator.

(2) The New Economic Policy Package was decided by the Cabinet on December 8. The

government would tackle the enormous challenge of the declining birth rate and aging

population by promoting "Supply System Innovation" and "Human Resources

Development" as two wheels of a cart. To achieve "Supply System Innovation," it

would thoroughly ensure that the record-high level of corporate profits would lead to

wage increases and business fixed investment by fiscal 2020. While "Human Resources

Development" was a challenge for the longer term, the government would establish a

foundation by fiscal 2020 for new frameworks that were not constrained by

conventional systems or practices.

(3) The government expected the Bank to work steadily toward achieving the price stability

target of 2 percent, in light of developments in economic activity and prices, as well as

financial conditions.

**V. Votes**

**A. Vote on the Guideline for Market Operations**

Based on the above discussions, to reflect the majority view of the members, the

chairman formulated the following proposal and put it to a vote.

The Policy Board decided the proposal by a majority vote.

**The Chairman's Policy Proposal on the Guideline for Market Operations:**

The guideline for market operations for the intermeeting period will be as follows.

1. The Bank will apply a negative interest rate of minus 0.1 percent to the

Policy-Rate Balances in current accounts held by financial institutions at the

Bank.

2. The Bank will purchase JGBs so that 10-year JGB yields will remain at

around zero percent. With regard to the amount of JGBs to be purchased, the

Bank will conduct purchases at more or less the current pace -- an annual pace

19


-----

of increase in the amount outstanding of its JGB holdings of about 80 trillion

yen -- aiming to achieve the target level of the long-term interest rate specified

by the guideline.

Votes for the proposal: Mr. H. Kuroda, Mr. K. Iwata, Mr. H. Nakaso, Mr. Y.

Harada, Mr. Y. Funo, Mr. M. Sakurai, Ms. T. Masai, and Mr. H. Suzuki.

Votes against the proposal: Mr. G. Kataoka.

Mr. G. Kataoka dissented, considering that, taking account of risk factors such as

the consumption tax hike and a possible economic downturn in the United States, it was

desirable to achieve the price stability target in fiscal 2018, and that it was appropriate for

the Bank to purchase JGBs so that yields on JGBs with maturities of 10 years and longer

would be broadly lowered.

**B. Vote on the Guideline for Asset Purchases**

To reflect the view of the members, the chairman formulated the following

proposal to implement the guideline for asset purchases for the intermeeting period and put

it to a vote: (1) to purchase ETFs and J-REITs so that their amounts outstanding would

increase at annual paces of about 6 trillion yen and about 90 billion yen, respectively, and

(2) to maintain the amounts outstanding of CP and corporate bonds at about 2.2 trillion yen

and about 3.2 trillion yen, respectively.

The Policy Board decided the proposal by a unanimous vote.

Votes for the proposal: Mr. H. Kuroda, Mr. K. Iwata, Mr. H. Nakaso, Mr. Y.

Harada, Mr. Y. Funo, Mr. M. Sakurai, Ms. T. Masai, Mr. H. Suzuki, and Mr. G.

Kataoka.

Votes against the proposal: None.

**VI. Discussion on the Statement on Monetary Policy**

On the basis of the above discussions, members discussed the Statement on

Monetary Policy. Mr. G. Kataoka expressed the following opinions: (1) the possibility of

the year-on-year rate of change in the CPI increasing toward 2 percent going forward was

20


-----

low at this point, and (2) with a view to reinforcing the inflation-overshooting commitment,

if there was a delay in the timing of achieving the price stability target due to domestic

factors, the Bank should take additional easing measures, and it was necessary to include

that in the text.

Based on this discussion, the chairman formulated the Statement on Monetary

Policy and put it to a vote. The Policy Board decided the text by a unanimous vote. It was

confirmed that the statement would be released immediately after the meeting (see

Attachment).

**VII. Approval of the Minutes of the Monetary Policy Meeting**

The Policy Board approved unanimously the minutes of the Monetary Policy

Meeting of October 30 and 31, 2017 for release on December 26.

21


-----

Attachment

December 21, 2017

Bank of Japan

**Statement on Monetary Policy**

1. At the Monetary Policy Meeting held today, the Policy Board of the Bank of Japan decided

upon the following.

(1) Yield curve control

The Bank decided, by an 8-1 majority vote, to set the following guideline for market

operations for the intermeeting period.[ [Note 1]]

The short-term policy interest rate:

The Bank will apply a negative interest rate of minus 0.1 percent to the Policy-Rate

Balances in current accounts held by financial institutions at the Bank.

The long-term interest rate:

The Bank will purchase Japanese government bonds (JGBs) so that 10-year JGB

yields will remain at around zero percent. With regard to the amount of JGBs to be

purchased, the Bank will conduct purchases at more or less the current pace -- an annual

pace of increase in the amount outstanding of its JGB holdings of about 80 trillion yen -
aiming to achieve the target level of the long-term interest rate specified by the guideline.

(2) Guidelines for asset purchases

With regard to asset purchases other than JGB purchases, the Bank decided, by a

unanimous vote, to set the following guidelines.

a) The Bank will purchase exchange-traded funds (ETFs) and Japan real estate

investment trusts (J-REITs) so that their amounts outstanding will increase at annual

paces of about 6 trillion yen and about 90 billion yen, respectively.

b) As for CP and corporate bonds, the Bank will maintain their amounts outstanding at

about 2.2 trillion yen and about 3.2 trillion yen, respectively.

2. Japan's economy is expanding moderately, with a virtuous cycle from income to spending

operating. Overseas economies have continued to grow at a moderate pace on the whole. In

22


-----

this situation, exports have been on an increasing trend. On the domestic demand side,

business fixed investment has continued on an increasing trend with corporate profits and

business sentiment improving. Private consumption has been increasing moderately, albeit

with fluctuations, against the background of steady improvement in the employment and

income situation. Housing investment has been more or less flat. Meanwhile, public

investment has been more or less flat, remaining at a relatively high level. Reflecting these

increases in demand both at home and abroad, industrial production has been on an

increasing trend, and labor market conditions have continued to tighten steadily. Financial

conditions are highly accommodative. On the price front, the year-on-year rate of change in

the consumer price index (CPI, all items less fresh food) is in the range of 0.5-1.0 percent.

Inflation expectations have remained in a weakening phase.

3. With regard to the outlook, Japan's economy is likely to continue its moderate expansion.

Domestic demand is likely to follow an uptrend, with a virtuous cycle from income to

spending being maintained in both the corporate and household sectors, on the back of highly

accommodative financial conditions and underpinnings through the government's past

stimulus measures. Exports are expected to continue their moderate increasing trend on the

back of the growth in overseas economies. The year-on-year rate of change in the CPI is

likely to continue on an uptrend and increase toward 2 percent, mainly on the back of an

improvement in the output gap and a rise in medium- to long-term inflation expectations.[ [Note 2]]

4. Risks to the outlook include the following: the U.S. economic policies and their impact on

global financial markets; developments in emerging and commodity-exporting economies;

negotiations on the United Kingdom's exit from the European Union (EU) and their effects;

prospects regarding the European debt problem, including the financial sector; and

geopolitical risks.

5. The Bank will continue with "Quantitative and Qualitative Monetary Easing (QQE) with

Yield Curve Control," aiming to achieve the price stability target of 2 percent, as long as it is

necessary for maintaining that target in a stable manner. It will continue expanding the

monetary base until the year-on-year rate of increase in the observed CPI (all items less fresh

food) exceeds 2 percent and stays above the target in a stable manner. The Bank will make

policy adjustments as appropriate, taking account of developments in economic activity and

prices as well as financial conditions, with a view to maintaining the momentum toward

achieving the price stability target.[ [Note 3]]

23


-----

[Note 1] Voting for the action: Mr. H. Kuroda, Mr. K. Iwata, Mr. H. Nakaso, Mr. Y. Harada, Mr. Y. Funo,

Mr. M. Sakurai, Ms. T. Masai, and Mr. H. Suzuki. Voting against the action: Mr. G. Kataoka.
Mr. G. Kataoka dissented, considering that, taking account of risk factors such as the consumption
tax hike and a possible economic downturn in the United States, it was desirable to achieve the price
stability target in fiscal 2018, and that it was appropriate for the Bank to purchase JGBs so that
yields on JGBs with maturities of 10 years and longer would be broadly lowered.

[Note 2] Mr. G. Kataoka opposed the description, considering that the possibility of the year-on-year rate of

change in the CPI increasing toward 2 percent going forward was low at this point.

[Note 3] With a view to reinforcing the inflation-overshooting commitment, Mr. G. Kataoka opposed the

description, considering that, if there was a delay in the timing of achieving the price stability target
due to domestic factors, the Bank should take additional easing measures and that it was necessary to
include that in the text.

24


-----

