-----

-----

**FOREWARNING**
This document is provided for the reader’s convenience only.
The translation from the official Spanish version was made
by Banco de México’s staff. Discrepancies may arise
between the original document in Spanish and its English
translation. It should be noted that the original Spanish
version is the only official document.


**1. PLACE, DATE, AND PARTICIPANTS**

**1.1. Place:** Av. Cinco de Mayo Street no.2, 5[th] Floor,
Col. Centro, Mexico City

**1.2. Date of Governing Board meeting: August 1,**
2018

**1.3. Participants:**

Alejandro Díaz de León-Carrillo, Governor

Roberto Del Cueto-Legaspi, Deputy Governor

Irene Espinosa-Cantellano, Deputy Governor

Javier Eduardo Guzmán-Calafell, Deputy Governor

Manuel Ramos-Francia, Deputy Governor

Miguel Messmacher-Linartas, Undersecretary of
Finance and Public Credit

Fernando Luis Corvera-Caraza, Secretary of the
Governing Board

Prior to this meeting, preliminary work by Banco de
México’s staff analyzing the economic and financial
environment, together with the developments in
inflation and the determinants and outlook for
inflation, was conducted and presented to the
Governing Board.

**2. ANALYSIS AND RATIONALE BEHIND THE**
**GOVERNING BOARD’S VOTING**

This section summarizes the views expressed by the
members of the Governing Board regarding the
monetary policy decision.

All members highlighted that available data for the
second quarter of 2018 suggest that the world
economy continued to grow at a relatively fast pace.
One member noted that it grew above potential
during the first half of the year. Nevertheless, all
members pointed out that there is an increasing
divergence in growth among countries and regions.
Most members stated that prospects for a solid
growth rate of the world economy are maintained for
2018, while one member added that this scenario
also prevails for 2019. However, all members agreed
that the world economy’s performance is subject to


uncertainty and that risks to the downside for world
economic growth have increased even in the short
term and, to a larger extent, in the medium term. All
members considered the following as the most
relevant risks to the world economy: i) an escalation
of trade disputes; ii) a possible tightening of financial
conditions; and, iii) the materialization of geopolitical
risks.

Regarding the first of these risks, some members
mentioned that, recently, the threat of protectionism
has increased in some countries. The same
members highlighted that the U.S. has adopted some
of these measures, announcing the possibility of
even imposing additional tariffs. This has led to
retaliatory measures by the affected countries.
Particularly, one of the members warned about the
possibility of the U.S. imposing additional tariffs on
Chinese exports as well as trade barriers on
automotive imports. All members emphasized that
international trade flows are already showing the
effects from these protectionist measures. In this
regard, one member pointed out that a downward
trend can already be observed in the emerging
countries’ trade volume, particularly in Asia and Latin
America, as well as in the Purchasing Managers’
Indexes (PMIs) of these regions. Another member
stated that in the Eurozone and Asia there has been
a decline in export manufacturing orders. The same
member noted that some recent studies indicate that
protectionist measures of this sort could significantly
affect international investment and capital flows,
particularly if they have a negative effect on
confidence levels. In this context, some members
stated that the possibility of escalating trade tensions
is far from fading, despite the fact that, in recent days,
U.S. and European Union representatives agreed to
keep the tariff system that rules their bilateral trade
unchanged, and even expressed the view of
engaging in further liberalization.

As for the second risk, most members made
reference to a possible tightening of global financial
conditions due to a faster-than-expected

normalization of U.S. monetary policy in a context of
elevated debt levels worldwide, which even exceed
those observed prior to the global financial crisis. In
this environment, one member noted that this risk
has increased, given the U.S. economy’s position in
the current business cycle and the adoption of an
expansionary fiscal policy.

As for the third risk, one member pointed out that
geopolitical tensions in the Middle East and other
regions persist, and that there are no signs of them
mitigating. Another member explained that, although

1


-----

the tensions associated with North Korea have
apparently diminished, those related to Iran and to
the effects of the U.S. economic blockade to this
country, have increased. The same member added
that despite the low probability of this type of risks,
they could have significant implications for the prices
of some commodities and for global risk appetite.

In addition to the above mentioned risks, some
members included other factors that could affect the
world economy’s performance negatively. One
member pointed out that the probability of a
slowdown in U.S. growth is another risk to world
economic growth. Some members noted that an
economic slowdown in the U.S. may ensue given that
the current business cycle is in an advanced stage.
One member even mentioned the possibility of an
economic recession in this country in the next years,
and highlighted that such recession would be
worsened by the deteriorated conditions of its public
finances. Another member pointed out that the
development of oil prices could have a negative
impact on the growth rate of world economic activity.
The same member added that, although the recovery
of oil prices from their lowest levels in 2016 has partly
been reverted in recent months, they may reach
levels above those expected by markets if there are
disruptions in the supply for oil. Finally, some
members pointed out that the uncertainty related to
elections in both advanced and emerging countries
as well as to the terms and conditions of Brexit, may
also have a negative effect on confidence levels and,
in turn, on global investment and growth.

Regarding world inflation, some members mentioned
that in advanced economies inflation continues to
converge gradually to central banks’ targets. One
member stated that the strengthening of labor
markets, as well as the increases in fuel prices, have
led to slight rises in price levels worldwide. In this
regard, the same member expressed that, towards
the end of 2018, world inflation is expected to near
2%, stating that this process will be slower in certain
regions than in others. The same member
highlighted that the balance of risks to inflation in the
short term is starting to deteriorate. The same
member also pointed out that several risks to inflation
in the medium term are expected to continue,
underlining among these the persistence of an
upward trend in fuel prices and the problems that
certain emerging economies may have due to
external or fiscal imbalances.

In regards to the performance of advanced
economies, some members stated that several of
them may have even reached the peak of their


business cycle. Most members noted that U.S.
economic activity grew at faster rate during the
second quarter, partly in response to the fiscal
stimulus adopted. Another member pointed out that
this performance reflected the growth of most
aggregate demand components. Another member
mentioned that the increasing domestic demand is
also due to the low levels of unemployment. In this
regard, some members added that the latter have
reached several-decade minimum levels in this
country. In this regard, another member added that
U.S labor market conditions remain tight and
highlighted that wages and earnings, as well as the
labor cost index, are on an upward trend. Some
members stated that this environment of reduced
slack may exert greater pressures on inflation. In line
with the above, some members noted that the labor
market conditions have been reflected in an upward
trend of inflation and its expectations, mostly those
for short- and medium-terms. As for growth
forecasts, some members pointed out that timely
indicators suggest that, in the U.S., GDP will continue
growing at a high rate for the remainder of the year.
One of the members stated that given both the
current U.S. business cycle and the timing of the
fiscal stimulus, the U.S. economy is expected to
continue growing at a robust rate, not only for the
remainder of 2018, but also during 2019. In this
context, one member noted that, indeed, U.S. growth
forecasts have been revised upwards, although, as
some members mentioned above, there is the
possibility of a deceleration in subsequent years. As
for other advanced economies, most members
highlighted that, in contrast with the U.S. economic
dynamism, most recent data on economic activity in
the Eurozone, United Kingdom and Japan point to a
deceleration. Some members stated that growth
forecasts for these three economies have been
revised downwards. One member noted that these
revisions reflect the negative surprises observed for
economic activity at the beginning of 2018.

As for monetary policy in advanced economies, one
member pointed out that, in general terms, monetary
policy expectations in these economies exhibited
only a few adjustments. The same member added
that, although central banks have warned about the
risks associated with the increasing protectionism
worldwide, economic activity in this group of
countries has been growing. Delving into the case of
the U.S., most members highlighted that, as
expected, the Federal Reserve kept the target range
for the federal funds rate unchanged in its August
meeting and reiterated its forecast of increasing it
gradually. Some members pointed out that the
forecast of two additional 25 basis points (bps) raises

2


-----

for the remainder of the year prevails. One member
emphasized that the U.S. Federal Reserve has been
facing the current economic environment in that
country without major problems, by raising its
reference rate gradually and through its forward
guidance on monetary policy. Most members
mentioned certain factors that might heighten
inflationary pressures and affect the trajectory of
interest rates in the U.S., such as labor market
tightness, fiscal stimulus measures, and the
protectionist policies announced. Another member
highlighted that the yield curve of Treasury bonds is
relatively flat, which apparently reflects, on the one
hand, the expectation of gradual increases in shortterm interest rates and, on the other hand, that the
conditions that led to a low term premia have
prevailed. The same member concluded that
monetary policy normalization in the short term is
currently subject to greater risks and to an
environment of higher uncertainty, albeit being
planned and announced as a gradual and smooth
process. The same member added that, in the long
run, there seem to persist conditions in markets that
imply a low inflation rate.

Regarding monetary policy in other advanced
economies, one member mentioned that the
European Central Bank kept its reference rates
unchanged, partly due to a weaker-than-expected
economic performance and to the fact that the level
of inflation is below the central bank target, which
suggests that this institution has adopted a slightly
more accommodative policy stance than expected.
Regarding the Bank of Japan, the same member
highlighted that it also kept its reference rate
unchanged and committed to maintain a highly
accommodative monetary policy for a longer period,
by controlling the yield curve and introducing
guidance on the likely path of interest rates. As for
the Bank of England, the same member pointed out
that, despite its favorable development, inflation
remains above the 2% target in the United Kingdom,
adding that, given the strong wage pressures,
inflation expectations have remained at the highest
level in the last four years. In this context, the same
member pointed out that, in its next meeting, the
Bank of England is expected to raise its target rate
by 25 bps, to 0.75%. In this regard, some members
concluded that a gradual withdrawal of the monetary
stimulus in these countries continues to be expected.
One member stated such process is foreseen to be
faster in the U.S. than in other advanced economies.

As for emerging economies, one member noted that
the forecast of moderate economic activity growth
rates is maintained for this year and 2019, which


means that these economies would accumulate four
consecutive years of increasing GDP growth.
Nevertheless, some members mentioned that the
forecasts to growth for these economies were
revised downwards. One member pointed out that,
as for Asian economies, this was due to the
contraction of trade flows in recent months. In
relation to the Chinese economy, the same member
noted that it has undergone a gradual deceleration,
while another member added that uncertainty about
this economy has increased, albeit from a still robust
growth level. One member highlighted that the
growth forecast for oil-exporting countries has
increased slightly. In this context, some members
pointed out that there is also divergence in growth
rates of emerging economies. As for inflation in these
economies, one member added that, in most cases,
incoming data shows that inflation remains below the
set targets; however, in some cases, they have been
affected by the depreciation of their local currencies
and, in other cases, by the rise in fuel prices. The
same member noted that, in order to cope with this
situation, the respective central banks have opted for
a more cautious rhetoric and are expected to adopt
a more restrictive stance in their next monetary policy
decisions.

Most members pointed out that international financial
markets exhibited episodes of volatility in recent
weeks. Some members added that risk aversion has
increased and that a high sensitivity to the escalation
of trade tensions between the U.S. and other
countries has been observed. Some members
explained that this has caused an outflow of foreign
capital from emerging economies. In this context,
most members highlighted that asset prices in these
economies exhibited negative returns, particularly
those from Asian countries. In this regard, some
members emphasized the case of China. In contrast,
one of the members stated that most financial assets
in advanced economies exhibited marginal changes.
In this regard, another member pointed out that
yields on U.S. 2-year Treasury bonds neared 2.70%
and increased by around 140 bps from September to
date. The same member added that those of 10- and
30-year T-bonds are at 3.00% and 3.13%, exhibiting
increases of around 95 and 45 bps, respectively,
during the same period. Most members highlighted
the strengthening of the U.S. dollar. One of the
members stated that the latter is associated with the
expectation of a higher growth of U.S. aggregate
demand relative to other advanced economies, partly
as a result of the fiscal stimulus in that country.
Another member noted that the monetary policy
normalization process of the U.S. Federal Reserve
has also implied a depreciation of emerging

3


-----

economies’ currencies of between 1% and 4%.
Looking ahead, one member pointed out that the
U.S. dollar is expected to continue appreciating in
real terms for the following quarters. The same
member also mentioned that U.S. monetary
conditions are tightening in two ways: through the
increase in short-term interest rates, and through the
nominal appreciation of the U.S. dollar, which, in turn,
has led to a certain tightening of financial conditions.
As for other asset and primary commodity prices, one
member stated that stock prices of the automotive
sector fell significantly given the possibility of the U.S.
imposing new tariffs on automobile imports, while the
prices of industrial metals have undergone a
downward adjustment given the possible weakening
of economic activity and the subsequent lower
demand for commodities. In this regard, another
member added that the prices of commodities are not
expected to increase significantly in the near future,
and that even the oil futures curve does not show
signs of oil prices increasing sharply in the short term
and that they show a significant amount of contango.

Looking ahead, most members added that risks are
perceived in the short term, such as those previously
described for world economic growth, which may
continue generating volatility in international financial
markets. Some members noted that, in this
environment, there could be greater increases in
interest rates and an additional strengthening of the
U.S. dollar, as well as a significant decline in appetite
for risk and capital outflows from emerging
economies. One of the members added that the
aforementioned could intensify if a more adverse
environment for international trade materializes. In
regards to China, another member referred to the
possible effect of the fiscal and monetary easing
recently announced by this country on financial
markets. The same member pointed out that,
although the Chinese authorities have stated that
these policies are aimed at avoiding the effects
arising from the trade tensions and other external
sources of uncertainty on domestic demand, they
may exert additional pressures on their currency and
elevate the risks associated with the increasing
indebtedness in China.

All members of the Governing Board noted that
timely indicators suggest that during the second
quarter of 2018 Mexico’s economic activity

contracted as compared to the previous quarter. In
this regard, one member pointed out there appears
to be evidence of such a slowdown on both supply
and demand indicators. On the aggregate demand
side, most members mentioned that there was a
reversion in the dynamism exhibited by investment in


the previous quarter and a weakening of exports,
while private consumption showed a positive
evolution. One member stated that the behavior of
aggregate demand reflects the continuing

adjustment of the economy to an environment of high
uncertainty, a decreasing availability of external
funding, and of a depreciation of the real exchange
rate. Some members explained that the growth of
investment decreased both in the component of
construction, due to the fading effects of the
reconstruction efforts after the earthquakes of 2017,
as well as in imported machinery and equipment.
One member reiterated that such behavior is mainly
due to the persisting environment of uncertainty
arising from both domestic and external factors. The
same member pointed out that manufacturing
exports could be affected in part by the weaker rate
of growth of world trade and particularly by its effect
on exports to countries other than the U.S. In regards
to production, some members mentioned the
contraction of the primary sector, while most
members noted that the secondary sector continues
to exhibit a lack of dynamism while the tertiary sector
is showing signs of decelerating. As for the slower
growth rate of the industrial sector, some members
stated that it is associated with a negative trend in the
construction sector. In this regard, one member
added that it is also associated to the deceleration in
manufacturing production.

Most members pointed out that in 2018 GDP growth
is anticipated to fall to the lower part of the estimated
range (2 to 3%), as specified in the latest Quarterly
Report. Most members highlighted that this forecast
is due to the weakness exhibited during the second
quarter of the year. One member added that it also
reflects the outlook that investment will remain weak
in the following quarters. Another member noted that,
taking into account that the first half of the year has
ended, this adjustment of half a percentage point in
the forecast to growth is significant, and that it implied
an adjustment to this member’s outlook for growth
and inflation for the next months. Notwithstanding the
above, most members pointed out that the forecast
of a stronger growth for 2019 prevails, although some
members mentioned that an environment of higher
uncertainty is expected for that year. In this regard,
one of the members stated that, under current
conditions, it is difficult to make an assessment of the
evolution of economic activity during the second half
of 2018 and in 2019.

Most members noted that, given the uncertainty
generated by the complex environment faced by the
Mexican economy, the balance of risks for growth
maintains a bias to the downside. Beside the

4


-----

aforementioned global risks, most members

mentioned the uncertainty associated with the North
America Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA)

renegotiation and the outlook for the U.S.-Mexico
bilateral relation. In this regard, some members
pointed out that, despite the recent signs of a positive
outcome, the risks of a prolonged NAFTA

renegotiation or an unfavorable outcome cannot be
dismissed, which can continue to have an effect on
domestic demand, particularly on investment. One
member mentioned as an additional risk the
possibility that oil production remains significantly
below the levels programmed for the remaining of
2018. Most members highlighted the uncertainty
associated with the strategies, policies and plans of
the incoming administration. In this regard, one
member stated that the absence of details about the
actions that the new administration will implement in
different areas also entails risks to domestic demand
during the second half of 2018 and in 2019. The
same member also emphasized the possibility of a
reduction of total public spending during the second
half of this year, as has been the case in previous
election years. Among the medium- and long-term
risks to potential growth, another member noted the
possible modification of the fiscal policy stance by the
incoming administration, as well as the deterioration
of Mexico’s conditions of access to international
trade. Finally, one member highlighted the

uncertainty regarding the necessary measures to
increase the productivity of the country and its
adequate use of productive factors.

Most members pointed out that slack conditions in
the Mexican economy are estimated to have eased
and that forecasts to growth would imply output gaps
that are wider than those previously expected for the
following quarters. In this regard, one of the members
stated that the economy is anticipated to grow even
below potential during the next quarters and that the
output gap will near zero in 2019. The same member
emphasized that these forecasts imply that slack
conditions would ease at a faster pace than
expected, which could have significant

consequences on the path of core inflation in the next
months. Most members noted that labor market
indicators remain tight. In this regard, one of the
members highlighted that the national

unemployment rate apparently stabilized at around
3.4%, a figure below the nonaccelerating inflation
rate of unemployment (NAIRU) estimate. Another
member pointed out that the latest data indicates a
lower growth of formal employment and an increase
in the unemployment rate, although it is too early to
draw conclusions from these figures. Some members
noted that the indicators of slack conditions do not


reflect demand-related pressures on inflation.
Another member emphasized that, although wage
indicators have exhibited moderate increases, they
could be subject to pressures in view of the absence
of slack in the labor market. The same member also
stated that, for this reason, wage revisions must be
thoroughly assessed in order to fully identify their
effects on the economy’s price formation process.
The same member added that, in this context, the
alternatives proposed for revising various wage
indicators should consider productivity gains and do
not entail generalized cost pressures on the
economy.

As for headline inflation, all members agreed that
after the fall observed at the beginning of the year, it
increased in June. Most members mentioned that in
the first half of July 2018 inflation reached 4.85%,
after having posted 4.65% in June and 4.51% in May.
All members considered that this increase is
explained mainly by the growth in the non-core
inflation component, due to the upward adjustment in
the prices of gasolines and L.P. gas. All members
noted that the indirect effects of the price increases
of these products have also had an impact on core
inflation. One member highlighted that fundamental
core inflation does not suggest any cyclical pressures
on prices. Most members stated that in recent
months headline inflation has been affected by the
aforementioned shocks. One member pointed out
that, in a more adverse environment, and with
considerable elements of domestic uncertainty,
some of the risks to the upside for inflation have
materialized. In this regard, the same member
mentioned that the Mexican peso exchange rate has
been subject to episodes of volatility, despite its
recent appreciation, and that non-core inflation has
been subject to the energy-product shocks

mentioned above.

As for non-core inflation, some members pointed out
that it continued to increase, reaching 8.15% during
the first half of July, after having posted 7.79% in
June and 6.99% in May. In this regard, one member
emphasized that energy prices have escalated
above expectations, due mainly to the reduction in
the fiscal stimuli applied to these products, as well as
to the upward adjustment in their international
references. Another member added that the
contribution of energy products to the rise in inflation
during the first half of July was above that registered
in January 2017. As for core inflation, most members
mentioned that it reached 3.64% during the first half
of July, after having posted 3.62% in June and 3.69%
in May. Some members noted that the development
of core inflation has been in line with forecasts,

5


-----

exhibiting a downward trend during the entire year.
One member emphasized that core inflation is the
component that responds more clearly to the
monetary policy stance. Another member considered
that core inflation has declined at a slower rate than
expected. Finally, one member mentioned that there
are several additional risks to be considered
regarding the recent developments in inflation and its
components. The same member mentioned that in
the first half of July, the percentage of components of
the CPI basket with annualized monthly increases
below or equal to 3% decreased to levels below the
50% reference for core inflation for the first time in
several months. The same member added that the
analysis of inflation dynamics considering frequency
and time (wavelets) suggests that inflation’s trend
component has decreased very gradually, for both
headline and core inflation.

Most members mentioned that headline inflation
expectations for the end of 2018 were adjusted from
4.00% in June to 4.25% in July, whereas those for
the end of 2019 remained around 3.60% and those
for the medium and long terms remained around
3.50%. Most members emphasized that mediumand long-term inflation expectations continue above
the target. In this regard, some members mentioned
that the latter has been taking place for a long period.
Some members noted that core inflation

expectations for the end of 2018 increased from
3.54% in May’s survey to 3.60% in that of July. As for
the spread between nominal and real government
security yields, some members pointed out that these
have shown an upturn as a reflection of the increase
in inflation risk premia, although one member
considered that such premia have remained at
relatively stable levels.

Regarding the foreseen trajectory for headline
inflation, most members agreed that the change in
relative prices stemming from the increase in energy
prices affects the expected trajectory for headline
inflation for the next twelve months, although this
effect is estimated to be of a transitory nature. One
member noted that inflation is expected to return to a
downward trend in August, which would continue
during the rest of 2018 and in 2019. As for core
inflation, most members expect it will continue falling
in the time frame in which monetary policy operates.
Some members considered that attaining the inflation
target during the period in which monetary policy
exerts an influence will be difficult. One member
mentioned that, in general terms, the speed at which
headline and core inflation are declining appears to
be too slow to attain the target within the time frame
expected by Banco de México. Nevertheless, the


same member noted that considering the latest
information on economic activity, the economy’s
cyclical conditions will probably loosen further, a
situation that could in turn make headline and core
inflation fall more rapidly in the next quarters. The
same member stated that, in the absence of
additional supply-related shocks or of episodes of
volatility that could affect the exchange rate, this
scenario is what, in this member’s opinion, makes
feasible the convergence of inflation to its target
within the expected time frame. The same member
mentioned, nevertheless, that even in such a
scenario, there is a high risk of inflation not
converging to its target within the anticipated time
frame.

Most members agreed that the balance of risks for
the expected trajectory of inflation continues biased
to the upside, in an environment of high uncertainty.
One member mentioned that such balance did not
deteriorate since the last monetary policy decision,
although another member said that the prevailing
uncertain environment makes its assessment
difficult. The majority of members stated that among
the main risks to the upside are that the peso
exchange rate continues to be subject to external
pressures such as the higher foreign interest rates
and the U.S. dollar strength, and to factors of
uncertainty that persist in both the domestic and
external fronts, such as the NAFTA renegotiation. In
this regard, one member also noted the still important
possibility of a negative NAFTA outcome, as
mentioned before, stating, however, that this risk has
decreased. The same member also pointed out that
the inflation’s high current levels could generate
hysteresis in the economy’s price formation process.
In this context, the same member noted that there is
the possibility of facing a cyclical stage in which
inflation persistently remains above its target, while
the economy decelerates sharply. Another member
mentioned that the risk of shocks to one or several of
the items that compose the non-core inflation price
basket is always present. In this regard, some
members pointed out that the risk of further increases
in the prices of some energy products or of
agricultural products persists. Some members
highlighted that a factor to consider are the effects of
the possible changes in the incoming

administration’s economic policy. One member
noted that among these measures could be a change
in the policy for setting minimum wages. The same
member stated that the tighter conditions in the labor
market could generate risks to prices, although
acknowledging that no demand-related pressures on
inflation are anticipated and that the risks from the
demand side apparently have decreased. Another

6


-----

member mentioned that the revision of nominal
contractual wages, which is now at 5.6%, could begin
to translate into increases in unit labor costs. Another
member noted the risk of a deterioration in the fiscal
position, which is structurally very vulnerable. The
same member also warned of the possibility of an
adverse inflationary surprise in the United States,
despite considerations of a structural flattening of the
Phillips curve in that country, which could have
serious consequences for international financial
markets. The same member also mentioned that a
change in sentiment in these markets towards
Mexico cannot be ruled out, and that the recent
cases of several emerging economies –such as
South Africa, Turkey, Brazil and Argentina– reveal
how suddenly these changes can take place. Lastly,
some members considered that there is the risk of
U.S. trade policy actions leading to an escalation of
protectionist and countervailing measures that could
affect inflation negatively. As for the risks to the
downside, some members highlighted a possible
appreciation of the Mexican peso if the NAFTA
renegotiations turn out to be favorable.

All members pointed out that since the last monetary
policy decision, the Mexican peso appreciated and
exhibited lower volatility. Some members noted that
of the main emerging economies, the Mexican peso
was the currency that appreciated the most. Most
members agreed that such results were partly the
consequence of the lesser levels of uncertainty since
Mexico’s presidential and legislative elections and as
a result of a more optimistic outlook regarding the
North America Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA)
renegotiation and of the raise of 25 bps in Banco de
México’s monetary policy target rate announced in
June. Some members added that the recent behavior
of the exchange rate was also the result of investors’
anticipating that Mexico will continue to have fiscal
and monetary policy stances that contribute to an
orderly adjustment of the Mexican economy and
financial markets. Some members noted that, in this
context, an improvement in the operating conditions
of the exchange market has been observed. In
particular, this members expressed that there has
been greater liquidity and depth in this market, as
well as an increase in net long derivatives positions
on the Mexican peso. Most members indicated that
this more favorable environment has also been
reflected in the behavior of the prices of other assets.
Some members mentioned that both short and longterm interest rates decreased moderately. One
member stated that the latter has led to a slight
steepening of the yield curve. Another member
highlighted that an improvement in bond market
operating conditions has also been observed, as well


as capital flows from foreign investors to assets
denominated in Mexican pesos, mainly to mediumterm instruments. Some mentioned that sovereign
risk indicators improved. One of the members
specified that domestic financial markets have
exhibited a favorable performance. On the other
hand, most members noted that, looking head, there
are risk factors that could affect domestic financial
markets, particularly, the Mexican peso exchange
rate. Among such risks they included the uncertainty
surrounding NAFTA renegotiations, the higher levels
of external interest rates, surprises regarding the
process of normalization of monetary policy in the
U.S., and, the worldwide escalation of protectionist
trade measures. One member added also the
uncertainty among investors regarding the economic
package to be presented to Mexico’s Congress by
the incoming federal administration.

One member indicated that the recent behavior of
financial markets highlights the importance of having
a sound management of macroeconomic policy.
Some members stated that the economy is expected
to continue facing a complex environment, both in the
external and domestic fronts. For this reason, it is
particularly relevant that, in addition to following a
prudent and robust monetary policy, measures to
foster greater productivity are adopted and public
finances are consolidated sustainably. One member
pointed out that this strategy would reduce the
probability of having to face a sudden recomposition
of portfolios and capital outflows. Some members
mentioned that over the next months one crucial
element for preserving a robust macroeconomic
policy will be the actions regarding public finances
that the incoming administration will announce and
implement. One member specified that, in the short
term, possible doubts regarding the consistency
between some of the initiatives presented by the
incoming administration and strengthening the fiscal
position should be clarified. The same member
mentioned that it will also be important to take actions
to ensure the soundness of public finances in the
long term, in light of the possible pressures arising
from public spending in items such as pension
payment obligations, health spending, and the
financial cost of federal government debt. In this
member’s opinion, spending in state-owned

productive enterprises’ investment that the new
administration is considering should also be added to
the aforementioned. Another member mentioned
that some of the members of the newly elected
president’s economic team have announced that a
responsible fiscal policy will be maintained in order to
continue preserving sound macroeconomic

fundamentals. The same member added that the

7


-----

aforementioned is a necessary condition so that
Banco de México can fully meet its constitutional
mandate. Most members pointed out the relevance
of raising productivity levels and, in turn, the Mexican
economy’s growth potential, which, according to one
of the members, stands currently around 2.5%. Most
members mentioned that in order to achieve this, it is
important to improve the rule of law and reduce
public insecurity levels, corruption, and impunity.
One member stressed that the magnitude of such a
challenge requires building on the already attained
achievements and adopting the required measures,
both on the economic and institutional fronts, to make
progress in that direction. The same member also
pointed out that raising investment levels is also
necessary, since as a share of GDP the latter has
fallen to its lowest level in three years, and almost 1
percentage point below that observed in 2008. In this
regard, the same member mentioned that it is
necessary to give certainty to private investors as to
the actions that the incoming administration will
adopt in key areas and assess carefully how to
create room for the recovery of public investment.

All members pointed out that the most relevant factor
to consider for the monetary policy decision is that
the effects of the changes in relative prices on
headline inflation are forecasted to be temporary.
Most members also stated that medium- and longterm inflation expectations have remained stable.
Most members also added the forecast that slack
conditions in the economy will continue easing, which
reduces the possibility of pressures stemming from
aggregate demand. Considering the

aforementioned, most members emphasized that
core inflation continues on a downward trend and is
expected to continue falling. Another member
highlighted that, under the scenarios foreseen for
Mexico’s economy, the current monetary policy
stance is consistent with a convergence of headline
inflation to the 3% target in the time frame in which
monetary policy operates fully. One member added
that Banco de México should continue with the same
current policy stance as long as inflation does not
follow a clear downward trend, particularly of its core
component. Most members also agreed that, given
the current economic environment, it is important to
follow a prudent monetary policy stance. One
member pointed out that this is essential in a context
where major risks persist. Another member added
that there are no historical precedents for some of
these risks and that they may materialize anytime,
and even simultaneously. In this regard, one member
stated that, in the case of an adverse environment
that requires an adjustment of the real exchange
rate, previsions must be taken to ensure that


medium- and long-term inflation expectations are not
affected and that no second-round effects on in the
economy’s price formation process emerge. In this
regard, some members pointed out that, in general
terms, the monetary policy stance must prevent any
additional inflationary pressures from contaminating
the economy’s price formation process and from
putting at risk the convergence of headline inflation
to its target. In this regard, one member pointed out
that monetary policy faces a situation of inflationary
pressures above those expected. The same member
mentioned that, however, these pressures are the
result of supply shocks, in the absence of demandrelated pressures on prices, with core inflation
following a path consistent with forecasts, and
without evidence of second-round effects on inflation.
The same member stated that although in these
circumstances an immediate monetary policy

response is not justified, a prudent stance must be
maintained, since under an uncertain environment,
with a balance of risks for inflation to the upside, and
where it will be apparently difficult to achieve the
inflation target during the period of influence of
monetary policy, there is a high risk of second round
effects, including a de-anchoring of long-term
inflation expectations. In this context, some members
mentioned that additional rises of the target rate
cannot be ruled out, while one member highlighted
that Banco de México should clearly indicate this
possibility in its communications.

Furthermore, one member delved into the factors to
consider for conducting Mexico’s monetary policy.
The same member mentioned that the current levels
of short-term rates implies that their spreads in
relation to those of the U.S. remain at prudently high
levels, although the spread between Mexico and U.S.
inflation has narrowed. The same member

considered that the aforementioned situation is
appropriate since the spread of term premia between
both countries has remained relatively stable, and
there is also the persisting possibility of volatility
episodes or shocks that could result in a depreciation
of the real exchange rate. The same member also
added that monetary conditions have tightened
further, not only due to the present level of interest
rates, but also to the appreciation of the Mexican
peso exchange rate. The same member also
expressed concern because inflation has been slow
in converging to Banco de México’s target than as
previously expected. The same member emphasized
that this is taking place in an environment where
economic activity is decelerating. The same member
also mentioned that apparently there is certain
degree of economic inertia that would be consistent
with the forecast that long-term inflation expectations

8


-----

will remain at 3.5% instead of 3%. The same member
noted that this could be due to the presence of
different channels that generate inflation persistence
and make inflation exhibit a strong resistance to the
downside as well as to the need for Banco de México
to strengthen the credibility of its 3% target. The
same member pointed out that the prevailing
uncertainty may represent a hindrance to achieving
the convergence of inflation to its target, despite
Banco de México’s prudent and consistent

conduction of monetary policy. The same member
also expressed concern about the possibility of a
situation where inflation is persistently above its
target while simultaneously there is a sharp
slowdown of economic growth, even to below
potential levels. The same member stated that, in this
context, monetary policy becomes less effective
since one of the most important channels through
which it operates is that of aggregate demand. The
same member highlighted that the aforementioned
situation may prevent inflation, particularly its core
component, from converging to the 3% target during
the expected time period.

Some members pointed out that, given that monetary
policy is implemented within an inflation-forecasttargeting framework, the governing board must
explain clearly and with detail the reasons for
possible deviations of inflation from its target. The
same members agreed that in the event of supply
shocks on prices, it will generally be possible to
explain credibly the deviation of inflation from the
forecasted trajectory, the absence of a monetary
policy response, and Banco de México’s commitment
to attaining the inflation target. One member stated
that even in the presence of shocks that would justify
a change in the monetary policy stance, for instance,
when there is evidence or a risk of second-round
effects on prices, postponing the attainment of the
inflation target can be justified, as long as the
monetary policy response to these shocks is deemed
appropriate, and consistent with the attainment of the
inflation target, although in a reasonably longer
period. Another member explained that it is important
to communicate the time frame in which inflation is
expected to reach its target, as well as provide
guidance on how Banco de México responds to
different types of shocks in order to re-optimizing its
monetary policy stance so that it is consistent with
the fulfillment of the target in the referred time frame.

All members agreed that the message of Banco de
México should be that of its commitment to reach the
inflation target. The members stated that, given that
headline inflation is being affected by the fluctuations
in the relative prices of products corresponding to its


non-core component, due attention must be paid to
the behavior of core inflation, especially because it is
the component that responds the most to monetary
policy.

**3. MONETARY POLICY DECISION**

As stated in the monetary policy statement released
August 2 of 2018, in order to guide its monetary
policy actions, Banco de México’s Governing Board
follows closely the development of inflation vis-à-vis
its anticipated trajectory, taking into account the
monetary policy stance adopted and the time frame
in which monetary policy operates, as well as
available information on all inflation determinants and
on medium- and long-term inflation expectations,
including the balance of risks for such factors. Given
the Mexican economy’s recent developments and, in
particular, that the shocks that have affected inflation
recently are of a transitory nature, and considering
that core inflation is expected to continue on a
downward trend, Banco de México’s Governing
Board has voted unanimously to maintain the target
for the overnight interbank interest rate unchanged at
7.75%.

Looking ahead, the Governing Board will maintain a
prudent monetary policy stance and will continue to
follow closely the potential pass-through of exchange
rate fluctuations to prices, the monetary policy stance
relative to that of the U.S., and the conditions of slack
in the Mexican economy. In the presence and
possible persistence of factors that, by their nature,
involve risks to both inflation and inflation

expectations, monetary policy will be adjusted in a
timely and robust manner to achieve the

convergence of inflation to its 3% target and to firmly
anchor medium- and long-term inflation expectations
so that they attain such target.

**4. VOTING**

**Members voting in favor of this decision:**
Alejandro Díaz de León Carrillo, Roberto Del Cueto
Legaspi, Irene Espinosa Cantellano, Javier Eduardo
Guzmán Calafell and Manuel Ramos Francia voted
in favor of maintaining the target rate unchanged at
7.75%.

9


-----

**ANNEX**

The information in this section was prepared for this
meeting by the staff of Banco de México’s General
Directorate of Economic Research and General
Directorate of Central Bank Operations and Payment
Systems. It does not necessarily reflect the
considerations of the members of the Governing
Board as to the monetary policy decision.

**A.1. External conditions**

**A.1.1. World economic activity**

Available data suggest that the world economy
continued to grow at a relatively fast pace. However,
there is an increasing divergence in the performance
of the main advanced economies. The U.S. economy
grew at a faster rate during the second quarter of the
year, while those of the Eurozone, Japan, and the
U.K. did so at a lower-than-expected rate. Although
domestic demand continued to expand in most
economies, international trade decelerated and
business confidence started to reflect the uncertainty
associated to tariff-related measures. This

uncertainty has increased the risks to the global
economy in the short term and, to a larger extent, in
the medium term (Chart 1). There is also the risk of
a sudden tightening of financial conditions and of an
escalation of geopolitical tensions.

**Chart 1**

**GDP Growth Forecasts for 2018 and 2019**

Annual percentage change

7

Oct-17

Apr-18

6

Jul-18

5

4

3

2

1

0

|Chart 1 GDP Growth Forecasts for 2018 and 2019  Annual percentage change|Col2|Col3|Col4|Col5|Col6|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|Oct-17 Apr-18 Jul-18||||||
|2018 2019 World|2018 2019 USA|2018 2019 Eurozone|2018 2019 Japan|2018 2019 UK|2018 2019 China|


Source: IMF.

In the U.S., after having posted a growth rate of 2.2%
during the first quarter of the year, GDP grew at an
annualized quarterly rate of 4.1% during the second
quarter (Chart 2). Job creation and the higher levels
of consumer confidence continued to fuel consumer
spending. Net exports had a larger contribution to
growth, mainly through the strong increase in


agricultural exports, possibly in anticipation of the
coming into effect of the Chinese tariffs on these
items. Business investment continued to expand,
while residential investment continued to grow at a
moderate rate, vis-à-vis the strong rebound exhibited
at the end of last year. In this environment, although
the U.S. fiscal stimulus is expected to boost
economic activity in 2018 and 2019, a significant
downturn is anticipated in the medium term, as this
stimulus gradually fades away. The aforementioned,
together with uncertainty related to U.S. trade policy
measures, has heightened the risks to the economic
outlook for the U.S. itself and for other advanced and
emerging economies.

**Chart 2**

**USA: Real GDP and Components**

Annualized quarterly percentage change and

contribution in percentage points, s. a.

7 Public spending

Net exports

6

Inventories

5 Non-residential investment

Residential investment

4 Private consumption

Total

3

2

1

0

-1

-2

-3

Q-II

-4

2014 2015 2016 2017 2018

s. a. / Seasonally adjusted figures.
Source: BEA.

U.S. industrial production grew 0.6% in June, after
having fallen 0.5% in May. This rebound was mainly
due to the recovery of manufacturing production,
which grew 0.8% in June, after having contracted in
the previous month due to an accident in an auto
parts plant. Mining production sustained the
expansion that has been observed since the end of
2016. This was partially offset by the weakening of
electricity and gas supply services, which decreased
for the second consecutive month. Purchasing
Managers’ Indexes (PMIs) suggest that

manufacturing activity will continue to grow during
the third quarter, despite the dollar strength and the
escalated risks to trade.

U.S. labor market conditions continued to tighten
during the second quarter. In particular, 213,000 new
jobs were created in June, an increase that was
above the rate needed to keep pace with the growing

10


-----

labor force. The unemployment rate registered 4%,
around 0.5 percentage points below the natural
unemployment rate.[1] Quit and vacancy rates
continued to increase, in tandem with the growing
difficulties to cover available jobs. In this context,
wage growth has been recovering.

In the Eurozone, GDP continued to grow at a
moderate rate of 1.4% in annualized terms, a rate
marginally lower than that observed during the first
quarter of the year. These weak results could be
explained partly by the presence of short-lived
factors, among which were labor strikes in France, as
well as, possibly, a lower growth of net exports. In
contrast, available indicators suggest that private
consumption continued to be driven by the favorable
labor market conditions, while investment continued
growing, in response to the higher profits of
businesses and to accommodative financial

conditions. In this environment, the unemployment
rate fell to 8.3% in June, while wage growth
increased, although at differing rates across
countries. Nevertheless, looking ahead, the balance
of risks to the region’s growth has deteriorated due
to the persisting uncertainty regarding the region’s
trade relations with both the U.S. and the United
Kingdom.

In Japan, available indicators of consumption,
equipment investment, and foreign trade are
consistent with a moderate rate of growth exhibited
in the second quarter of the year, after having
contracted 0.6% during the first quarter mainly due to
transitory factors. In this environment, in May, the
unemployment rate reached its lowest level observed
since 1992. Nevertheless, forward-looking indicators
such as the Purchasing Managers’ Indexes (PMIs)
continued to fall in July, reflecting expectations of a
lower external demand and the greater risks related
to the imposition of U.S. tariffs on foreign exports.

Most emerging economies continued growing at a
higher rate during the second quarter of the year,
albeit with differences, reflecting the asymmetric
effects of higher commodity prices and tighter
financial conditions. The growth of the Chinese
economy slowed down slightly during the second
quarter, under an environment where the balance of
risks to growth in that country deteriorated due to the
lower growth rate of credit and the uncertainty
associated with the escalation of trade disputes with
the U.S. This situation could also have a negative

1 The Congressional Budget Office (CBO) estimate for the natural
unemployment rate for the second quarter is of 4.6%, while the


effect on other Asian economies due to the high level
of integration of the region’s supply chains.

In general, the international prices of commodities
decreased in recent weeks. On the one hand, after
having increased as a result of falling oil production
in Libya and Venezuela and uncertainty associated
with sanctions imposed by the U.S. on crude oil
exports from Iran, oil prices fell sharply, due to the
possibility of Saudi Arabia and Russia raising their
production levels and the U.S. using its strategic oil
reserves to supply the market. The prices of
industrial metals fell significantly due to the growing
trade tensions between the U.S. and China and their
potential impact on the economic growth of that
Asian country. Finally, the prices of grains exhibited
an erratic behavior due to both the unfavorable
weather conditions and the tariffs imposed by China
on several grains from the U.S.

**A.1.2. Monetary policy and international financial**
**markets**

The reduced slack in the labor markets of advanced
economies and the higher prices of food and energy
have contributed to the gradual increase of inflation,
albeit with significant differences across countries
(Chart 3). In the U.S., inflation rose as some
transitory factors that had maintained it at low levels
during the last year faded out, particularly regarding
telecommunication fares. In the Eurozone and
Japan, core inflation and inflation expectations
remain low, despite the fact that the reduced slack in
their labor markets has been reflected in higher wage
levels.

Federal Reserve’s most recent estimate for the long-term
unemployment rate is 4.5%.

11


-----

**Chart 3**

**Selected Advanced Economies: Core Inflation**


3 USA 1/
Eurozone
Japan 2/
Canada 3/
United Kingdom 1/

2

1


0

-1

2014 2015 2016 2017 2018


1/ Corresponds to the Consumer Price Index (CPI).
2/ Excludes fresh foods, energy, and the direct effect of the consumption
tax increase.
3/ Excludes food, energy, and the effect of adjustments on indirect taxes
(CPI-XFET).
Source: Haver Analytics, BEA, Eurostat, and Statistics Bureau.

In this environment, the central banks of the major
advanced economies are expected to continue
undergoing a gradual process towards implementing
a more neutral monetary policy stance, although a
greater divergence is anticipated in the pace at which
each one of them could adjust their respective
policies. The U.S. Federal Reserve, the Bank of
England, and the Bank of Canada are expected to
continue raising their respective reference rates in
the coming months, while the European Central Bank
and the Bank of Japan are expected to be more
cautious as to the normalization process of their
respective monetary policies (Chart 4).


3.0% **― U.S. Federal Reserve*** Forecasts

**― Bank of England**

2.5% **― Bank of Japan**

**― EBC key deposit facility rate**

2.0% **--- Implied trajectory of OIS curve at Jun 18, 2018**

**― Implied trajectory of OIS curve at Aug 01, 2018**

1.5%

1.0%

0.5%

0.0%

-0.5%

-1.0% End 2018 End 2019 End 2020

2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020

|Col1|Col2|es: Cor|re Infla|ation|
|---|---|---|---|---|
|||es: Cor change|e Infla|tion June 018|
|||2017|2||
|||CPI). t effect of justments tatistics Bu banks ected wards i stance in the p st thei erve, t da are refere opean pected n proc art 4). Trajec Forecasts|the cons on indire reau. of the to co mplem, altho ace at r resp he Ba expec nce ra Centra to be ess o tory in||
|% % %|― Bank of England ― Bank of Japan ― EBC key deposit facility rate --- Implied trajectory of OIS curve at Jun 18, 2018 ― Implied trajectory of OIS curve at Aug 01, 2018||||
|%|||||
|%|||||
|%|||||


1/ OIS: Fixed floating interest rate swap where the fixed interest rate is the
effective overnight reference rate.

- In the case of the U.S. observed reference rate, the average interest rate
of the federal funds target range is used (1.75%-2.00%).
Source: Bloomberg.


In its July meeting, as expected, the Federal Reserve
kept the target range for the federal funds rate
unchanged at between 1.75 and 2%, and reiterated
its intention of increasing it gradually and in a manner
consistent with sustained economic growth, tighter
labor market conditions, and the convergence of
inflation to the symmetric 2% target. In this context,
market indicators almost fully price in that the Fed will
raise its target rate by 25 basis points (bps) in its
September meeting, and reflect the possibility of an
additional 25 bps raise before the end of the year.

In its July meeting, as expected, the Bank of Canada
raised its reference rate by 25 bps, to 1.5%. This
central bank pointed out that the economy continues
to operate near its full capacity and reiterated that it
will continue increasing its reference rate gradually to
keep inflation near its target. The Bank of Canada is
thus expected to raise its key interest rate to 1.75%
before the end of 2018.

In its August meeting, the Bank of England raised its
reference rate by 0.25 percentage points, to 0.75%.
In its press release, the Monetary Policy Committee
pointed out the need for a further tightening of its
monetary policy stance in the following years to
ensure that inflation will return to its 2% target.
Nevertheless, this central bank reiterated that it will
continue raising such rates gradually and in a limited
fashion, as long as the country’s economic
developments continue being consistent with

economic forecasts. This central bank raised its
growth forecast for the remainder of 2018 and for
2019, while it continues expecting inflation to be
above its target, at least until 2020. Additionally, it
reiterated that the economic outlook might be
affected by the response of economic agents to the
results of the Brexit negotiations.

In its June meeting, the European Central Bank
(ECB) kept its key deposit facility rate and its forward
guidance unchanged, by stating that interest rates
will not vary at least until the Summer of 2019, or until
necessary to ensure that inflation converges
sustainably to its target. The ECB also pointed out
that it will continue to buy assets for a monthly
amount of 30,000 million euros until the end of
September and that, subject to incoming economic
figures, it is expecting to reduce these purchases to
15,000 million euros from late September to
December 2018, when this program is anticipated to
conclude. It also stated that, despite the high
uncertainty over global trade, available information
indicates that the region has been growing at a high
and generalized rate. The ECB pointed out that,
although inflation has remained weak, pressures on

12


-----

costs have increased due to the tightening of the
European labor markets and the high utilization rates
of capacity, reflecting its confidence that inflation will
continue converging to its target. Monetary policy
expectations implied by market instruments continue
to anticipate that the first increase of the key interest
rate will take place in the third quarter of 2019.

Finally, the Bank of Japan announced that it will
maintain a highly accommodative monetary policy
stance for as long as is necessary to reach its price
stability target. This institution kept its short-term
reference rate unchanged at -0.1% and its long-term
rate indexed to its 10-year bond at 0%. The Bank of
Japan emphasized that such rates will be kept at
those levels for a long time. This central bank
modified some aspects of its asset purchase
program and of its yield curve control policy to
improve their sustainability in the long run and to
mitigate any negative effects they could have on
Japan’s markets.

In emerging economies, headline inflation increased
further due to factors such as the recent depreciation
of their currencies, the rise in energy prices, and the
lower slack in the economy. In most countries,
however, headline inflation remained below the
target of their respective central banks. The
Philippines, Indonesia, and the Czech Republic
raised their monetary policy target rates, while other
central banks are expected to adopt a tighter policy
stance in the coming months if the balance of risks to
inflation deteriorates further.

In the specific case of China, although the reference
rate was kept unchanged, its central bank cut the
reserve requirements for commercial banks and
increased the access to medium-term loans in an
effort to promote the granting of credit to small and
medium enterprises in order to face a potential
economic slowdown in that country. The Chinese
authorities also announced a fiscal stimulus package
to offset the negative effects of uncertainty caused by
external factors on economic activity.

In this context, international financial markets
underwent episodes of volatility and became highly
sensitive to the heightened trade tensions between
the U.S. and other countries and its implications for
global economic growth. As a result, the assets of
emerging markets, as well as those that are more
sensitive to an environment of higher protectionism,
posted negative returns, particularly in the Asian
region. In this regard, the fall of the Chinese stock
market indexes and the depreciation of the renminbi
stand out. Auto industry stock prices also fell


significantly in light of the possibility that the U.S.
imposes tariffs on vehicle imports, while the prices of
industrial metals were adjusted downwards given the
possibility of a weakening of economic activity and
the consequent lower demand for commodities.

In advanced economies, both stock market indexes
and exchange rates exhibited only a few variations,
although U.S. stock markets remained on an upward
trend driven by the strong dynamism of economic
activity and the solid profits generated by companies
during the second quarter. Such profits reflected, in
part, the effects of the recent fiscal reform in that
country (Chart 5). Debt instruments exhibited slight
changes. In the U.S., short-term interest rates
continued to increase more than long-term ones,
thus contributing to a further flattening of the yield
curve and raising concerns among investors about
the economic cycle’s maturity.

**Chart 5**

**Change in Selected Financial Indicators**

**(June 18 – August 1, 2018)**

Percent, basis points


1/ MSCI Emerging Markets Index (includes 24 countries).
2/ DXY: Weighted average of the nominal exchange rate of the six main
world-traded currencies (calculated by Intercontinental Exchange, ICE) with
the following weights: EUR (57.6%), JPY (13.6%), GBP (11.9%), CAD
(9.1%), SEK (4.2%), and CHF (3.6%).
3/ J.P. Morgan Index constructed from a weighted average of the nominal
exchange rate of emerging economies’ currencies with the following
weights: TRY (8.3%), RUB (8.3%), HUF (8.3%), ZAR (8.3%), BRL (11.1%),
MXN (11.1%), CLP (11.1%), CNH (11.1%), INR (11.1%), and SGD (11.1%).
Source: Bloomberg and ICE.

In emerging economies, the prices of financial assets
fell due to the persisting trade tensions and to
idiosyncratic factors. Assets from Argentina, Turkey,
and the Asian emerging economies were particularly
affected. A continuing reduction in capital flows to
these economies was observed, although

accumulated flows during the year remain positive.

Looking ahead, risk factors persist that may lead to
new volatility in financial markets. In recent weeks,
protectionist trade measures escalated. If these
persist, they could lead to a sharp adjustment in

13


11%
10%

9%
8%
7%
6%
5%
4%
3%
2%
1%
0%

-1%
-2%
-3%
-4%
-5%
-6%
-7%
-8%
-9%


30

25

20

15

10

5

0

-5

-10

-15

-20

-25


-----

financial markets and to a deceleration of

international trade and investment, therefore posing
a risk for the cycle’s current stage of expansion.
Another risk is the possibility of monetary policy
normalization in advanced economies taking place at
a more rapid pace than expected by financial
markets. The high valuation of some financial assets,
the high leverage position of households and
businesses in certain countries, and several
geopolitical factors continue being risk factors as
well.

**A.2. Current situation of the Mexican economy**

**A.2.1. Mexican markets**

In the weeks after Banco de México’s last monetary
policy statement, the Mexican peso exchange rate
against the U.S. dollar appreciated by around 10.7%
(Chart 6), standing out as the currency that
performed the best against the U.S. dollar during the
period. The peso totally reverted its depreciation
trend accumulated in the last months by appreciating
6.1% so far this year (Chart 7). This behavior was
observed after Mexico’s presidential and legislative
elections and as a result of a more optimistic outlook
regarding the North America Free Trade Agreement
(NAFTA) renegotiation. The 25 bps raise in Banco de
México’s monetary policy target rate in June also
contributed to the appreciation of the peso exchange
rate.

In this context, foreign exchange market-operating
conditions, including liquidity and market depth,
improved slightly vis-à-vis those observed during
June (Chart 8). The implied volatility of peso-dollar
exchange rate options decreased significantly,
particularly in shorter-than-3 month tenors (Chart 9).
This led to an increase in net long derivatives
positions on the Mexican peso, mainly among foreign
investors with short-term investment horizons (Chart
10). As for exchange rate expectations, forecasters
from various financial institutions modified their
projections from 18.95 to 19.00 pesos per dollar for
the end of 2018, and from 18.62 to 18.80 pesos per
dollar for the end of 2019.


**Chart 6**

**Mexican Peso and Bid-ask Spreads of its**

**Intraday Quotes**

Pesos per dollar

**Bid-ask**
**spread**

**(Mexican**

**peso cents)**

20.0

19.0

Source: Prepared by Banco de México with Reuters data.


**Bid-ask**
**spread**

**(Mexican**

**peso cents)**

20.0

19.0


Note: Currencies’ mean and range of the following emerging countries:
Peru, Turkey, Philippines, Poland, Hungary, South Korea, Indonesia, South
Africa, Russia, Brazil, Colombia, and Chile. The black vertical line
represents Banco de México’s last monetary policy decision.
Source: Prepared by Banco de México with Bloomberg data.

14


**Chart 7**

**Accumulated Index of Selected Emerging**

**Currencies and Mexican Peso in 2018**

Index (Dec 2017 =100)

115

110

105

100

95

90

Range

85 Mexican peso

Canadian dollar

80 Emerging currencies mean

July

75


J J F M M A M M J J J


-----

**Chart 8**

**Mexican Foreign Exchange Market Operating**

**Conditions and Peso-dollar Exchange Rate**

Index (5-day moving average), pesos per dollar


90

80


**Chart 10**

**Mexican Peso Net Futures Position in Chicago**

**Mercantile Exchange by Investor Type**

Millions of dollars

4,000

|Mercantile Exchange by Investor Type Millions of dollars|Col2|
|---|---|
|||
|Asset managers Hedge funds|July|


J A A S O N D J F M A M J J


70

60


3,000

2,000


50

40


1,000

0


30

20


22.0

21.5

21.0

20.5

20.0

19.5

19.0

18.5

18.0

17.5

17.0


-1,000

-2,000


J M A J J S O D J M A J J S O D J M A J J


2016 2017 2018

Note: Index calculated using the mean, volatility, skewness, kurtosis, bidask spread and mean of simple differentials all of them related to quotes of
intraday operations, and the total traded volume. After obtaining this data,
the percentiles since 2011 are calculated and the average of the 7
percentiles for each day is considered. The black vertical line represents
Banco de México’s last monetary policy decision.
Source: Prepared by Banco de México with Reuters data.


**Chart 9**

**Implied Volatility of Selected Emerging**

**Currencies-USD Options at Different Maturities**

**(July 30, 2018)**

Percent


Note: The black vertical line represents Banco de México's last monetary
policy decision.
Source: Prepared by Banco de México with data from the Commodity
Futures Trading Commission (CFTC).

Since the previous monetary policy statement, the
yield curve of government securities had a positive
performance, with interest rates of shorter-term
instruments registering the most significant

decreases (of up to 27 bps; Chart 11). It is worth
noting that the adjustment of interest rates in the
Mexican market took place in an environment where
operating conditions in the bond market remained
stable. During this period, capital inflows from foreign
investors to peso-denominated assets stood out,
particularly those directed to medium term

instruments (Chart 12).

Finally, expectations for the target rate implied in the
interest rate swap yield curve were 7.76% for Banco
de México’s August monetary policy decision and
8.02% for the end of the year (Chart 13). The
consensus among forecasters is that the central
bank will leave the target rate unchanged in its
August policy decision, anticipating that it will close
the year at 7.75%.

15


20

18

16

14

12

10

8

6

4

|Turkey Turkey South Africa Brazil Brazil South Africa Mexico Mexico Colombia Colombia Russia Russia Chile Chile Hungary Hungary Poland Poland Czech Republic Czech Republ South Korea South Korea Indonesia Indonesia Malaysia Malaysia|Turkey Turkey Brazil Brazil South Africa South Africa Mexico Mexico Colombia Colombia Russia Russia Hungary Chile Poland Hungary Poland Chile ic Czech Republic Czech Republic South Korea IS no du ot nh e K so iarea Indonesia Malaysia Malaysia|
|---|---|


**1M** **2M** **3M** **6M**

Source: Bloomberg.


-----

8.25

8.00

7.75

7.50


**Chart 11**

**Government Bond Yield Curve**

Percent, basis points

←June 18, 2018 ←July 30, 2018 Change from June 18, 2018 to July 30, 2018 →

0 5 10 15 20 25 30

Tenor (years)


20

10

0

-10

-20

-30


Source: PIP.

**Chart 12**

**Foreign Investors’ Flows in Mexican**

**Government Securities in 2018**

Accumulated flows in thousand million pesos

200 Other goverment bonds

Less-than-3 year Mbonds

160 More-than-3 year Mbonds

Zero-coupon bonds (Cetes)

120 Inflation-linked bonds (Udibonos)

80

40

0

-40

-80

-120

July

-160

J J F A A M J J

Note: The black vertical line represents Banco de México’s last monetary
policy decision.
Source: Prepared by Banco de México with Indeval data.

**Chart 13**

**Banxico Overnight Interest Rate Implied in**

**28-day TIIE IRS Curve**

Percent Percentage

8.50

Banxico overnight rate (target rate)

8.25

June 18, 2018

8.00

July 30, 2018

7.75

Rest of the period

7.50

7.25

7.00

6.75

6.50

6.25

6.00

5.75

5.50

J        M        O         F         J          N         M         A D

2017                          2018                           2019

Source: Prepared by Banco de México with PIP data.


**A.2.2. Economic activity and determinants of**
**inflation**

According to INEGI´s GDP timely estimate, Mexico’s
economic activity contracted during the second
quarter of 2018, in contrast with the rebound
observed during the last quarter of 2017 and first
quarter of 2018 (Chart 14). This result is partly the
reflection of both the reversion in the dynamism
exhibited by investment, particularly that related to
construction, and a weakening of exports. Private
consumption, in contrast, remained on a positive
trend.

**Chart 14**

**Gross Domestic Product**

Quarterly percentage change, s. a.

2

1

0

-1


-2 Q-II 1/

I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV I II

2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018

s. a. / Seasonally adjusted figures.
1/ The figure corresponding to the second quarter of 2018 refers to
INEGI’s GDP quarterly timely estimate.
Source: Mexico’s National Accounts System (SCNM, for its acronym in
Spanish), INEGI.

During the April-June 2018 period, manufacturing
exports exhibited a certain slowdown vis-à-vis the
previous quarter, mainly as a reflection of the
contraction of automobile exports, while nonautomobile exports followed an upward trend (Chart
15). By destination, exports to the U.S. continued to
grow, albeit at a lower rate, while those to the rest of
the world exhibited an incipient negative trend. As for
domestic demand, despite private consumption’s fall
in April (as revealed by its monthly indicator), it
remained on a positive trend. More timely indicators
of consumption, although of less coverage, exhibited
a mixed behavior. In particular, in May, revenues of
retail stores maintained the dynamism they had been
exhibiting since the beginning of the year. In contrast,
the lack of vigor in the sales of light vehicles persisted
up to the end of the second quarter of 2018. Between
March and April 2018, investment slowed down, in
contrast with the recovery observed at the end of
2017 and beginning of 2018, in response to both the
fading recovery that construction had exhibited in the

16

|Other goverment bonds Less-than-3 year Mbonds More-than-3 year Mbonds Zero-coupon bonds (Cetes) Inflation-linked bonds (Udibonos)|Col2|
|---|---|
|||


-----

previous months, and the incipient trend change of
spending in machinery and equipment.

**Chart 15**

**Total Manufacturing Exports**

Indices 2013 = 100, s. a.

160

Total

150 Automotive

Non-automotive

140

130

120

110

100

90

June

80

J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M

2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018

s. a. / Seasonally adjusted series and trend series. The former is
represented by a solid line and the latter by a dotted line.
Source: Prepared by Banco de México with data from the Tax
Administration Service (SAT, for its acronym in Spanish), the Ministry of the
Economy (SE, for its acronym in Spanish), Banco de México, the National
Institute of Statistics and Geography (INEGI, for its acronym in Spanish),
Mexico’s Merchandise Trade Balance, and National System of Statistical
and Geographical Information (SNIEG).

As for production, during the second quarter of 2018,
secondary activities continued showing weak results,
after the uptick observed at the end of 2017 and
beginning of 2018, while primary activities exhibited
a strong contraction and tertiary activities slowed
down, as compared to the dynamism observed in the
previous quarters (Chart 16). Regarding industrial
activity, during the April – May 2018 period, mining
continued on a negative trend, while the rebound
observed in construction between December 2017
and February 2018 reverted (Chart 17). In contrast,
manufacturing production exhibited an incipient
recovery. As for the services sector, the slowdown
observed reflected mainly the weak results of its
components of wholesale and retail trade; arts,
entertainment and recreation; and other services
(except public administration), while those of
transportation and warehousing; information and
cultural industries; finance and insurance; real estate
and rental and leasing; public administration;
professional, scientific and technical services; and,
management of companies and enterprises,

continued growing.


s. a. / Seasonally adjusted and trend series. The former is represented by a
solid line and the latter by a dotted line.
Source: Mexico’s National Accounts System (SCNM, for its acronym in
Spanish), INEGI.

**Chart 17**

**Industrial Activity**

Indices 2013 = 100, s. a.

115

110

105

100

95

90 Total

85 Mining (22.3%)

Manufacturing (49.7%)

80 Construction (23.3%)

75 Utilities (4.7%)

May

70

J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M

2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018

s. a. / Seasonally adjusted series and trend series. The former is
represented by a solid line and the latter by a dotted line.
Source: PEMEX and Mexico’s National Accounts System (SCNM, for its
acronym in Spanish), INEGI.

As for the economy’s cyclical position, several
indicators of slack conditions suggest that these
loosened during the second quarter of 2018. In
particular, as a result of the contraction in GDP
observed during the April – June period, the positive
output gap measure that excludes the oil sector,
narrowed, and ended up close to zero (Chart 18).
Regarding labor market conditions, both the urban
and national unemployment rates remained at low
levels (Chart 19). The number of IMSS-insured jobs
continued on an upward trajectory, albeit at a
moderate rate of growth. According to available
information from the first quarter of 2018, unit labor
costs in real terms for the overall economy exhibited
a level similar to that of the last quarter of 2017, while
in May, those of the manufacturing sector remained
on an upward trend.

17


**Chart 16**

**Global Index of Economic Activity**

Indices 2013 = 100, s. a.


120

115

110

105

100

95


140

130

120

110

100

90


J

2012


M S J

2013


M S J

2014


M S J

2015


M S J

2016


M S J

2017


M S J

2018


M


-----

**Chart 18**

**Output Gap Estimates [1/]**

**Excluding Oil Industry [4/ ]**

Potential output percentages, s. a.


8.0

Global Index of Economic Activity (IGAE) 2/

6.0 Gross Domestic Product 2/

4.0 95% Confidence interval 3/

2.0

0.0

-2.0

-4.0

-6.0

-8.0

-10.0 Q-II

June

-12.0

J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M J

2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018


s. a. / Seasonally-adjusted figures.
1/ Output gap estimated with a tail-corrected Hodrick-Prescott filter; see
Banco de México (2009), “Inflation Report (April-June 2009)", p.74.
2/ Second quarter of 2018 GDP figures; IGAE figures up to June 2018
consistent with GDP figures.
3/ Output gap confidence interval calculated with a method of unobserved
components.
4/ Excludes both oil and gas extraction, support activities for mining, and
petroleum and coal products' manufacturing.
Source: Prepared by Banco de México with data from INEGI.

**Chart 19**

**National Unemployment Rate and Urban**

**Unemployment Rate**

Percent, s. a

8

Urban unemployment rate

National unemployment rate

7

6

5

4

June

3

J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M J

2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018

s. a. / Seasonally-adjusted and trend series. The former is represented by
a solid line and the latter by a dotted line.
Source: National Survey of Occupations and Employment (ENOE, for its
acronym in Spanish), INEGI.

At the end of the second quarter of 2018, the real
annual growth rate of financing to the private nonfinancial sector continued to increase, as compared
to the end of 2017. This was mainly the result of the
higher growth rate of domestic financing to
companies, particularly large companies, while
lending to SMEs continued to grow moderately.
Credit to households continued to grow at low rates,
although higher than those observed at the end of
2017. The aforementioned took place in a context
where the costs of financing reached levels above
those observed on average during 2017 and, in


general, did not exhibit significant changes vis-à-vis
the previous quarter. Business and housing
delinquency rates have remained stable and at low
levels, except those related to consumer lending.
The latter continue at relatively high levels, although
there are signs that they have stopped deteriorating.
This suggests the absence of demand pressures on
the loanable funds market.

**A.2.3. Developments in inflation and inflation**
**outlook**

During the first half of July, the annual rate of
headline inflation rose to 4.85%, after having posted
a rate of 4.51% in May and of 4.65% in July. These
increases were associated with the materialization of
some risks to the upside that had been previously
mentioned, as a result of higher-than-expected rises
in the prices of energy-related products, which led to
significant increases in non-core inflation (Chart 20
and Table 1).

**Chart 20**

**Consumer Price Index**

Annual percentage change

13 CPI

12 Core

Non-core

11

10

9

8

7

6

5

4

3

2

|Chart 20 Consumer Price Index Annual percentage change CPI|Col2|Col3|Col4|Col5|Col6|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|CPI Core Non-core||||||
|||||||
|||||||
|1st half July||||||


J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J

2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018

Source: Banco de México and INEGI.

Annual core inflation reached 3.69% in May and
3.62% in June. This fall was caused mainly by the
decline in the annual rate of change of merchandise
prices. During the first half of July, annual core
inflation reached 3.64%. The fact that core inflation
stopped declining in that month is associated in part
with the indirect effects of the increases in energy
prices. During the first half of July, the annual rate of
change of merchandise prices exhibited a rebound,
which was slightly more noticeable in the case of
non-food items (Chart 21 and Chart 22). The annual
growth rate of the price sub-index of services
exhibited a moderate decline (Chart 22 and Table 1).

18


1

0


1st half
July


-----

**Chart 21**

**Merchandise Core Price Subindex**

Annual percentage change


8

7

6

5

4

3

2

1

0


J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J

2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018

Source: Banco de México and INEGI.

**Chart 22**

**Merchandise and Services Core Price Subindex**

Annual percentage change

7

Merchandise

6 Services

5

4

3

2

1

1st half
July

0

J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J

2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018

Source: Banco de México and INEGI.

Annual non-core inflation increased further, reaching
6.99% in May, 7.79% in June, and 8.52% in the first
half of July. The high annual growth rate of energy
prices, mainly those of L.P. gas and gasoline, were
the most relevant in this regard. These results were
partially offset by the low inflation levels of the price
sub-index of agricultural products (Chart 23 and
Table 1).

The medians for short-term inflation expectations
from Banco de México’s Survey of Private Sector
Forecasters, increased between May and June. In
this regard, the rise in the median for headline
inflation expectations for the end of 2018 is
noteworthy, after recent inflation figures, particularly
those related to its non-core component, were above
private sector forecasters’ expectations. Hence, the
medians for headline inflation expectations for the
end of 2018 and 2019 were adjusted upwards from
3.94% to 4.25% for the end of 2018 and from 3.55%
to 3.60% for the end of 2019. In contrast, the medians
for expectations for the following 12 months from


these surveys, both relative to the month in which
data is collected and to the subsequent month, were
adjusted downwards, from 3.90% to 3.85% and from
3.90% to 3.80%, respectively. The medians for
medium- and long-term inflation expectations

remained stable at around 3.5%. As for inflation
expectations implied in quoted market prices of longterm money market instruments (drawn from 10-year
government bonds), these remained unchanged, at
levels close to 3.5%. The inflation risk premia
increased during the same period.

**Chart 23**

**Non-core Price Subindex**
Annual percentage change

20 Non-core

Agriculture
Energy and government-authorized prices

15

10

5

1st half
July

0

-5

J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J

2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018

Source: Banco de México and INEGI.

Given that the prices of energy-related products have
increased more than expected, especially those of
gasoline and L.P. gas, the expected trajectory for
headline inflation could be affected for the next 12
months, although this effect is estimated to be of a
transitory nature. In contrast, core inflation is
foreseen to remain on a downward trend. Among the
upside risks to inflation are; first, pressures on the
peso exchange rate due to an environment of higher
external interest rates and U.S. dollar strength and to
persisting uncertainty in both the external and
domestic fronts, such as the NAFTA renegotiation;
second, additional upward pressures on some
energy prices or increases in agricultural prices; and,
third, that the trade policy measures adopted by the
U.S. generate an escalation of protectionist and
countervailing actions that could negatively affect the
behavior of inflation. As for downside risks, the peso
could appreciate if NAFTA negotiations turn out to be
favorable.

19


-----

**Table 1**

**Consumer Price Index and Components**

Annual percentage change

**Item** **December 2017** **May 2018** **June 2018** **1st half July 2018**

**CPI** 6.77 4.51 4.65 4.85

**SubyacenteCore** 4.87 3.69 3.62 3.64

**Merchandise** 6.17 4.07 3.88 4.02

Food, beverages, and tobacco 6.82 4.73 4.49 4.55

Non-food merchandise 5.62 3.52 3.36 3.57

**Services** 3.76 3.36 3.38 3.31

Housing 2.65 2.57 2.60 2.61

Education (tuitions) 4.74 4.82 4.81 4.81

Other services 4.63 3.73 3.76 3.58

**Non-coreNo Subyacente** 12.62 6.99 7.79 8.52

**Agriculture** 9.75 2.87 2.11 2.23

Fruits and vegetables 18.60 -0.87 -1.40 0.67

Meats, poultry, fish, and eggs Livestock 4.50 5.14 4.24 3.21

**Energy and government-authorized pricesEnergéticos y Tarifas Aut. por Gobierno** 14.44 9.59 11.40 12.59

Energy goodsEnergy 17.69 12.37 15.22 17.16


Source: INEGI


Government-authorized prices 8.36 4.53 4.48 4.39


-----

-----

-----

