-----

-----

**FOREWARNING**
This document is provided for the reader’s convenience only.
The translation from the official Spanish version was made
by Banco de México’s staff. Discrepancies may arise
between the original document in Spanish and its English
translation. It should be noted that the original Spanish
version is the only official document.


**1. PLACE, DATE, AND PARTICIPANTS**

**1.1. Place:** Av. Cinco de Mayo no.2, 5[th] floor, Col.
Centro, Mexico City

**1.2. Date of Governing Board meeting:** June 20,
2018

**1.3. Participants:**

Alejandro Díaz de León-Carrillo, Governor

Roberto Del Cueto-Legaspi, Deputy Governor

Irene Espinosa-Cantellano, Deputy Governor

Javier Eduardo Guzmán-Calafell, Deputy Governor

Manuel Ramos-Francia, Deputy Governor

José Antonio González-Anaya, Secretary of Finance
and Public Credit

Miguel Messmacher-Linartas, Undersecretary of
Finance and Public Credit

Fernando Luis Corvera-Caraza, Secretary of the
Governing Board

Prior to this meeting, preliminary work by Banco de
México’s staff, analyzing the economic and financial
environment, together with the developments in
inflation and the determinants and outlook for
inflation, was conducted and presented to the
Governing Board.

**2. ANALYSIS AND RATIONALE BEHIND THE**
**GOVERNING BOARD’S VOTING**

This section summarizes the views exposed by the
members of the Governing Board regarding the
monetary policy decision.

All members highlighted that, according to available
data, the world economy increased its growth rate
during the second quarter of 2018. Some members
pointed out that this increase was the result of higher
growth in advanced economies. One member noted
that this was due to temporary factors that faded out
and had affected the dynamism of some of these
economies at the beginning of the year.


Nevertheless, most members highlighted that
economic growth among advanced economies has
started to show signs of divergence, emphasizing
that, in contrast with the United States, where a
stronger upswing in economic activity is expected,
the rest of the advanced economies have exhibited
signs of lesser dynamism.

Most members pointed out that the forecasts for
world economic growth for 2018 and 2019 have
remained practically unchanged. One member
stated that growth rates are expected to be higher
than those for 2017 and to be above potential.
Notwithstanding the above, most members

mentioned that both uncertainty in the short run, and
medium run downside risks to world economic
growth, have increased. Such members pointed to
three risks that stand out: i) the intensification of
protectionist trade measures; ii) a possible tightening
of financial conditions caused by a faster pace of
normalization of monetary policy by the Federal
Reserve, in case of inflationary surprises in the
United States; and, iii) the escalation of certain
geopolitical risks. Some members added that the
protectionist actions adopted by the United States
have led to retaliatory trade measures by other
countries, and that the possible escalation of these
could have significant effects on global trade and
investment. One member pointed out that these
events could significantly reduce international trade
flows, even in countries not directly involved. In this
regard, the same member highlighted that,

according to recent estimates, increases in tariff
barriers to levels authorized by the WTO, could result
in a reduction of world trade similar to that observed
in 2008-2009, affecting to a larger extent emerging
and developing regions. This member stated that this
is particularly relevant in view of the importance of
international flows of merchandises and services for
world growth. In this regard, another member noted
that growth figures for world trade volume already
show a clear reversion.

Regarding geopolitical risks, one member argued
that such episodes could have a negative effect not
only on economic activity of the regions involved, but
also on the world economy, mainly through its effect
on investment. This member also added that
although the world’s geopolitical situation apparently
has improved after the recent meeting between the
Presidents of the United States and North Korea,
tensions in other fronts persist and are at risk of
intensifying. Additionally, this member stated that, on
top of these challenges, there are those related to

1


-----

election processes and to political developments in
different countries, both advanced and emerging.

Another member added that world economic growth
is forecasted to decrease in the medium term, in so
far as slack conditions worldwide become tighter,
investment and trade moderate, the effects of the
U.S. tax reform fade out, the economic stimulus
generated by China dissipates, and financing
conditions grow tighter.

As for world inflation, most members pointed out that
there is also some divergence in the behavior of
inflation and its expectations in advanced

economies. The majority emphasized that inflation
has increased in the United States, while some
added that inflation remains at low levels in other
advanced economies. As for the balance of risks to
world inflation, one member pointed out that it
remains relatively stable in the short-term, albeit with
mixed signs. Some members mentioned that one of
the main risks to world inflation is the intensification
of trade tensions among some of the major world
economies. One member added that other risk
factors to inflation persist, including: i) a faster rate of
increase of U.S. inflation; ii) a continuation of the
upward trend in the prices of commodities; and, iii)
problems in some emerging economies that have
external or fiscal imbalances.

Regarding economic activity, most members pointed
out that the outlook for the U.S. economy has
strengthened. Some members highlighted the
upswing in U.S. growth during the second quarter of
2018, driven by the recovery of private consumption,
pointing out that these results are consistent with the
increased levels of consumer confidence and
disposable income. One member added that fixed
investment has exhibited a strong recovery as well.
Another member stated that the U.S. economy has
undergone an atypical cycle, characterized by a
gradual and widespread recovery, which has
narrowed the output gap and led to historically low
levels of unemployment. In this context, most
members emphasized that the labor market has
continued to strengthen and that slack conditions
have tightened. Most members noted that U.S.
economic activity is expected to grow at a strong
pace in 2018 and 2019, and one member stated that
the environment is more uncertain for the medium
and long terms.

As for other advanced economies, most members
noted that in contrast with the United States, the
Eurozone has grown at a slower pace during the
second quarter of the year, and doubts persist as to
the soundness of its recovery. One member
mentioned that this has occurred in an environment
where political tension in Italy and Spain has


intensified and concerns about the possibility of
additional protectionist measures have increased.
Regarding Japan, another member mentioned that
expectations for the Japanese economy's growth
this year have been revised slightly downwards.

As to inflation in the major advanced economies,
most members pointed out that in the case of the
United States inflation and inflation expectations
have already started to increase. These members
argued that the fiscal stimulus adopted, in the
context of reduced slack in the economy, particularly
in the labor market, might lead to greater pressures
on wages and prices. One member added that the
possible impact of protectionist measures and the
recovery of the prices of fuels and other commodities
could also contribute to an uptick in inflation. In this
regard, one member pointed out that financial
markets suggest that the balance of risks to inflation
is somewhat biased upwards. In this regard, all
members emphasized that there is a risk that
inflationary surprises may arise in the United States.
Another member stated that inflation has not only
increased in the United States, but also in Canada,
in contrast with that of Japan and the Eurozone,
where it remains weak and below their central banks’
targets.

Most members stated that, given the divergence in
the behavior of both economic activity and inflation
among the major advanced economies, the
observed and expected trajectories of monetary
policy have also exhibited some divergence. One
member pointed out that, in view of expectations of
a generalized increase in inflation, monetary policy
in some advanced economies is foreseen to turn less
accommodative. Nevertheless, the same member
noted that this process will be faster in the United
States than in other countries. Elaborating on the
case of the United States, most members pointed out
that, as expected, in its June decision, the Federal
Reserve raised the target range for the federal funds
rate by 25 basis points, to between 1.75 and 2.00%.
One member stated that the language in its FOMC
statement points to a faster process of monetary
policy normalization. Most members highlighted that
this committee increased its median forecasts for the
expected trajectory of the federal funds rate for the
end of 2018 and for 2019, and thus is expecting two
additional increases of 25 basis points each for the
rest of the year. One member noted that the forecast
for the reference rate for the end of 2019 is already
above the Federal Reserve’s long-run estimate. The
same member emphasized that the Federal Reserve
raised its projections for economic growth for 2018,
for inflation for 2018 and 2019, and lowered those for
unemployment for 2018, 2019, and 2020. Some
members emphasized that the Federal Reserve
reiterated its expectation that inflation will be near its

2


-----

symmetric 2% target in the medium term. In this
context, most members concluded that the expected
path is consistent with a scenario of gradual
adjustments in the federal funds rate. One member
pointed out that the scenario of higher inflation in the
U.S. is being adjusted by the Federal Reserve with
no distress, and that the baseline scenario for
inflation in that country does not consider adverse
inflationary shocks. However, all members

highlighted that, given the possibility of inflationary
surprises, the risk that the Federal Reserve may
follow a faster-than-expected normalization of its
monetary policy persists. One member mentioned
that there is a higher probability of this event given
the increase of both inflation and inflation

expectations. The same member also pointed out
that said normalization process is not expected to be
accompanied by excessive volatility. Regarding the
monetary policy of other advanced economies, one
member pointed out that, given the moderate growth
of inflation in the Eurozone, the European Central
Bank kept its reference rate unchanged, stating that
it is expecting to keep it at the current level until at
least the summer of 2019 or until necessary. Another
member stated that in view of these messages,
markets incorporated a delay in the expected date
for increases in the Eurozone reference rates until
the fall of 2019. One member highlighted that the
Bank of England and the Bank of Japan also kept
their reference rates unchanged. Nevertheless, the
same member pointed out that the Bank of England
is expected to tighten its stance later this year, while
the Bank of Japan is expected to continue with a
highly accommodative stance possibly until 2020. In
this context, one member estimated that, in general
terms, the U.S. dollar is expected to follow an
appreciation trend in the following quarters and that
the spreads in both the levels and expected
trajectories of interest rates between the United
States and other advanced economies will be higher
and probably more volatile.

As to emerging economies, one member stated that
these continue to grow at a fast pace, although
exhibiting downside risks. The same member
highlighted that the Chinese economy is gradually
slowing down due to its position in the business
cycle. However, this member stated that the
slowdown could be greater as a result of the
elimination of tax benefits and the escalation of a
possible trade war. This member also pointed out
that the scenario for inflation among emerging
economies is also heterogeneous and that the recent
depreciation of some currencies and the increase in
the prices of commodities have heightened the risk
of higher inflation in these economies. The same
member pointed out that while some emerging
countries have loosened their monetary policy
stances, Argentina, Indonesia, Romania, and Turkey


have adopted tighter monetary policy stances, due
to their position in the business cycle and inflationary
pressures.

Most members highlighted that the world economic
environment described above has led to greater
volatility in international financial markets and to
interest rate increases. In particular, one of the
members pointed out that interest rates of U.S. 2year Treasury bonds have hit levels above 2.5% and
also registered an increase of over 120 basis points
since September, while 10- to 30-year Treasury
bonds have yields of 2.9% and 3.0%, corresponding
to increases of over 80 and 35 basis points,
respectively, during the same period. In this context,
most members noted that there has been a
generalized strengthening of the dollar and greater
risk aversion worldwide. Such members pointed out
that all of the above has caused a reallocation of
investment portfolios towards safer assets. In this
regard, one member added that episodes of a
strengthening of fixed-income assets have been
observed in the United States, while another
member added that concerns about overvalued
assets persist, particularly those of emerging
economies, as well as about the growing use of
complex derivatives, which have contributed to
further adjustments in financial markets. In this
regard, most members noted that capital outflows
have been observed, particularly of fixed income
assets from emerging economies and, in some
cases, this situation has been intensified by
idiosyncratic factors. In this context, most members
stated that the currencies of most emerging
economies depreciated significantly and exhibited
greater volatility. One of the members expressed that
the adjustment in emerging markets has also been
significant in equity instruments and even in
sovereign risk indicators. In this regard, the same
member pointed out that, in a context of lower search
for yield, these countries will face tighter financial
conditions. Another member argued that this
scenario is expected to have adverse effects on the
economic performance of these countries and, more
markedly, on those economies where high levels of
both public and private indebtedness, among other
vulnerabilities, persist.

All members stated that in the first quarter of 2018
economic activity in Mexico continued gaining
strength, growing at a rate even higher than that
observed in the previous quarter, although most
members noted that some timely indicators suggest
a slight slowdown during the second quarter. One
member added that economic growth during the first
quarter was apparently influenced by transitory
factors, such the impact of the reconstruction efforts
after the earthquakes of September 2017, which
affected both industrial production and investment

3


-----

figures. The same member added that the recent
strengthening of investment may also be the result
of capital goods imports being brought forward due
to the uncertainty related to the renegotiation of the
North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA)
and, in general, to the escalation of protectionist
trends in the world. This member added that
aggregate demand generally increases in the
months prior to presidential elections. Most

members highlighted that consumption and exports
continued to increase, although exports exhibited a
slight moderation in April. Some members stated that
investment is apparently slowing down. On the
supply side, most members noted that services
continued growing strongly, while industrial

production weakened due to an incipient adjustment
in the trend of construction observed since April, as
well as a slight lack of dynamism in manufacturing.
One member added that this occurred after the
upswing of investment in the previous months,
mainly driven by the rebound in construction.
Regarding low-frequency developments in economic
activity, one member pointed out that in recent years
the economy has been subject to a lower availability
of external funds and to a high degree of uncertainty,
which have led to a significant depreciation of the
real exchange rate. The same member added that
external demand has been adjusting in response to
the significant change in relative prices and to an
environment of higher real interest rates. The same
member also added that this has led to the following
trends in the adjustment process: i) a high dynamism
in exports; ii) a slight moderation in consumption;
and, iii) a tendency for weak investment.

Most members noted that the forecasts for growth for
this year and for 2019, published in Banco de
México’s Quarterly Report, remain unchanged. One
member noted that the Mexican economy is
expected to slow down in the following months as the
factors that influenced economic activity temporarily
at the beginning of 2018 fade out. This and another
member added that the aforementioned slowdown
will also be influenced by a slower rate of growth of
spending in the second semester; a relatively slight
negative effect of the recent imposition of tariffs on
imports from Mexico by the United States and
Mexico’s response; and, an additional reduction in
the oil production platform.

Given the uncertainty caused by the complex
environment faced by the Mexican economy, most
members considered that the balance of risks to
growth continues to be biased downwards. Some
members estimated that this balance has

deteriorated and one member pointed out that,
although risk factors in general terms are the same
that have been observed since some months ago,
several of them indicate a more challenging outlook.


Among such risk factors, most members pointed out
the aforementioned global risks, as well as
uncertainty associated to the lack of agreement in
the NAFTA negotiations and to the country’s
electoral and post-electoral processes. As to the last
two factors, some members noted the possibility that
they may lead to the postponement of investment
projects or to the reduction of consumer spending.
Most members pointed out the possible

consequences on economic activity of an

environment of uncertainty related to the electoral
process, to institutional weakness, as well as to
crime and public insecurity. Regarding these two last
phenomena, one of the members stated that they
constitute challenges to the monopoly of the use of
force by the State and have intensified lately, even in
Mexico City, which may suggest that such
phenomena are no longer geographically isolated.
Another member argued that the growing public
insecurity has already affected the country’s
productive activity. The same member mentioned as
an additional risk factor the possibility of future
adjustments in the fiscal stance that may deteriorate
the perception of sovereign risk. Some members
added the possibility of volatility episodes in financial
markets. One member also mentioned the

worsening of volatility in domestic financial markets,
especially in the foreign exchange market, while
another member referred to the implications of the
recent U.S. fiscal reform.

Most members highlighted that the recent

performance of economic activity caused a slight
tightening in slack conditions. One of the members
pointed out that this tightening has been observed
mainly in the labor market. The same member added
that some wage indicators have started to increase.
These indicators, the member also pointed out,
should be monitored in order to thoroughly identify
their role in the price formation process. Moreover,
another member considered that the labor market
situation exhibits no significant changes. The same
member noted that, in April, the domestic

unemployment rate posted figures similar to those
observed since mid-2017. This member stated that,
indeed, this market continues to exhibit tight
conditions, which are consistent with an output gap
close to zero, as suggested by most available
indicators. This member added that the deterioration
of real wages observed during 2017 apparently has
ended, although no excessive wage pressures are
observed. Some members pointed out that growth is
expected to run close to potential for the rest of 2018
and for 2019, thus maintaining the output gap close
to zero. One of the members mentioned that this
would imply that, starting from a level moderately
above zero, the output gap will gradually converge to
zero in the following quarters. The same member
added that this is reflected in both the recent and

4


-----

expected development of a broad set of cyclical
indicators of the economy as well as in the output
gap excluding the oil sector, which, from this
member’s standpoint, is the correct way to evaluate
the economy’s current position in the business cycle.

All members agreed that annual headline inflation
continued to decrease, from 4.55% in April to 4.51%
in May. Some members pointed out that in May
headline inflation moderated the rate at which it had
been falling since January. Most members noted that
core inflation fell from 3.71% in April to 3.69% in May.
Some members attributed this behavior partly to the
monetary policy actions implemented recently and to
the fading out of the shocks that affected it last year.
Moreover, some members pointed out that this
decrease occurred despite the increases in the
prices of services caused by a calendar effect. One
member added that this situation contrasts with the
decline in the prices of merchandises. As for noncore inflation, most members noted that this
component also fell, from 7.07 to 6.99% during the
same period. One member stated that this was due
to reductions in the prices of agricultural products.
However, most members pointed out that these price
reductions were partially offset by increases in the
prices of gasolines and L.P. gas.

Most members stated that between April and May
2018 headline inflation expectations drawn from
surveys remained relatively stable for all terms.
Some members specified that those for the end of
2018 and 2019 remained around 4.0 and 3.6%,
respectively. One of the members added that
expectations for the following twelve months
decreased from 4.01 to 3.90%. Regarding headline
inflation expectations, another member stated that
short-term expectations increased slightly and that
they are above Banco de México’s forecasts. In
regards to core inflation expectations, the same
member pointed out that those for the end of 2018
and 2019 remained at the same levels of 3.54 and
3.36%, respectively. As for medium- and long-term
expectations, most members stated that they remain
stable at a level of 3.5%. Some members
emphasized that, in this context, expectations are
above Banco de México’s forecasts and the 3%
target. Regarding the spreads between nominal and
real yields of government securities that correspond
to a compensation for inflation and for inflation risk
premia, most members pointed out that these
spreads have increased. One of the members stated
that this suggests greater concern of markets
regarding the behavior of medium- and long-term
inflation. In this regard, another member noted that
the inflation risk premia has been increasing at the
margin, while another member highlighted that
inflation expectations drawn from market

instruments have remained practically unchanged.


Some members agreed that the decline in inflation
during the first five months of 2018 is consistent with
its convergence to the target as forecasted by Banco
de México in its latest Quarterly Report.

Nevertheless, the majority expressed that some of
the upside risks to inflation identified by the Central
Bank have started to materialize. It stated that, in
particular, the peso exchange rate has depreciated
even further, while the prices of gasoline and L.P.
gas have been under pressure, in line with increases
in their international references. One member
pointed out that the outlook of prolonged NAFTA
negotiations could imply a level of the exchange rate
above that expected for the rest of the year. Most
members noted the effect that the tariffs imposed on
some products and inputs from the United States
could also have, although it is estimated that their
impact on inflation would be limited and short-lived.
Nevertheless, one member stated that such impact
could be greater as more products subject to tariffrelated measures are added to the list. Regarding
the nature of these events, one member pointed out
that, in some cases, they consist of changes in
relative prices that have a short term effect on
inflation, while in other cases, such as the
depreciation of the peso, the inflationary impact
could be more long-lived. One member recalled that
the inflation forecast included in the latest Quarterly
Report was prepared expecting an orderly behavior
of the exchange rate, a significant reduction of noncore inflation, and the absence of cyclical pressures
on inflation. All members considered that if the
aforementioned pressures on inflation persist, these
will affect the rate at which inflation declines. Taking
the above into account, most members highlighted
that the risk to inflation converging to its target at a
slower rate than previously expected has increased.
Some members pointed out that inflation may not
attain the 3% target during 2019.

Most members agreed that the balance of risks to the
forecasted trajectory of inflation has worsened since
the last monetary policy decision and remains biased
to the upside, in an environment of high uncertainty.
Among the main upward risks to inflation are that the
peso exchange rate continues to be under pressure
due to an environment of higher external interest
rates and U.S. dollar strength, and to uncertainty
associated with both the NAFTA renegotiation and
this year´s electoral process. Some members
mentioned that the uncertainty associated with the
post-electoral process could also affect the

exchange rate. One member added that there is the
risk that the exchange rate depreciation becomes
permanent and that the exchange rate continues
being subject to depreciation pressures. The same
member also mentioned that this would imply risks in
at least two aspects: i) that the passthrough of
exchange rate fluctuations to consumer prices also

5


-----

becomes permanent; and, ii) that the passthrough
per unit of depreciation increases. In the same
direction, this member was concerned that the
passthrough to the prices of services may become
positive, when it is currently close to zero. Another
member pointed out that increases in the prices of
the non-core component basket cannot be ruled out,
due to their high volatility. In this regard, some
members highlighted that the risk of continuous
upward pressures in the prices of certain energyrelated goods or shocks to agricultural prices
persists. Some members mentioned the risk of
changes to the gasoline price-smoothing policy,
while one member specified that this could generate
greater volatility and lead to a change in the
seasonality of inflation. Most members mentioned
that, considering the current position of the economy
in the business cycle, demand-related pressures
could arise, particularly through the behavior of unit
labor costs. In this regard, one member mentioned
that lower potential growth could lead to greater
inflationary pressures, even in a scenario where
aggregate demand would grow at a relatively low
rate. This member also stated that lower potential
growth could also reduce producers’ margin to
absorb any supply-related shocks. The same
member mentioned that private sector analysts
forecasts of inflation, and Banco de México’s own
forecasts of inflation, do not consider the possibility
of a significant increase in the minimum wage. The
same member mentioned that if said increases do
not reflect labor productivity gains, it could
significantly affect the economy’s price

determination process. In addition, this member
pointed out that the high structural vulnerability of
public finances in Mexico is also a risk for inflation,
and the same member also stated as a risk the fact
that long-term inflation expectations are around
3.5%, and that they show a high degree of
persistence and hysteresis. The same member also
stated that the latter situation is reflected in
excessive long-term interest rates, which implies
significant costs for the population. Finally, most
members pointed out that given the U.S. foreign
trade policy actions, the risk of inflationary pressures
generated by the escalation of protectionist and
countervailing measures has increased. As for
downside risks to inflation, some members

highlighted a possible appreciation of the Mexican
peso if NAFTA negotiations turn out to be favorable.

The majority of members stated that since the last
monetary policy decision, the Mexican peso
depreciated further and its volatility rose. One
member noted that the peso was one of the
currencies of emerging economies that exhibited a
greater depreciation, while another member pointed
out that, in the margin, the peso appreciated slightly.
Most members agreed that this behavior was


influenced by the abovementioned external and
domestic shocks and risks. One member pointed out
that the implied volatility in exchange rate options
exhibited overall increases in all maturities and
remains high as compared to the levels observed in
other emerging economies’ currencies, particularly
for expiration dates close to July 1, when elections in
Mexico will take place. In this context, most members
stated that operating conditions in the foreign
exchange market deteriorated, although one

member considered that they remain at adequate
levels. Most members mentioned that there was a
reduction in derivative positions betting on an
appreciation of the Mexican peso. Some members
clarified that the latter was mainly observed among
foreign investors with a short-term investment
horizon. Regarding interest rates, most members
expressed that these have increased, especially
those for shorter terms. In this regard, one member
mentioned that the yield curve has flattened
considerably. Some members noted that the longterm interest rate spread between Mexico and the
U.S. has recently widened.

Looking forward, most members agreed that in the
next months, domestic financial markets, and the
peso exchange rate in particular, will continue to be
affected by a complex international environment.
One member pointed out that although analysts
expect the exchange rate to appreciate considerably
after having depreciated markedly, there is a high
degree of uncertainty regarding such expectation.
The same member mentioned that the prices of
Mexican assets are apparently incorporating with
some probability the materialization of a new shock
on the real exchange rate. Another member stated
that, at first, pressures on domestic financial markets
might diminish or increase depending on the
economic message of the presidential election’s
winner and, later on, depending on how this
message is translated into concrete decisions when
the incoming administration takes office. The same
member mentioned that during this process it will be
crucial to have in mind both the risks generated by a
very complex external environment and by an
economy with a high degree of openness to foreign
capital flows like Mexico’s.

Regarding macroeconomic policy, some members
pointed out that the shocks that have affected the
Mexican economy have exerted pressure on both
the real exchange rate and real interest rates. In this
context, most members emphasized that the
monetary policy adopted to keep medium- and longterm expectations anchored, together with the
attainment of the fiscal measures and the financial
systems’ resilience, have contributed to place the
economy in a better position to face adverse
scenarios, like the abovementioned. In this regard,

6


-----

one member highlighted the importance of having a
fiscal and monetary policy stance that contributes to
generate the conditions for an orderly adjustment of
the economy and of financial markets, and to
continue working to consolidate the resilience of the
domestic financial system. The same member added
that such actions would reduce the probability of
having to face portfolio reallocations and capital
outflows. Another member mentioned that in an
adverse environment like the one currently faced by
the Mexican economy, the optimal macroeconomic
response would be to adjust both fiscal and
monetary policies. However, as mentioned by the
same member, monetary policy would be the one
that, to a great extent, would have to face the
referred shocks and risks, given that, currently, for
different reasons, a fiscal adjustment is very unlikely.
The same member mentioned that public finances
are subject to different sources of vulnerability and
that these could be intensified in the near future
given that the winner of the forthcoming elections,
regardless of who it is, will try to fulfill his campaign
promises, which could exert additional pressures on
public finances. Another member emphasized that
for Banco de México to be able to fulfill completely
its constitutional mandate of ensuring price stability,
it is imperative that responsible and sustainable
fiscal policy be implemented. Some members
emphasized the importance of fighting and reducing
corruption and impunity and, in general terms, of
improving the effective exercise of the rule of law.
One member explained that institutional weakness is
a burden for investment and growth, and that it
affects both through different channels. The same
member also added that this has already been
reflected in total factor productivity remaining
stagnant and even falling since several decades ago.
Another member added that according to private
sector analysts, among the most important factors
that might jeopardize economic growth, as drawn
from Banco de México’s surveys, are the increase in
problems related with governance, such as political
uncertainty, public insecurity, corruption, impunity,
and lack of rule of law.

As for monetary policy, all members pointed out that
it is important to realize that some risks to inflation
have already materialized and that the balance of
risks to inflation worsened, which could affect
inflation’s convergence to its 3% target. All members
cautioned that monetary policy faces a more adverse
scenario and with greater uncertainty. In this regard,
one member specified that a distinction has to be
made between risk, which is quantifiable, and
uncertainty, which is not. The same member added
that a robust monetary policy implies that a central
bank averse to risk and uncertainty would need to
act under a pessimistic scenario in terms of the
variables it might consider uncertain, such as the


behavior of the exchange rate. Another member
stated that, given the current level of uncertainty,
monetary policy can face surprises in one direction
or another and that Banco de México must be
prepared to respond in whichever scenario. Some
members noted that, in an uncertain environment,
the monetary policy stance is relevant for the
adjustment in financial markets, including the
exchange rate market, to take place in an orderly
manner. In this regard, one of the members
mentioned that, in case the Mexican economy faces
a scenario in which the real exchange rate would
need to be adjusted, it is important to prevent
medium- and long-term inflation expectations from
being affected and possible second-round effects on
the economy’s price formation process. One of the
members mentioned that a moderately-tight

monetary policy has contained the decompression of
the term premia and has led to a flattening of the
yield curve, which confirms that this monetary policy
stance has been adequate. However, the same
member noted, the inflationary risk premia has
increased and, because of this, monetary policy
needs to be further adjusted. The same member
added that the risk-taking channel of monetary policy
has operated intensively and effectively in the last
years. This member argued that this channel
depends on the spread between U.S. and Mexico’s
short-term interest rates, the evolution of which has
contributed to improve the operating conditions in the
foreign exchange market and has curbed the longterm interest rate spread, a spread that has recently
increased. The same member noted that monetary
policy must take into account that a narrowing of the
short-term interest rate spread is not convenient.

Most members highlighted the need to maintain a
prudent monetary policy. One member pointed out
that Banco de México has been communicating that
it is convenient to act in such a way and considered
that adjusting the central bank’s reference rate is
consistent with such policy guidance. Another
member added that it is necessary to act prudently
and cautiously to raise confidence in the economy,
mainly in a context in which several shocks are
taking place simultaneously that might affect the
economic environment and outlook. All members
agreed that, under a more adverse scenario, a
monetary policy response is essential to prevent
inflation expectations from de-anchoring and other
second-round effects from taking place, and to
ensure the convergence of inflation to its target.
Some members pointed out that this is particularly
relevant given the economy’s current position in the
business cycle and the absence of slack. One
member mentioned that by adding elements to make
monetary policy decisions more transparent and
accountable, such as publishing the inflation
forecasts, it is imperative for the central bank to

7


-----

explain and act in the event that those forecasts
might not be met. The same member added that
otherwise, the central bank would face a high
reputational risk. Some members mentioned that in
an environment as the one described above,
additional increases in the next monetary policy
meetings cannot be ruled out. One member added
that Banco de México’s future forward guidance
would need to be adjusted to reflect that further
increases in the reference rate might be required.
Finally, all members considered that the Governing
Board must continue monitoring the development of
inflation and its determinants, so that, if needed,
monetary policy can act in a timely and decisive
manner that allows the attainment of the central bank
objectives.

**3. MONETARY POLICY DECISION**

To guide its monetary policy actions, Banco de
México’s Governing Board follows closely the
development of inflation vis-a-vis its anticipated
trajectory, taking into account the monetary policy
stance adopted and the time frame in which
monetary policy operates, as well as available
information on all inflation determinants and on
medium- and long-term inflation expectations,
including the balance of risks to such factors. Given
that some inflationary risks have started to


materialize and the balance of risks to inflation has
worsened and might affect the convergence of
inflation to its target, Banco de México’s Governing
Board has voted unanimously to raise the target for
the overnight interbank interest rate to 7.75%.

Looking ahead, the Governing Board will maintain a
prudent monetary policy stance and will continue to
follow closely the potential pass-through of

exchange rate fluctuations to prices, the monetary
policy stance relative to that of the U.S., and the
conditions of slack in the Mexican economy. In the
presence and possible persistence of factors that, by
their nature, involve risks to both inflation and
inflation expectations, monetary policy will be
adjusted in a timely and robust manner to attain the
convergence of inflation to its 3% target, and to firmly
anchor medium- and long-term inflation expectations
so that they attain such target.

**4. VOTING**

**Members voting in favor of this decision:**
Alejandro Díaz de León Carrillo, Roberto Del Cueto
Legaspi, Irene Espinosa Cantellano, Javier Eduardo
Guzmán Calafell and Manuel Ramos Francia voted
in favor of raising the target rate by 25 basis points
to 7.75%.

8


-----

**ANNEX**

The information in this section was prepared for this
meeting by the staff of Banco de México’s General
Directorate of Economic Research and General
Directorate of Operations and Payment Systems. It
does not necessarily reflect the considerations of the
members of the Governing Board as to the monetary
policy decision.

**A.1. External conditions**

**A.1.1. World economic activity**

Available indicators suggest that the world economy
increased its rate of growth during the second quarter
of 2018, reflecting the fading out of the factors that
temporarily affected the growth of some of the major
advanced economies at the beginning of 2018.
However, economic activity in the main advanced
economies has started to show signs of divergence:
a strong recovery in U.S. economic activity is
expected for the second quarter, while in the other
advanced economies the recovery seems to be
weaker than was anticipated some months ago.
Emerging economies have also exhibited differing
rates of expansion. Under such an environment,
although the outlook for recovery in world economic
activity for 2018 and 2019 remains practically
unchanged, in the short term uncertainty has
increased, while medium-term downward risks have
worsened. Among such risks are the intensification
of protectionist measures –which could affect the
expansion cycle of trade and investment– a possible
tightening of financial conditions arising from inflation
surprises, and the escalation of geopolitical risks in
various regions.

In the U.S., demand indicators suggest a strong pick
up of GDP growth during the second quarter of 2018.
This is evidenced by the significant recovery of
private consumption in April and the evolution of
purchase orders for capital goods and other leading
indicators, which point to the continuing upturn in
business investment that has been observed since
the end of 2017 (Chart 1). The outlook for U.S.
economic growth in the short term is backed by
household confidence and the positive dynamics of
employment and income, as well as by the continuing
growth of external demand, financial conditions that
are still accommodative, and the effects of the tax
reform approved by the U.S. Congress at the end of
2017. These factors, under conditions of reduced
slack in the economy, may lead to greater inflationary
pressures.


**Chart 1**

**USA: Real GDP and Components**

Annualized quarterly percentage change and

contribution in percentage points, s. a.

7 Public spending

6 Net exports

Inventories

5 Fixed investment

Private consumption

4

Total

3

2

1

0

-1

-2

-3

Q-1

-4

2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019


s. a. / Seasonally adjusted data.
Note: The diamonds in pink and green refer to the Federal Reserve Banks
of New York and Atlanta forecasts for Q2 2018 GDP, respectively.
Source: BEA, Blue Chip, and Federal Reserve Banks of Atlanta and New
York.

U.S. industrial production fell at a monthly rate of
0.1% in May, partly due to transitory factors. Indeed,
the decrease in manufacturing production largely
reflected the 6.5% contraction in vehicle and auto
parts production, caused by a fire in an auto parts
plant. This was partially offset by the growth of
electricity and gas distribution and mining production,
which kept the upward trend that has been observed
since the end of 2016. Looking ahead, certain
leading indicators, such as the NY Empire State
Manufacturing Index, point to an upswing in
manufacturing activity in June.

U.S. labor market conditions continued to strengthen
during the second quarter. The non-farm payroll
increased by around 200,000 monthly jobs on
average during the first five months of 2018, a rate of
increase above that needed to keep pace with the
growing labor force. These developments led to an
additional reduction in the unemployment rate, down
to 3.8% in May, its lowest level in nearly two decades.
Under these conditions, wage growth has been
picking up moderately.

Available information on the Eurozone points to a
moderate rebound in growth during the second
quarter, albeit at a still moderate pace, after having
grown at an annualized rate of only 1.5% during the
first quarter. Although the rebound in domestic
demand is expected to be further driven by
employment growth, high confidence levels and

9


-----

financial conditions that are still accommodative,
concerns have been raised as to whether the region
can continue growing at a rate above potential. In this
regard, both industrial production and Purchasing
Manager’s Indexes have exhibited weak results in
the last months.

In Japan, available indicators on trade, consumption
and equipment investment are consistent with a
moderate growth during the second quarter of 2018,
after economic activity slowed down to an annualized
rate of 0.6% during the first quarter. Nevertheless,
the weakness of Japan’s Purchasing Managers
Indexes suggests that, looking ahead, growth could
be below that expected a few months ago.

In the U.K, available information points to a recovery
of economic activity during the second quarter of
2018. Particularly, U.K. consumption recovered as
the transitory factors that affected it at the beginning
of the year have faded out. Nevertheless, industrial
production has continued to deteriorate, in line with a
moderation of external demand.

Growth in advanced economies has continued to be
reflected in the strengthening of labor markets.
Unemployment rates have continued to decrease,
company surveys suggest a growing labor shortage,
and wages have been recovering gradually (Chart 2).

**Chart 2**

**Selected Advanced Economies: Labor**

**Market Gap (U-NAIRU)**

5

4 USA

Eurozone

3 UK

Canada

2 Japan

1

0

-1

-2

May
April

-3

2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019

Note: The source of NAIRU data is the OECD, except for USA figures, which
are drawn from the CBO. Expectations are drawn from the Consensus
Forecast, except those for the USA, which are obtained from the U.S.
Federal Reserve.
Source: Haver Analytics, FRED, CBO, Consensus Forecast, and OECD.


Emerging economies continued to grow throughout
2018, albeit at different rates between regions. While
the Asian region has grown above potential, driven
by the higher demand from China, economic activity
in the European emerging economies grew at a more
moderate rate due to the overall weakness exhibited
by the Eurozone. Emerging economies are facing
greater downside risks to growth, due to the
possibility that the U.S. may impose more tariffs on
their exports and the possibility that global financial
conditions become tighter.

In the last weeks, commodities’ international
references exhibited a mixed behavior. On the one
hand, after the upward trend exhibited at the
beginning of 2018, oil prices decreased, due to signs
suggesting that U.S. oil production may reach new
historical highs, as well as recent concerns that the
Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries
(OPEC) and other crude oil producers may reach an
agreement to raise crude oil production. Prices of
grains also fell due to an improvement in weather
conditions. In contrast, the prices of industrial metals
continued to increase after the hike registered as a
result of the U.S. announcing the imposition of tariffs
on steel and aluminum and of the fears of a strike in
the world’s largest copper-producing mine in Chile.

**A.1.2. Monetary policy and international financial**
**markets**

In the context described above, inflation in advanced
economies has followed a gradual upward trend
since the end of 2017, although with some
differences among countries. In the U.S. and
Canada, inflation has exhibited a generalized
increase, while in the Eurozone and Japan it has
continued to advance slowly and has remained
below the central banks’ targets (Chart 3). In this
environment, the central banks of the major
advanced economies are expected to continue with
their gradual process of adopting a more neutral
monetary policy stance, although a greater

divergence in the pace at which these institutions
could adjust their monetary policies is anticipated. In
particular, the Federal Reserve is expected to keep
raising the federal funds rate in the following months,
while other central banks, particularly the European
Central Bank and the Bank of Japan, are expected to
be more cautious as to the normalization of their
respective monetary policies and could possibly keep
a highly accommodative policy stance in the
foreseeable future (Chart 4).

10

|Col1|May April|
|---|---|
|2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 : The source of NAIRU data is the OECD, except for USA f rawn from the CBO. Expectations are drawn from the cast, except those for the USA, which are obtained fr ral Reserve. ce: Haver Analytics, FRED, CBO, Consensus Forecast, a|2019 igures, whic Consensu om the U.S nd OECD.|


-----

**Chart 3**

**Selected Advanced Economies: Core Inflation**


3 USA 1/
Eurozone
Japan 2/
Canada 3/
United Kingdom 1/

2

1


0

-1


2014 2015 2016 2017 2018

1/ Corresponds to the Consumer Price Index (CPI).
2/ Excludes fresh foods, energy, and the direct effect of the consumption
tax increase.
3/ Excludes food, energy, and the effect of adjustments on indirect taxes
(CPI-XFET).
Source: Haver Analytics.


3.0%

**― U.S. Federal Reserve**** Forecasts
**― Bank of England**

2.5% **― Bank of Japan**

**― Bank of Canada**

**― ECB key deposit facility rate**

2.0% **--- Implied trajectory of OIS curve at May 14, 2018**

**― Implied trajectory of OIS curve at Jun 14, 2018**

1.5%

1.0%

0.5%

0.0%

-0.5%

-1.0% End 2018 End 2019 End 2020

2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020

|Col1|Col2|es: Cor|re Inflat|tion|
|---|---|---|---|---|
|||es: Cor change|e Infla|tion April April May 018|
|||2017|2||
|||CPI). ct effect of justments Trajec Forecasts|the cons on indire tory in||
|% % %|― Bank of Japan ― Bank of Canada ― ECB key deposit facility rate --- Implied trajectory of OIS curve at May 14, 2018 ― Implied trajectory of OIS curve at Jun 14, 2018||||
|%|||||
|%|||||
|%|||||


1/ OIS: Fixed floating interest rate swap where the fixed interest rate is the
effective overnight reference rate.
** In the case of the U.S. observed reference rate, the average interest rate
of the federal funds target range is used (1.75%-2.00%).
Source: Bloomberg.

As expected, in June the Federal Reserve raised the
federal funds target range by 25 basis points (bps),
leaving it between 1.75 and 2%. In its last monetary
policy statement, it pointed out that economic activity
in the U.S. has continued to grow at a strong pace. It
also mentioned that additional gradual raises in its
reference rate would be consistent with a scenario of
sustained economic activity growth, a strong labor
market, and headline and core inflation close to its
symmetric 2% target. The FOMC members raised
their growth and inflation forecasts for 2018 and also
lowered their unemployment rate estimation,

expecting that it will remain below its long-term level
in the next three years. The Federal Reserve


continued to describe monetary conditions as
accommodative, but omitted its expectation that the
reference rate will remain below its neutral level for
some time. This is consistent with the upward
revision in its median forecast, which now has the
federal funds rate above the long-term rate in 2019.
In this regard, the median estimates for the federal
funds rate incorporate 2 additional 25 basis points
increases by the Federal Reserve for the rest of 2018

- forecasting an additional raise above the expected
in its FOMC meeting of March - and 3 more in 2019.
Similarly, the federal funds rate futures almost
completely incorporate two increases in the target
rate for the rest of 2018.

In its June meeting, the European Central Bank
(ECB) kept its reference rate unchanged. However,
it modified its forward guidance by stating that
interest rates will remain unchanged at least until the
summer of 2019 or until necessary to ensure that
inflation remains in line with its expected sustained
adjustment towards the target. The ECB also pointed
out that it will continue to buy assets for a monthly
amount of 30,000 million euros until the end of
September and that, depending on economic results,
it is expecting to reduce these purchases to 15,000
million euros from late September to December
2018, when this program is foreseen to conclude.
The ECB also stated that, although risks to the
region’s growth are balanced, uncertainty has
increased due to the implementation of protectionist
policies around the world and persistent volatility in
financial markets. In response to the ECB statement,
monetary policy expectations implicit in marketbased instruments changed so that the expected
date for the first raise in the reference rate was
delayed from the first quarter of 2019 to the third or
fourth quarter of the same year.

In its June meeting, the Bank of Japan kept its shortterm deposit rate unchanged at -0.1%, its long-term
government bonds target rate at 0%, while leaving
the volume of its asset purchase program unchanged
as well. This central bank gave a positive
assessment of the Japanese economy, emphasizing
the growth of exports, investment and domestic
consumption. However, it acknowledged that

inflation remains low and reiterated the need for an
in-depth analysis of the factors that have prevented
inflation from rising, and of maintaining the monetary
stimulus to attain the convergence of inflation to the
2% target.

11


-----

In many emerging economies, inflation remained
relatively low and, in some cases, even below their
central bank targets. Nevertheless, in an

environment in which slack conditions have

continued to decrease, commodity prices have risen
and the currencies of these economies have
depreciated, the risk of higher levels of inflation and
pressures for more central banks to adopt less
accommodative monetary policy stances have
increased. In this regard, the central banks of India,
Indonesia and Turkey recently raised their reference
rates.

In the last weeks, global financial markets exhibited
periods of greater volatility and an environment of
lower risk appetite due to the escalation of certain
risk factors. Trade tensions between the U.S. and its
main trade partners intensified after the U.S.
government imposed tariffs on steel and aluminum
imports from Mexico, Canada and the European
Union, as well as on several products from China.
Furthermore, political changes in Spain and Italy
affected the performance of markets in the region.
This caused a reallocation of foreign investment
portfolios towards safer assets –which was reflected
in the fall of several stock market indexes, particularly
European ones– an unfavorable behavior of
corporate bond markets, and in an appreciation of
the dollar against other major currencies. Despite the
faster pace of growth of economic activity and the
gradual increase in inflation in advanced economies,
the flight to quality led to a decrease in government
bond yields of the main advanced economies, except
those of Italy, which rose significantly (Chart 5). It is
worth noting that, despite a risk aversion

environment, U.S. stock markets remained on an
upward trend, reaching, in some cases, new
historically high levels. This appears to reflect the
persistent optimism regarding the dynamism of the
U.S. economy, despite the presence of various traderelated and geopolitical risks.


**Chart 5**

**Change in Selected Financial Indicators**

**(May 14 – June 15, 2018)**

Percentage, basis points

124

12%10% **<-- Stock markets** <-- 68 government bonds 10-year 3025

8% Currencies --> 20

6% 15

4% 1.5% 2.3% 10

2% 0.3% 0.4% 5

0% 0

-2%-4%-6% -0.1%-0.7%-1.0%-4.0%-4.8% -0.9%-1.0%-1.6%-2.0%-2.6%-2.8%-3.1% -1 -3 -9 -10 -14 -5-10-15

-8% -20

-10% -8.4% -21 -21 -25

-12% -30

-35

-40

1/ DXY: Weighted average of the nominal exchange rate of the six main
world-traded currencies (calculated by Intercontinental Exchange, ICE) with
the following weights: EUR (57.6%), JPY (13.6%), GBP (11.9%), CAD
(9.1%), SEK (4.2%), and CHF (3.6%).
2/ J.P. Morgan Index constructed from a weighted average of the nominal
exchange rate of emerging economies’ currencies with the following
weights: TRY (8.3%), RUB (8.3%), HUF (8.3%), ZAR (8.3%), BRL (11.1%),
MXN (11.1%), CLP (11.1%), CNH (11.1%), INR (11.1%), and SGD (11.1%).
Source: Bloomberg.

As for the financial markets of certain emerging
economies, some of them registered capital outflows.
Especially affected were those countries with large
current account deficits and considerable short-term
financing requirements. As a result, the currencies of
various emerging economies depreciated

significantly and exhibited greater volatility,

particularly the Argentine peso, the Turkish lira and
the South African rand, while yields increased in a
generalized manner and stock markets fell (Chart 6).
In this context, some central banks continued to
intervene in their foreign exchange markets with the
intention of mitigating adverse fluctuations in such
markets. In this sense, the central banks of
Argentina, Brazil and Indonesia intervened in their
foreign exchange markets. Some of these countries,
including India, Indonesia and Turkey, adjusted their
monetary policy stances by raising their reference
rates.

12


-----

**Chart 6**

**Performance of Selected Emerging**

**Market Assets (May 14, 2018 –To Date)**

Percentage, basis pointsPercentage, basis points

**Stock** **Interest** **Interest**
**Region** **Country** **Currencies** **CDS**

**market** **rate (2Y)** **rate (10Y)**

**Mexico**

**Brazil** **+147 pb** **+215 pb**

**Latin**

**Chile**

**America**

**Colombia**

**Argentina** **-89 pb**

**Russia**

**Poland**

**Emerging** **Turkey** **+174 pb** **+162 pb**

**Europe**

**Czech Rep.**

**Hungary**

**South Korea**

**Malaysia**

**Emerging** **India**

**Asia** **Philippines**

**Thailand**

**Indonesia**

**Africa** **South Africa**

-10% 0% 10% -19% 0% 19% -80 0 80 -80 0 80 -100 0 100

Note: Interest rates correspond to interest rate swaps for 2- and 10-year
terms, except for Indonesia, where 1-year and 5-year interest rates are used
for 2- and 10-year interest rates, respectively, since those maturities are not
available in the market.
Source: Bloomberg.

Looking ahead, risk factors persist that could
generate more volatility in markets. Particularly, an
escalation of protectionist policies could lead to a
slowdown in international trade and investment,
which could pose a risk for the current expansion
cycle. Another risk is the possibility that the pace of
monetary policy normalization in advanced

economies occurs more rapidly than expected by
financial markets. The high valuation of certain
financial assets and the high leverage of households
and businesses in certain advanced countries, as
well as geopolitical instability in several regions,
continue being risk factors as well.

**A.2. Current situation of the Mexican economy**

**A.2.1. Mexican markets**

In the weeks following Banco de México’s last
monetary policy statement, the Mexican peso
exhibited volatility and depreciated against the U.S.
dollar by around 4.5% (Chart 7). This result was
mainly associated with a more negative market
sentiment towards emerging economies’ financial
markets in general, in an environment of increased
uncertainty regarding the implementation of

protectionist trade policies worldwide and facing the
possibility that the Federal Reserve may speed up
the pace of normalization of its monetary policy
stance. In the case of Mexico, uncertainty related to
the North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA)


renegotiations and to the country’s upcoming
election also contributed to the negative performance
of the peso exchange rate.

On June 15, the peso/dollar exchange rate reached
a peak of 20.96 pesos per dollar, level unseen since
January 2017. Foreign exchange market-operating
conditions worsened once more: higher bid/ask
spreads, lower market depth, and smaller trade
operating volumes were observed (Chart 8).
Forward-looking operating conditions as measured,
for instance, by the implied volatility in exchange rate
options, also deteriorated (Chart 9).

**Chart 7**

**Accumulated Index of Selected Emerging**

**Currencies and Mexican Peso in 2018**

Index (Dec 2017 = 100)

|Latin America|Mexico Brazil Chile Colombia Argentina|Col3|Col4|Col5|Col6|+ -89 pb|147 pb|+|215 pb|Col11|Col12|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|Emerging Europe|Russia Poland Turkey Czech Rep. Hungary|||||+|174 pb|+|162 pb|||
|Emerging Asia|South Korea Malaysia India Philippines Thailand Indonesia|||||||||||
|Africa|South Africa|||||||||||
|||-10% 0% 10%||-19% 0% 19%||-80 0 80||-80 0 80||-100 0 100||


Note: Index calculated using the mean, volatility, skewness, kurtosis, bidask spread and mean of simple differentials all of them related to quotes of
intraday operations, and the total traded volume. After obtaining this data,
the percentiles since 2011 are calculated and the average of the 7
percentiles for each day is considered. The black vertical line represents
Banco de México’s last monetary policy decision.
Source: Banco de México with Reuters data.

13


115

110

105

100

95

90

85

80


75

Jan-01 Jan-16 Jan-31 Feb-15 Mar-02 Mar-17 Apr-01 Apr-16 May-01 May-16 May-31 Jun-15

Note: Currencies’ mean and range of the following emerging countries:
Argentina, Peru, Turkey, Philippines, Poland, Hungary, South Korea,
Indonesia, South Africa, Russia, Brazil, Colombia and Chile. The black
vertical line represents Banco de México’s last monetary policy decision.
Source: Banco de México with Bloomberg data.


**Chart 8**

**Mexican Foreign Exchange Market Operating**

**Conditions Index and Peso-dollar**

**Exchange Rate**

Index (5-day moving average), pesos per dollar


90

80

70

60

50

40

30

20


22.0

21.5

21.0

20.5

20.0

19.5

19.0

18.5

18.0

17.5

17.0


J M A J J S O D J M A J J S O D J M A J

2016 2017 2018


-----

**Chart 10**

**Government Bond Yield Curve**

Percentage, basis points


50

40


34

29


8.25

8.00


30

20


24

19


7.75

7.50


10

0


14

9


0 5 10 15 20 25 30

Tenor (years)

Source: PIP.


7.25

7.00


4


**Chart 9**

**Latest Level of Implied Volatility in Selected**

**Emerging Currencies-USD Options**

**(Different Maturities)**

Percentage

Turkey

Turkey

South Africa Brazil Turkey TurkeyBrazil
Brazil South Africa Brazil

**Mexico** South Africa South Africa

Czech RepublicSouth KoreaColombiaChileIndonesiaRussiaHungaryPoland ColombiaRussiaIndonesiaCzech RepublicSouth KoreaHungaryPolandChileMexico PolandHungarySouth KoreaCzech RepublicColombiaChileIndonesiaRussiaMexico South KoreaIndonesiaColombiaCzech RepublicRussiaChileMexicoPolandHungary

Malaysia Malaysia Malaysia Malaysia

**1M** **2M** **3M** **6M**


Source: Bloomberg.

Since the previous monetary policy statement, the
yield curve of government securities posted negative
results that led to overall increases of up to 42 basis
points (bps) (Chart 10), being the interest rates of
instruments with shorter maturities the ones to exhibit
the greater increases. Thus, the slope of the yield
curve, measured by the spread between 30- and 3year bonds, flattened by around 28 basis points
(bps), down to a level of 0 basis points (bps), which
had not been seen since June 2007 (Chart 11). The
adjustment of interest rates of the Mexican
government bond market occurred in an environment
where operating conditions remained relatively
stable.

Finally, monetary policy target rate expectations
implicit in the interest rate swap yield curve
registered 7.67% for June’s decision, 7.82% for
August, and 8.16% for the end of the year (Chart 12).
The consensus among forecasters is that Banco de
México will raise the target rate by 25 bps in its next
monetary policy decision.


**Chart 11**

**Slope of Yield Curve Measured through the**

**Spread between Mexico-US Government Bonds’**

**Nominal Rate with 30- and 3-year Maturities**

Percentage

180

160

United States Mexico

140

120

100

80

60

40

20

0

June

-20

J F M M J A S O D J F A M

2017 2018

Source: PIP.


**Chart 12**

**Banxico Overnight Interest Rate Implied in**

**28-day TIIE IRS Curve**

Percentage

8.50

8.25 Banxico overnight rate (target rate)

8.00

May 14, 2018

7.75

Jun 15, 2018

7.50

7.25

7.00

6.75

6.50

6.25

6.00

5.75

5.50

J         M         S         J         J         O         F         J N

2017                          2018                          2019


Source: Banco de México with PIP data.


14


-----

**A.2.2. Economic activity and determinants of**
**inflation**

During the first quarter of 2018, economic activity in
Mexico continued to gain strength, even growing at a
rate higher than that observed in the previous quarter
(Chart 13). Manufacturing exports and private
consumption continued to show significant

dynamism, while investment rebounded.

Nevertheless, timely indicators for the second
quarter suggest a certain slowdown of economic
activity.

**Chart 13**

**Gross Domestic Product**

Quarterly percentage change, s. a.


**Chart 14**

**Total Manufacturing Exports**

Indices 2013 = 100, s. a.


140

130


120

110


100

90


80

70


J

2012


A J O J

2013


A J O J

2014


A J O J

2015


A J O J

2016


A J O J

2017


A J O J

2018


A


3

2

1

0

-1

-2

-3

-4

-5


-6 Q-I

I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV I

2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018

s. a. / Seasonally adjusted figures.
Source: Mexico’s National Accounts System (SCNM, for its acronym in
Spanish), INEGI.

Although both automobile and non-automobile
exports followed an upward trend in the first quarter
of 2018, in April they contracted, mainly reflecting the
fall in Mexican exports to the U.S., as exports to the
rest of the world mantained their dynamism (Chart
14). In regards to the development of domestic
demand, according to its monthly indicator, in the first
quarter of 2018, private consumption continued to
improve, driven mainly by the consumption of goods.
Indicators of consumption that are preliminary,
although of less coverage, include retail stores’
revenues, which exhibited a positive trend, as well as
the sales of light vehicles, which remained weak.
Moreover, in the first quarter, investment recovered
slightly as a result of the rebound of business
spending in machinery and equipment, as well as the
upswing in construction that began at the end of
2017. Nevertheless, the contraction of this economic
aggregate in March originated by the fall in
construction spending indicates that the recovery
observed at the beginning of the year may have been
temporary.


s. a. / Seasonally adjusted series and trend series. The former is
represented by a solid line and the latter by a dotted line.
Source: Prepared by Banco de México with data from the Tax
Administration Service (SAT, for its acronym in Spanish), the Ministry of the
Economy (SE, for its acronym in Spanish), Banco de México, the National
Institute of Statistics and Geography (INEGI, for its acronym in Spanish),
Mexico’s Merchandise Trade Balance, and National System of Statistical
and Geographical Information (SNIEG). Information of national interest.

On the production side, during the first quarter of
2018 growth of economic activity was driven by the
dynamism of tertiary activities and the rebound of
industrial activity, although the latter exhibited a
certain loss of dynamism at the beginning of the
second quarter (Chart 15). The items that mainly
contributed to the positive performance of the
services sector during the first quarter were trade;
educational services, health care and social
assistance; transportation; information and cultural
industries; and, public administration. The

development of industrial activity in the same period
reflected the favorable trend in manufacturing and
construction. Nevertheless, at the beginning of the
second quarter, these two sectors once more posted
weak results. As for mining, during the January –
April 2018 period, it continued to follow a negative
trend, remaining at considerably low levels (Chart
16).

15


-----

**Chart 15**

**Economic Activity Indices**

Indices 2013 = 100, s. a.


120

115

110

105

100

95


140

130

120

110

100

90


J

2012


A J O J

2013


A J O J

2014


A J O J

2015


A J O J

2016


A J O J

2017


A J O J

2018


A


s. a. / Seasonally adjusted and trend series. The former is represented by a
solid line and the latter by a dotted line.
1/ Figures up to March 2018.
2/ Monthly industrial activity index. Figures up to April 2018.
Source: Mexico’s National Accounts System (SCNM, for its acronym in
Spanish), INEGI.

**Chart 16**

**Industrial Activity**

Indices 2013 = 100, s. a.

115

110

105

100

95

90 Total

85 Mining (22.3%)

Manufacturing (49.7%)

80 Construction (23.3%)

75 Utilities (4.7%)

April

70

J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A

2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018

s. a./ Seasonally adjusted series and trend series. The former is represented
by a solid line and the latter by a dotted line.
Source: PEMEX and Mexico’s National Accounts System (SCNM, for its
acronym in Spanish), INEGI.

As to the economy’s position in the business cycle,
several indicators suggest that in the first quarter of
2018 slack conditions exhibited a tightening. In
particular, the positive output gap (excluding the oil
sector) widened (Chart 17). In turn, the urban
unemployment rate continued its downward trend,
while the national unemployment rate remained at
historically low levels (Chart 18). Furthermore, the
number of IMSS-insured jobs continued its positive


trend. Given the behavior of productivity and inflation,
during the first quarter of 2018 overall labor costs in
real terms registered levels similar to those observed
in the last quarter of 2017 (Chart 19).

**Chart 17**

**Output Gap Estimates [1/]**

**Excluding Oil Industry [4/]**

Potential output percentages, s. a.

8.0

Global Economic Activity Index (IGAE) 2/

6.0 Gross Domestic Product 2/

4.0 95% Confidence interval 3/

2.0

0.0

-2.0

-4.0

-6.0

-8.0

-10.0 Q-I

March

-12.0

J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J M

2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018

s. a. / Seasonally-adjusted figures.
1/ Output gap estimated with a tail-corrected Hodrick-Prescott filter; see
Banco de México (2009), “Inflation Report (April-June 2009)", p.74.
2/ First quarter of 2018 GDP figures; IGAE figures up to March 2018.
3/ Output gap confidence interval calculated with a method of unobserved
components.
4/ Excludes both oil and gas extraction, support activities for mining, and
petroleum and coal products' manufacturing.
Source: Prepared by Banco de México with data from INEGI.

**Chart 18**

**National Unemployment Rate and Urban**

**Unemployment Rate**

Percent, s. a.

8

Urban unemployment rate

National unemployment rate

7

6

5

4

April

3

J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A

2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018

s. a. / Seasonally-adjusted and trend series. The former is represented by
a solid line and the latter by a dotted line.
Source: National Survey of Occupations and Employment (ENOE, for its
acronym in Spanish), INEGI.

16


-----

**Chart 19**

**Global Index of Labor Productivity (IGPLE, for**

**its acronym in Spanish) and Unit Labor Costs[1/]**

Indices 2013 = 100, s. a.

120

Productivity

115 Unit labor costs

110

105

100

95

Q-I

90

I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV I

2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018

s. a. / Seasonally-adjusted and trend series. The former is represented by
a solid line and the latter by a dotted line. Trend series estimated by Banco
de México.
1/ Productivity based on hours worked.
Source: IGPLE published by INEGI. Unit labor costs prepared by Banco de
México with data from INEGI.

Up to April 2018, domestic financing to the private
non-financial sector exhibited higher growth in real
annual terms, as compared to the end of 2017. This
outcome is mostly due to the sustained dynamism of
financing to large companies and, to a lesser degree,
to the incipient recovery of household credit. External
financing continued to grow at a slow pace. The costs
of financing reached higher levels vis-à-vis those
observed on average during 2017, albeit not showing
significant changes in recent months. Delinquency
rates have remained at low and stable levels, except
those related to consumer lending, which continue to
remain at relatively high levels, although they have
shown some signs of having stopped the

deterioration they had been undergoing since the
end of 2016. Evidence suggests that lending markets
are not facing any demand-related pressures.

**A.2.3. Developments in inflation and inflation**
**outlook**

Between April and May 2018, annual headline
inflation continued to decrease, from 4.55% to
4.51%. This was caused by the lower annual price
variations in both its core and non-core components
(Chart 20 and Table 1).


J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A

2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018

Source: Banco de México and INEGI.

Annual core inflation fell from 3.71% in April to 3.69%
in May 2018, as a result of both monetary policy
actions and the fading of shocks that had an adverse
effect on it last year. The prices of merchandises,
particularly of non-food items, continued posting
lower annual variations (Chart 21 and Chart 22). In
contrast, the annual growth rate of the services price
sub-index exhibited a marginal increase associated
with the effect of the annual price variation of tourism
services, which decreased significantly in April due
to the calendar effect originated by the starting date
of the Easter holiday (Chart 22 and Table 1).

**Chart 21**

**Merchandise Core Price Subindex**

Annual percentage change

8

Food, beverages, and tobacco

7 Non-food merchandise

6

5

4

3

2

1

May

0

J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A

2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018

Source: Banco de México and INEGI.

17


13

12

11

10

9

8

7

6

5

4

3

2

1

0


**Chart 20**

**Consumer Price Index**

Annual percentage change

CPI
Core
Non-core


-----

**Chart 22**

**Merchandise and Services Core Price Subindex**

Annual percentage change

7

Merchandise

6 Services

5

4

3

2

1

May

0

J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A

2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018

Source: Banco de México and INEGI.

Annual non-core inflation fell from 7.07% to 6.99%
during the same months. In this regard, the reduction
in the prices of agricultural products are particularly
relevant. These were partially offset by increases in
the prices of fuel and LP gas (Chart 23 and Table 1).

**Chart 23**

**Non-core Price Subindex**
Annual percentage change

20 Non-core

Agriculture
Energy and government-authorized prices

15

10

5

May

0

-5

J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A

2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018

Source: Banco de México and INEGI.

The short-term median inflation expectations

reported by Banco de México’s survey of private
sector forecasters decreased slightly between April
and May. In particular, the medians for headline


inflation expectations for the end of 2018 and 2019
were adjusted downwards from 3.98 to 3.94%, and
from 3.58 to 3.55%, respectively. The median
expectations for the following 12 months from these
surveys, both relative to the month in which data is
collected and to the subsequent month, were
adjusted downwards, from 4.01% to 3.90% and from
3.98% to 3.90%, respectively. The medians for
medium- and long-term inflation expectations

remained stable at around 3.5%. As for inflation
expectations implied by quoted market prices of longterm money market instruments (drawn from 10-year
government bonds), these continued to remain at
levels close to 3.5%.

The decline in inflation during the first five months of
2018 is consistent with its convergence to the target
as forecasted by Banco de México in its latest
Quarterly Report. Nevertheless, some of the risks to
inflation identified by the Central Bank have started
to materialize, the peso exchange rate has
depreciated even further, while the prices of gasoline
and L.P. gas have been under pressure, in line with
increases in their international references. On the
other hand, the tariffs imposed by the U.S. and the
equivalent measures announced recently by Mexico
are expected to have a limited and short-lived effect
on inflation.

In particular, among the upside risks to inflation are
that the peso exchange rate continues to be under
pressure due to an environment of higher external
interest rates and U.S. dollar strength, and
uncertainty associated with both the NAFTA
renegotiation process and Mexico’s forthcoming
elections. Likewise, that shocks to agricultural
product prices and upward pressures on some
energy product prices materialize. Also, given the
economy’s current position in the business cycle, the
behavior of unit labor costs could exert pressure on
inflation. As for downside risks, the peso could
appreciate if NAFTA negotiations turn out to be
favorable.

18


-----

**Table 1**

**Consumer Price Index and Components**

Annual percentage change

**Item** **December 2017** **March 2018** **April 2018** **May 2018**

**CPI** 6.77 5.04 4.55 4.51

**SubyacenteCore** 4.87 4.02 3.71 3.69

**Merchandise** 6.17 4.64 4.35 4.07

Food, beverages, and tobacco 6.82 5.35 4.90 4.73

Non-food merchandise 5.62 4.04 3.90 3.52

**Services** 3.76 3.49 3.15 3.36

Housing 2.65 2.54 2.56 2.57

Education (tuitions) 4.74 4.84 4.84 4.82

Other services 4.63 4.07 3.24 3.73

**No SubyacenteNon-core** 12.62 8.03 7.07 6.99

**Agriculture** 9.75 7.74 5.24 2.87

Fruits and vegetables 18.60 8.82 4.07 -0.87

LivestockMeats, poultry, fish, and eggs 4.50 7.12 5.94 5.14

**Energy and government-authorized pricesEnergéticos y Tarifas Aut. por Gobierno** 14.44 8.19 8.18 9.59

Energy goodsEnergy 17.69 8.85 9.12 12.37

Government-authorized pricesTarifas Autorizadas por Gobierno 8.36 6.85 6.36 4.53

Source: INEGI.


19


-----

-----

