-----

**FOREWARNING**
This document is provided for the reader’s convenience only.
The translation from the official Spanish version was made
by Banco de México’s staff. Discrepancies may arise
between the original document in Spanish and its English
translation. It should be noted that the original Spanish
version is the only official document.


**1. PLACE, DATE, AND PARTICIPANTS**

**1.1. Place:** Av. Cinco de Mayo no.2, 5[th] floor, Col.
Centro, Mexico City

**1.2. Date of Governing Board meeting:** May 17,
2018

**1.3. Participants:**

Alejandro Díaz de León-Carrillo, Governor

Roberto Del Cueto-Legaspi, Deputy Governor

Irene Espinosa-Cantellano, Deputy Governor

Javier Eduardo Guzmán-Calafell, Deputy Governor

Manuel Ramos-Francia, Deputy Governor

José Antonio González-Anaya, Secretary of Finance
and Public Credit

Miguel Messmacher-Linartas, Undersecretary of
Finance and Public Credit

Fernando Luis Corvera-Caraza, Secretary of the
Governing Board

Prior to this meeting, preliminary work by Banco de
México’s staff analyzing the economic and financial
environment, together with the developments in
inflation and the determinants and outlook for
inflation, was conducted and presented to the
Governing Board.

**2. ANALYSIS AND RATIONALE BEHIND THE**
**GOVERNING BOARD’S VOTING**

This section summarizes the views exposed by the
members of the Governing Board regarding the
monetary policy decision.

All members highlighted that the world economy
continued to expand in a generalized manner during
the first quarter of 2018. One member pointed out the
increasing international trade and the recovery in
investment as the main foundations of world growth.
Most members noted that, at the margin, a slowdown
was also observed, and that this is mainly explained
by the lower growth of developed economies due to
certain temporary factors and to adverse weather
conditions. One member considered that this lower
dynamism is also associated with the fact that a
significant part of developed and emerging


economies is currently undergoing a late stage of
their business cycles. The majority of members
mentioned that forecasts for world economic growth
for 2018 and 2019 have remained unchanged in
relation to the projections published at the beginning
of 2018. One member stated that, despite the
increased volatility in financial markets and the
concerns about the trade policies that could be
adopted, the outlook for world economic recovery
rests upon an improvement in labor markets, a
higher confidence of economic agents, and the
effects of greater fiscal incentives in some developed
economies. Another member mentioned that the
expected strengthening of the world economy during
the April-June quarter supports the forecast of higher
economic growth worldwide in 2018, vis-a-vis 2017.
One member stated that short-term risks to the world
economy, that is, for 2018 and 2019, appear to be
balanced. Nevertheless, most members agreed that
there are several downward risks, particularly in the
medium and long terms, such as the escalation of
protectionist trade measures, increased volatility in
international financial markets, the tightening of
global financial conditions resulting from a fasterthan-expected U.S. monetary policy normalization,
and/or the materialization of some geopolitical risks.

In relation to the possible adoption of protectionist
measures, most members pointed out that these
could have significant effects on international trade
and investment. Particularly, one member noted
that, although the fears associated with a U.S.-China
trade conflict have tempered in recent weeks, the
risk of trade-related tensions between these two
countries persists. This member added that the
imposition of restrictions on trade and investment
flows would have implications not only for the
conflicting parties, but also for the global economy as
a whole. The same member stated that both the
allocation of resources and the dynamism of
economic activity would be affected at both the
regional and global level. Also, this member argued
that major disruptions in global value chains might
arise that, by affecting investor confidence, could
contribute to increased volatility in international
financial markets. In this context, the same member
pointed out that despite the efforts to reduce
geopolitical tensions in some regions of the world,
these have not faded and have even worsened in
some regions, such as the Middle East. Another
member added that, if the current conditions of
rapidly ageing population and low productivity
growth in some countries persist, the average
potential growth of the world economy could fall to
levels of between 2.3% and 2.5% in annual terms in
the next decade.

In relation to world inflation, some members stated
that, during the first quarter of 2018, there were

1


-----

gradual increases in inflation in certain economies,
derived partly from the increasing prices of
commodities and a significant reduction of slack in
labor markets. One member pointed out that these
price increases have been fueled by the outlook for
continued global economic growth and, in the case
of energy goods, that oil prices have also been
affected by some supply-related factors. Another
member emphasized that the re-imposition of
sanctions on Iran recently announced by the United
States, has contributed to the spike in international
oil prices to levels unseen since the end of 2014, and
that this could have relevant implications for
economic activity and inflation in several developed
and emerging economies. In this regard, another
member pointed out that the outlook for world
inflation is that it will continue on an upward trend,
albeit increasing at a more moderate pace, and that
the prices of assets currently incorporate this
prevision. Another member added that, although the
balance of short-term risks to world inflation remains
stable, latent upward risk factors persist for the
months ahead.

Most members emphasized that economic activity in
the U.S. grew at a more moderate pace during the
first quarter of 2018. Some members pointed out that
this was mainly due to the lower expansion of private
consumption. One member added that this
slowdown was partially offset by higher levels of
investment. The same member mentioned that this
lower growth took place in an environment where
economic agents’ confidence is at historically high
levels. One member noted that the U.S. economy
has undergone an atypical cycle of extended and
gradual recovery. In this regard, some members
emphasized that data indicate a continued
strengthening of the labor market, while the
unemployment rate is at its lowest levels of the last
decades. Thus, most members pointed out that there
has been a sustained reduction in the degree of
slack in the U.S. economy. As for forecasts for U.S.
economic activity, most members underlined that it
is expected to grow at a solid pace in the coming
quarters. They also mentioned that timely indicators
of private demand suggest an uptick in growth during
the second quarter and a greater dynamism for the
remainder of 2018 and in 2019. One member added
that the significant tax cuts approved at the end of
last year and the expected increase in the
government’s budget will have the most significant
effects on growth precisely in these two years.
Another member added that growth forecasts for
these years already incorporate the effects of the tax
reform and that they remain stable at 2.8% and
2.6%, respectively. As for the risks to U.S. growth,
some members mentioned the possibility of the
effects of the tax incentives gradually fading in the
following years. One member stated that the higher


interest rates along the yield curve could also have a
negative impact on growth. Another member
mentioned that another risk to economic activity is
the possibility of a further deterioration in U.S. public
finances, as well as the materialization of scenarios
associated with both tariff-related issues with China
and geopolitical conflicts.

Regarding U.S. inflation, one member stated that
there appears to be a consensus that the Phillips
curve has flattened sharply in the last years, which
could explain why the tightening in U.S. labor market
conditions has not led to stronger pressures on
wages and inflation. Also, this member added that
two important factors to explain this situation would
be the increased automation of various
manufacturing processes and the effect of
globalization. Another member pointed out that the
U.S. Federal Reserve acknowledged in its last
monetary policy statement that both headline and
core inflation have come closer to their 2% target.
Furthermore, most members emphasized that the
Fed stated that it expects inflation to be around its
2% symmetrical target. One member added that
such emphasis on symmetry could be interpreted as
a certain tolerance to inflation figures above the
target. Some members suggested that inflation could
be subject to upward pressures in an environment
where the labor market is near full employment and
facing the possibility of the U.S. economy operating
above potential in the coming years. One member
pointed out that the above has led to an upward
revision in inflation expectations, as well as an
increase in inflationary uncertainty and a possible
upward bias in inflation. Another member indicated
that, notwithstanding the above, financial markets do
not appear to assign a high likelihood to the
possibility of adverse inflationary shock in the U.S.

Most members highlighted that in its FOMC meeting
of May, the U.S. Federal Reserve kept unchanged
the target range for the federal funds rate at a level
of 1.5% to 1.75%, as was expected. They pointed out
that the Fed also reiterated its expectation of gradual
increases in its target range. They also noted that,
given the degree of slack in the U.S. economy, and
in an environment of fiscal stimulus measures, the
materialization of a scenario of a faster monetary
policy adjustment is increasingly probable for both
markets and analysts, which have changed their
projections from to 3 to 4 policy adjustments in 2018.
In this regard, one member said that expectations
that U.S. inflation will converge to its target sooner
than other advanced economies, has resulted in
expectations of U.S. interest rates increasing at a
higher and faster rate than in other advanced
economies.

2


-----

In relation to the rest of the developed economies,
one member stated that during the first quarter of
2018, Eurozone GDP grew at a moderate rate of
0.4% and of 1.7% in seasonally adjusted annual
terms, due to a reduction in the dynamism of
demand, after the strong recovery observed in 2017.
Another member pointed out that, in addition to other
factors, the above could have been reflected in the
recent weakness of their currencies against the US
dollar. Some members emphasized that growth
expectations for the Eurozone economies continue
to indicate a greater dynamism in 2018 and 2019. In
this regard, one member added that the Eurozone is
expected to grow 2.3% in 2018 and 2.0% in 2019.
Another member stated that although growth
estimates at the beginning of 2018 for Japan and the
Eurozone for 2018 and 2019 were revised upwards,
the latest information is not clear as to how strong
their economic expansion will be. Some members
underlined that labor markets in developed
economies show tight cyclical conditions. One
member added that there has been a moderate
increase in wages, inflation, and inflation
expectations. Another member stated that slack
conditions in the Eurozone have not been
exhausted, in contrast with those of the U.S.
economy. The same member pointed out that in the
rest of the advanced economies, inflation is still
below their central banks’ targets and, as a result,
these countries have maintained an accommodative
monetary policy stance, which is likely to continue at
least for the rest of 2018. The same member also
emphasized that up to March 2018, inflation in the
Eurozone had not yet attained its target level, while
the unemployment rate continued falling. Also, that
member argued that this was the reason why, in its
last monetary policy decision of April, the European
Central Bank (ECB) left its reference rate unchanged
and indicated that it will end its asset purchase
program in September 2018 and will begin the
gradual normalization of the reference rate until the
second half of 2019. The same member mentioned
that the Bank of England kept its reference rate at
0.5%, despite the fact that inflation fell to 2.5% in
March, its lowest level in one year. This member also
stated that Brexit negotiations pose an additional
challenge for the U.K. Monetary Policy Committee to
enable a faster monetary policy normalization
process in 2018. This member also added that the
Bank of Japan will continue with its accommodative
monetary policy stance in the coming months and
has changed the period of time to attain its 2%
inflation target for fiscal year 2019.

Some members agreed that emerging economies
grew at a high rate during the first quarter of 2018.
One member pointed out that China grew at an
annual rate of 6.8%, fueled mainly by consumption.
Another member indicated that labor markets in


several emerging economies also show tight cyclical
conditions. One member added that in these
economies inflation remains close, or even below,
their central banks’ targets, except for Turkey and
Argentina. The same member highlighted the case
of Colombia, where the central bank continues its
monetary easing cycle, as reflected by the recent cut
of 25 basis points in its reference rate. The same
member underlined that, despite the good
performance of emerging economies, risks persist,
particularly for China, due to its deleveraging
process and to growing trade tensions with the US.

All members pointed out that there has been an
increase in interest rates in the U.S., particularly for
shorter terms, while the US dollar has strengthened
in a generalized manner. One member mentioned
that these results are due to the relatively better
performance of the U.S. economy, vis-a-vis other
advanced economies, as well as to the convergence
of inflation to the Federal Reserve’s target and to
expectations that the Fed will continue its monetary
policy normalization process in the short term.
Another member added the upward revision in
inflation expectations, the greater inflationary
uncertainty, and even a possible upward bias in
inflation as other factors leading to increases in U.S.
interest rates. The same member explained that,
since the beginning of September 2017 to date, 2year bond interest rates have increased by more
than 120 basis points, while 10-year bond interest
rates did so by more than 100 basis points and
exceeded 3.0%. One member pointed out that these
rates reached their highest levels since 2008 in 2year maturities and since 2014 in longer maturities.
The majority of members agreed that the increase in
U.S. government securities’ interest rates has
generated episodes of volatility in international
financial markets, lower risk appetite, and capital
outflows from emerging economies. One member
expressed that this market adjustment occurred in a
relatively orderly manner, but another noted that
capital outflows from emerging economies could
intensify in the months and years ahead. Some
members noted that gains in asset price valuations
have reverted. Particularly, one of the members
mentioned that the search for yield in higher-risk
instruments has also reverted due to adjustments in
both the inflation outlook and interest rates. The
same member pointed out that such reversal took
place in an environment where, throughout 2017 and
early 2018, stock markets had grown significantly
and the search for yield prevailed in response to the
expected tax cuts and to the prevision that interest
rates would increase at a sufficiently gradual pace.
Some members noted that, in an environment of a
lesser search for yield, the idiosyncratic factors of the
different emerging economies could become more
relevant to determine their market prices.

3


-----

Particularly, one of the members mentioned that the
tightening of financial conditions that is likely to
ensue in the years ahead would affect mostly those
economies that still have weak fundamentals, such
as high levels of indebtedness, especially when
denominated in foreign currency. One member
highlighted that, in the absence of historical
precedents, a faster-than-expected increase in the
level of U.S. wages, inflation and reference interest
rates, could result in strong financial stress
worldwide due to the re-composition of foreign
investors’ portfolios in unforeseen magnitudes. The
same member emphasized that this would affect
capital flows to emerging economies like Mexico.

Most members pointed out that the available
information suggests that Mexico’s economic activity
continued to rebound in the first quarter of 2018,
attaining an even higher growth rate than in the
previous quarter. One member stated that this
compares favorably with the slowdown of the first
three quarters of 2017, while another noted that this
was the highest quarterly GDP growth rate figure
since July-September 2016. Most members added
that exports continued to follow a positive trajectory,
while private consumption continued to expand,
albeit at a slower pace, and that investment
recovered. Most members pointed out that the
recovery in investment was driven by the
reconstruction efforts after the earthquakes of
September 2017 and by certain public infrastructure
projects, some of them adding that the recent
recovery of spending in domestic and imported
machinery and equipment have also contributed to
the upswing in investment. Most members noted
that, as to productive activity, economic growth in the
first quarter of 2018 reflected both the dynamism of
services and the recovery of industrial activity, which
is explained mainly by the abovementioned upturn in
construction and manufacturing. In terms of a lower
frequency view, some members pointed out that, in
the last years, the country’s economy has been
subject to marked uncertainty and decreased
availability of external resources, which has led to a
sharp depreciation of the real exchange rate. Some
members expressed their views that aggregate
demand has been adjusting to the changing relative
prices and to an environment of higher real interest
rates in the U.S. One of the members added that, in
general terms, this has resulted in a greater
dynamism of exports, a certain moderation in
consumption, and in weak investment, although the
latest information shows that it has slightly
recovered.

Some members mentioned that the forecasts for
growth in Mexico for 2018 and 2019 remain stable.
Some members noted that the higher growth rates
observed during the first quarter of 2018 are not


expected to continue in the following months. In this
regard, one of them considered that the latter is
because the uptick in certain GDP components is
apparently a response to temporary factors, and to
the fact that both investment and industrial
production figures partly reflect the effect of the
reconstruction efforts to address the impact of the
earthquakes that hit the country in September 2017.
This member noted that what has been observed
frequently in previous election processes, is stronger
economic activity in the first half of the year, which
reverts, at least partially, in the second half. Thus,
this member held, that although, in principle, the
higher-than-expected growth of GDP during
January-March would imply an upward revision of
2018 growth expectations, it remains to be seen to
what extent the trajectory of economic activity in the
months ahead is affected by the aforementioned
factors.

Most members pointed out that, although the latest
economic activity figures indicate a greater
dynamism, given the prevailing conditions of
economic uncertainty the balance of risks to growth
continues to be downward-biased. One member
noted that several risk factors, external and
domestic, influence the above. Most members
mentioned that downward risks include the
uncertainty related to the renegotiation of the North
America Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA) and the
volatility associated with the electoral process, one
of them adding the risk of post-electoral volatility. As
for the first risk, one member noted the possible
negative impact of uncertainty on aggregate
demand. Another member pointed out that reaching
an agreement in NAFTA renegotiations in the next
days or before the country’s elections, as had been
announced, seems very unlikely, and therefore the
renegotiation rounds could be postponed until next
year, which could imply cautious decisions related to
spending and/or that investment projects will be
postponed further. As for the second risk, the same
member highlighted that it is difficult to anticipate the
magnitude and duration of these volatility episodes,
but that a strongly influential factor could be a small
percentage difference between the election’s winner
and the runner-up. Some members mentioned other
additional risks to growth, such as the tightening of
international monetary and financial conditions, a
faster-than-expected normalization of U.S. monetary
policy, and/or unexpected changes in the
aforementioned normalization process. Some
members noted that, in light of this risk, volatility in
international financial markets could increase,
affecting economic activity growth and capital flows
to emerging economies, including Mexico. One
member also mentioned the risk implicit in the tax
reform approval by U.S. Congress last December,
explaining that it could affect private sector

4


-----

investment decisions, which in turn would impact
Mexico’s tax base and economic activity. Some
members also mentioned the adoption of
protectionist trade policies as a risk, while one
member also included the potential impact of the
materialization of geopolitical risks. One member
pointed out the need for Banco de México to refine
its analysis of the balance of risks to inflation and
growth, mentioning that the probability of several of
these risks taking place changes significantly over
time, a fact that has never been mentioned before,
and that the nature of risks in terms of how they affect
growth and inflation in the short, medium and long
terms should be distinguished. This member
considered that the risks to growth in the short term
have diminished considerably, while those for the
medium and long terms have not.

As for the economy’s cyclical position, most
members emphasized that conditions remained
tight, particularly in the labor market. In this regard,
one member noted that statistical estimates suggest
that the unemployment rate is significantly below its
long-term level. Nevertheless, this member argued
that there is the possibility that the latter does not
reflect accurately labor market conditions,
particularly because wages are not showing an
excessive increase and the demand-side pressures
that would be expected under those circumstances
are not observed. The same member mentioned that
the labor market situation is more compatible with
the close-to-zero output gap estimates and that the
recent trajectory of three of the four indicators used
by Banco de México to estimate monthly slack
indices, also point to that conclusion. Another
member stated that indicators of the cyclical position
of the economy show, at the margin, that tightness
has been decreasing at a moderate pace. The same
member noted that indicators of labor market slack
should be interpreted cautiously because, in general
terms, they react to the cyclical conditions with a lag.
That member mentioned also that loose cyclical
conditions had not been observed since some
months ago and that in the past Banco de México’s
communications regarding this matter had not been
very clear and opportune. This member also
considered that it would be consistent to observe
pressures on nominal wages generated by the
economy’s cyclical conditions, simultaneously with a
fall in real wages, given the depreciation of the real
exchange rate, which would result in a slower
adjustment of inflation to its target, if monetary policy
were not operating effectively. This member pointed
out that, if the cyclical conditions had been less tight,
inflation would have fallen very rapidly under the
monetary policy stance adopted by the central bank.
Likewise, that a broad range of labor market
indicators suggest that there is no slack in this
market. For this member, the economy’s tighter


cyclical conditions over the last years have been a
determining factor in the adjustments to the
monetary policy target rate. The same member
emphasized that Banco de México recently acted in
a timely manner when it published its new indicators
to better understand the economic cycle,
emphasizing the need to take full advantage of the
publication of these indicators to improve the central
bank’s communication on economic slack matters,
as has been done. In this regard, another member
noted that it is necessary to evaluate accurately the
market conditions in order to fully identify their role in
the price formation process.

All members pointed out that during the first four
months of 2018, annual headline inflation continued
to decrease. Most members stated that the fall in
observed inflation is consistent with the forecasts
published by Banco de México in its OctoberDecember 2017 Quarterly Report. Some members
considered that this indicator has fallen more sharply
than expected, from 6.77% in December to 4.55% in
April. One mentioned that, although the behavior of
headline inflation has been the result of temporary
reductions in the prices of some products, the
percentage of items in the CPI basket with
annualized monthly increases below or equal to 3%
has continued to increase and in April accounted for
50% of the total. Another member stated that it is still
too early to be confident that the process of inflation
reduction in 2018 has been consolidated. As for core
inflation, some members pointed out that from
December to April it decreased from 4.87% to
3.71%, respectively. The majority of members
agreed that this reduction has been the result of the
monetary policy actions adopted and of the fading
out of the shocks that affected it last year. One
member stated that core inflation has reached levels
below the upper bound of the variability interval
around the central bank’s inflation target, adding that
the fundamental core inflation indicator, a variable
that reflects more adequately changes in the
economic cycle, has continued to fall, registering
figures below those of core inflation. As for non-core
inflation, some members mentioned that from
December to April, it decreased from 12.62% to
7.07%, respectively. Most of them pointed out that
this result is mainly due to reductions in the prices of
certain fruits and vegetables and of LP gas. Finally,
in this respect, one member said that this component
remains at high levels and that it has been under
certain additional pressures, especially related to
gasoline prices.

All members agreed that headline inflation
expectations for the end of 2018 were revised slightly
downwards, while those for the medium and long
terms remained stable. Some stated that inflation
expectations for the end of 2018 were revised

5


-----

downwards from 4.09% in March to 3.98% in April.
One member mentioned that the anchoring of
medium and long run inflation expectations makes it
clear that Banco de México’s monetary policy actions
have prevented the emergence of second-round
effects from the different shocks that have affected
prices. Nevertheless, this member also pointed out
that inflation expectations for all terms are above the
central bank’s projections. In this regard, most
members said that long-term inflation expectations
remain above the target, around 3.5%. One member
mentioned that long-term inflation expectations in
recent years have fluctuated no more than 20 basis
points around 3.5%, even when inflation figures were
below the target –like in 2015- or above the target like in 2017. This member stated that this outcome
could respond to various motives, and that Banco de
México has tried to strengthen its commitment to
attain the inflation target by adopting measures to
increase the central bank’s transparency and
accountability. As for inflation expectations derived
from market instruments, one member mentioned
that these have remained unchanged for three
consecutive months, while another stated that the
differentials between nominal and real yields
continue suggesting upward risks for inflation in the
long run.

Most members agreed that looking forward, and in
view of the current monetary policy stance, inflation
will continue to be in line with the forecasts published
in Banco de México’s October-December 2017
Quarterly Report. One member stated that forecasts
for the end of 2018 for both headline and core
inflation were adjusted slightly to the downside, while
those for non-core inflation rose because the outlook
for prices of energy goods was adjusted. Another
member mentioned that the forecasts for terms over
one year continue in line with the convergence of
inflation to its target. Most members acknowledged
that the base scenario assumes an orderly behavior
of the exchange rate, the absence of labor market
pressures, and non-core inflation continuing to
decline at the expected rate for the remainder of
2018. One member mentioned that there are risk
factors that might affect inflation and delay the
forecasted disinflationary trajectory, and the
convergence of inflation to its target. Another
member considered such convergence will occur in
the first half of 2019.

Most members coincided that the balance of risks to
inflation in relation to its expected path is still biased
upwards, in an environment characterized by a high
degree of uncertainty. Some members pointed out
that such bias responds to the possibility that the
assumptions incorporated in the aforementioned
inflation forecasts are affected by several factors.
One member mentioned that this balance has not


deteriorated in relation to that mentioned in the
previous monetary policy statement, while another
member said that there are still risks and uncertainty
in the short term, which appear to have increased, in
relation to the scenario foreseen in the last monetary
policy decision meeting. Among the main upward
risks, most members agreed that the peso exchange
rate could continue to be under pressure due to both
an environment of higher external interest rates and
the strengthening of the US dollar, and uncertainty
associated with NAFTA negotiations and Mexico’s
2018 electoral process. One of them also included
the uncertainty related to the post-election period. As
for NAFTA renegotiations, some members stated
that there is the risk of negotiations extending for a
long period, while one added that there is an
additional risk of these renegotiations having a
negative outcome. This member also included other
risks, such as the geopolitical ones, albeit specifying
that markets do not perceive them to have a high
probability of materializing, despite their media
coverage. In addition, this member mentioned the
risk of having an adverse inflationary shock in the
U.S. and the significant risk the U.S. tax reform could
pose on investment and public finances in Mexico.
The same member also pointed out the structural
weakness of Mexican public finances as an
additional risk to inflation and that total factor
productivity in Mexico has remained stagnant for
many years. This member highlighted that, if this
latter development continues, or if productivity even
falls, adverse shocks –both external and domesticcould have greater effects on the price level and,
therefore, on inflation, and at a faster pace. This
member added that this is a risk in the short and
medium terms that could last very long if the different
factors that affect productivity are not addressed.
Moreover, he argued that the apparent weak
association between aggregate economic activity
and employment in Mexico is a clear reflection of the
abovementioned problem. The same member stated
that, indeed, in the last years, employment has
grown at rates above productive activity, thus
suggesting that the jobs that are currently being
created show, on average, low productivity levels.
On another front, he also added the presence of
another risk generated by the fact that inflation
expectations are currently anchored at 3.5%, above
Banco de México’s target, and that the continuous
presence of different risks and the fact that they
could occur simultaneously, could considerably
affect the rate of price growth. This member argued
that the balance of risks described above includes
only those high-frequency risks related to the
business cycle, albeit noting that there are also
others of low frequency and structural nature. To
conclude, this member noted that it is important: i) to
specify which risks are temporary and which could
possibly lead to permanent shocks; ii) to identify their

6


-----

nominal or real nature, and if they are domestic or
external, and iii) to identify how these shocks have
evolved. One member stated that sudden increases
in non-core inflation cannot be ruled out, given the
volatility exhibited by most of its components.
Another member mentioned, among these risks, the
possibility of shocks to the prices of agricultural
products and upward pressure on the prices of some
energy-related goods. This member also added that
there could be a risk in 2019 –generated by the new
administration- of possible changes in the policy for
government-authorized prices. Most members
specified that given the economy’s cyclical
conditions, unit labor costs could put a pressure on
inflation. In this regard, one member added the
possibility of demand-side pressures. As for
downward risks, some members pointed out a
possible appreciation of the Mexican peso if NAFTA
negotiations have a favorable outcome.

As for Mexican financial markets, most members
pointed out that since the last monetary policy
decision, the peso depreciated significantly and
became increasingly volatile, in line with the
exchange rates of most emerging economies. They
ascertained that the evolution of the peso was due to
the generalized strengthening of the US dollar as
well as to domestic factors, such as the uncertainty
about the NAFTA renegotiation and the country’s
elections. One member noted that these two factors
caused the Mexican peso to be among emerging
economies’ most depreciated currencies in the
period, and explained that, of these two factors, the
outcome of the NAFTA renegotiations was the one
that had the most adverse impact on the peso’s
exchange rate. Another member underlined that the
increase in implied volatility in exchange rate options
has been particularly noticeable for those maturing
after the elections; and that this behavior is related
to both the diminished expectations of reaching a
favorable agreement within the NAFTA rounds in the
next weeks and the uncertainty associated with the
country’s elections, which gains relevance as the day
of the election approaches. Some members pointed
out that, under this environment, foreign exchange
market conditions slightly deteriorated; of these
members, one specified that higher bid/ask spreads
and a decreased market depth was observed.
Another member stated that the market has operated
under orderly conditions. As for interest rates in
Mexico, one member mentioned that these posted
increases throughout the yield curve, affected by the
same factors that had an impact on the peso
exchange rate. This member noted that such
increases were of higher magnitude than in the U.S.
Another member noted that a restructuring in foreign
investors’ government securities portfolio has been
observed, towards more medium- and long-term
positions, while opting for less positions in options


with maturities under three years. As for the
development of domestic financial markets in the
near future, one member pointed out that such
markets and the peso’s exchange rate could be
affected by the aforementioned risks. In view of
these conditions, another member mentioned that
foreign exchange rate expectations, drawn from
Banco de México’s Survey of Private Sector
Forecasters, remain relatively unchanged since the
last monetary policy decision, posting, on average,
18.60 and 18.28 pesos per dollar, for the end of 2018
and 2019, respectively. This member also
mentioned that this could suggest that, although the
market recognizes some degree of volatility
surrounding the country’s elections, it assumes that
in the medium-and long terms the peso’s foreign
exchange will return to the levels observed at the
beginning of 2018, thus implying that the prevailing
macroeconomic conditions are expected to continue.
One member gave insight as to the external and
domestic risks that financial markets face. Regarding
external risks, this member mentioned that markets
do not seem to consider that there is a high
probability of an adverse inflationary shock in the
U.S. or that the abovementioned geopolitical risks
will materialize. As for domestic risks, markets are
incorporating a high probability of NAFTA
renegotiations extending or having an adverse
outcome, while they do not seem to fully incorporate
the risk of a higher volatility associated with the
election process. This member pointed out that
although government economic authorities pursue
different objectives than financial market participants
and that, therefore, they evaluate both risks and their
implications differently, for the monetary authority’s
decision making it is important to analyze how the
markets are assessing the different types of risk and
how that assessment is being reflected in the
behavior of asset prices.

Some members pointed out that it is worth
highlighting that the Mexican economy has been
subject to marked levels of uncertainty and a lower
availability of external resources, which have led to
a significant depreciation of the real exchange rate
and to an increase in real interest rates. One of the
members added that in response to the financing
shock that affected the economy in recent years, the
monetary policy response adopted by the central
bank contributed to a major correction aimed at
reducing the current account deficit. Another
member stated that the monetary policy stance
adopted to keep medium- and long-term inflation
expectations anchored, together with the attainment
of the fiscal objectives and the financial system’s
resilience, have contributed to place the Mexican
economy in a better position to face possible adverse
scenarios. One of the members noted that, looking
ahead, the economy is expected to continue

7


-----

undergoing a complex environment, both in the
external and domestic fronts. This member added
that, for this reason, it is important that, in addition to
following a prudent and robust monetary policy,
authorities adopt measures to foster a greater
productivity and achieve a sustainable consolidation
of public finances. The same member also
underlined the importance of consolidating the
economy’s resilience and furthering the progress of
the Mexican financial system, emphasizing that it is
an essential ingredient, in order to reduce the
probability of possible abrupt restructurings of
investment portfolios and even of capital outflows.
Another member highlighted that it is essential to
consider the possibility of transiting through a period
of high uncertainty for a long time, and that even in a
scenario in which some of the current challenges
could fade, others will probably persist for a
prolonged period, such as the tightening of external
financial conditions. The same member underlined
that, in this environment, the required scope of action
encompasses other areas beside monetary policy,
and that the magnitude of the challenges that the
country is facing brings to the fore the need for timely
and adequate economic policy responses, in order
to strengthen the economy’s fundamentals. The
same member mentioned that, although some
sources of uncertainty are beyond the control of the
authorities, there are others that are not and, for this
reason, once the election process concludes, it will
be important to know as soon as possible the
detailed economic policy actions that the incoming
administration has the intention of implementing,
particularly regarding the management of public
finances. One of the members stated that regardless
of who the winner of the election is, the perception
that public finances and the fiscal stance may suffer,
in general terms, a deterioration, has started to gain
relevance, given that the winner of the elections will
have to fulfill several of the actions and public
policies promised during the campaign. The same
member added that, as is well known, the Public
Sector Borrowing Requirements’ Historical Balance
exhibited, in gross terms, a sizable increase through
the last years, except for 2017, reaching levels
above 50% of GDP. The same member considered
that this is a very important risk given the structural
weakness of public finances, and that the adverse
effects would be greater if Mexico’s sovereign risk
ratings deteriorate in case of this eventuality. The
same member added that this could also be
considered as a short- medium- and long-term risk.
Some members mentioned as an additional risk for
Mexican public finances, the effects that the US tax
reform approved last year might have. Among the
elements of uncertainty that the Mexican economy
will continue to face, one of the members underlined
the adverse sociopolitical environment that prevails
in the country. The same member mentioned that the


election process that will take place in July, besides
generating extreme polarization, poses an
unprecedented institutional challenge for the
electoral and jurisdictional authorities that will have
to judge the elections, given the number and
complexity of the aspects it involves. This member
also mentioned that this situation, already complex
_per se, occurs in an environment of institutional_
weakness where the State itself is vulnerable to
various crime groups, particularly in certain regions
of the country. This member cited as examples of
this situation the growing number of cargo trains that
are attacked every day, the increasing clandestine
fuel supply lines, as well as the figures published by
the National Electoral Institute (Instituto Nacional
Electoral, INE) regarding the resignation of
candidates running for election office to safeguard
their lives and, in more dramatic although less
frequent cases, the homicides of candidates during
the electoral campaign. Also, that same member
stated that in addition to the temporary uncertainty
that is always associated with all election processes,
which in itself involves an unfavorable environment
for economic activity, there is another type of
uncertainty that is not related to the election’s results,
but that runs deeper, is not limited in time, and that
bears relation with the minimum regulatory
effectiveness that is essential for economic and any
other kind of development. The same member added
that it is precisely this very effectiveness that is
directly undermined by corruption, since the goal of
the latter is to make regulation ineffective. In this
context, another member highlighted that a
determining factor of the lack of growth in the
country’s total factor productivity is the absence of
the rule of law. The same member underlined that,
to improve this situation, corruption and impunity
should be fought since, in many cases, they
represent the greatest threat in making property
rights sustain a dynamic investment process. For this
reason, this member emphasized that, although
there are several channels that should be addressed
to increase the level of investment and productivity
in the economy, it is essential to respect and have a
clear understanding of property rights.

All members of the Governing Board agreed that the
downward trajectory followed by inflation can be, to
a large extent, attributed to the monetary policy
actions adopted by Banco de México. One member
pointed out that these actions have allowed the
economy to avoid second-round effects, originated
by the shocks on certain prices, from taking place.
Another member emphasized that, in Mexico,
adopting a tighter and robust monetary policy has
contributed to an orderly adjustment in the yield
curve, the foreign exchange market and the other
financial markets in Mexico. All members pointed out
that the current monetary policy stance is consistent

8


-----

with annual headline inflation following a downward
trend to its target. All members also mentioned that
monetary policy has been implemented under an
adverse and uncertain environment, and that several
domestic and external factors still persist. For this
reason, all members agreed that it is necessary to
continue implementing a prudent monetary policy.
All members also indicated that the Mexican
economy could be affected by some shocks that
could generate additional inflationary pressures in
the following months. These shocks, all members
pointed out, must be assessed and monitored. One
member pointed out that the effects these shocks
might have on the expected disinflation trajectory,
within the horizon in which monetary policy operates,
need to be considered. Some members mentioned
the possibility of these shocks materializing
simultaneously, and one of these members
emphasizing that the covariance among different
shocks could be possibly positive. One member
noted that since some months ago, monetary policy
has been implemented under conditions of higherthan-normal uncertainty, and that the latter has not
faded as the key dates for certain risk factors have
come nearer. The same member pointed out that
some risks have even started to materialize. This
member also pointed out that the events of recent
weeks are an example of some of the challenges
monetary policy could face in the following months.
The same member also stated that some risks may
worsen as other key dates approach, and that the
implications for monetary policy under such a
complex environment are clear: monetary policy
must focus on attaining the convergence of inflation
to its target, facing decisively any shock that might
arise, and preserving the central bank’s credibility
through an approach emphasizing prudence, without
disregarding its implications for economic activity.
The same member stated that this could imply new
upward adjustments to the reference interest rate,
even in the near future. One member pointed out that
given the highly uncertain environment, it is
important that the monetary policy stance continues
to contribute to an orderly adjustment of the Mexican
financial markets, including the foreign exchange
market. The same member pointed out that in the
case the Mexican economy should face and adverse
scenario that would require the real exchange rate to
be adjusted, measures would need to be taken to
prevent medium- and long-term inflation
expectations from being affected and second-round
effects on the price formation process from taking
place. Finally, all members emphasized that it is
important that monetary policy continues to
contribute to the convergence of inflation to its target
and to strengthen the anchoring of inflation
expectations.


**3. MONETARY POLICY DECISION**

To guide its monetary policy actions, Banco de
México’s Governing Board closely follows the
development of inflation vis-a-vis its anticipated
trajectory, taking into account the monetary policy
stance adopted and the horizon in which monetary
policy operates, as well as available information on
all inflation determinants and on medium- and longterm inflation expectations, including the balance of
risks to such factors. Considering the latest
information on these elements and that the current
monetary policy stance is consistent with annual
headline inflation following a downward trend to its
target, Banco de México’s Governing Board voted
unanimously to keep the target for the overnight
interbank interest rate unchanged at 7.50%.

Looking ahead, the Governing Board will maintain a
prudent monetary policy stance and continue
following closely the potential pass-through of
exchange rate fluctuations on prices, the monetary
policy stance relative to that of the U.S., and the
conditions of slack in the Mexican economy. In the
presence of factors that, by their nature, may involve
risks to both inflation and inflation expectations,
monetary policy will be conducted in a timely and
robust manner to attain the convergence of inflation
to its 3% target and to firmly anchor medium- and
long-term inflation expectations.

**4. VOTING**

**Members voting in favor of this decision:**
Alejandro Díaz de León-Carrillo, Roberto Del CuetoLegaspi, Irene Espinosa-Cantellano, Javier Eduardo
Guzmán-Calafell, and Manuel Ramos-Francia voted
unanimously to keep the target rate unchanged at
7.50%.

9


-----

**ANNEX**

The information in this section was prepared for this
meeting by the staff of Banco de México’s General
Directorate of Economic Research and General
Directorate of Central Bank Operations. It does not
necessarily reflect the considerations of the
members of the Governing Board as to the monetary
policy decision.

**A.1. External conditions**

**A.1.1. World economic activity**

During the first quarter of 2018, the world economy
kept growing in a generalized manner, although at a
more moderate pace, as compared to the last quarter
of 2017 (Chart 1). The scenario for 2018 and 2019
continues suggesting a recovery of world economic
activity, driven by an improvement in labor markets,
a higher confidence by economic agents, and the
effects of greater fiscal stimulus implemented in
some of the major advanced economies.
Nevertheless, in the medium and long terms,
uncertainty and risks to global growth and financial
stability have increased. These include the possibility
of a sudden tightening in global financial conditions if
monetary policy normalization in advanced
economies occurs at a faster-than-expected pace,
the adoption of protectionist actions on trade and
investment, and that certain geopolitical events
materialize. In the last weeks, the perception of
greater risks has been reflected in increased
international financial market volatility, affecting
particularly those emerging market economies with
greater macroeconomic imbalances.


**Chart 1**

**World GDP Growth**

Annual percentage change, s. a.

12

10

8

6

4

2

0

-2

World

-4 Advanced economies

Emerging economies Q I

-6

2001 2003 2005 2007 2009 2011 2013 2015 2017

s. a. / Seasonally adjusted data.
Calculations of Q1 2018 GDP are based on estimates of certain countries.
The sample of countries used in the calculations accounts for 84.6% of
world GDP measured by purchasing power parity.
Source: Prepared by Banco de México with information from Haver
Analytics, J. P. Morgan, and International Monetary Fund.

U.S. economic activity expanded at an annualized
rate of 2.3% in the first quarter of 2018, after having
grown 2.9% in the previous quarter. The lower
growth rate is mostly attributed to the slowdown in
private consumption spending, which partly reflects
the delay in tax reimbursements associated with the
tax reform. Non-residential fixed investment grew at
a solid rate, driven by a rebound in infrastructure
investment, offsetting the downturn in equipment
investment (Chart 2). It is worth mentioning that
consumer and business confidence remain high and
solid growth in economic activity is expected in the
following quarters.

**Chart 2**

**U.S.: Real GDP and Components**

Annualized quarterly percentage change and
contribution in percentage points, s. a.

7 Public spending

Net exports

6 Inventories

Fixed investment

5 Private consumptionTotal

4

3

2

1

0

-1

-2

-3

Q I

-4

2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018

s. a. / Seasonally adjusted figures.
Source: Bureau of Economic Analysis.


10


-----

U.S. industrial production grew at a monthly rate of
0.7% in April. This expansion was the result of the
continuing recovery of electricity and gas supply,
after weather conditions normalized following
atypical warmer temperatures at the beginning of the
year -which reduced the demand for heating- as well
as the continuing strength in mining activities related
to crude oil and gas extraction. Additionally,
manufacturing expanded significantly in that month,
mainly due to the strong growth in equipment
production, which suggests that the slowdown of
investment in this item during the first quarter of the
year might have been transitory.

Most U.S. labor market indicators suggest that slack
conditions have decreased significantly. The nonfarm payroll increased by 200,000 jobs per month on
average during the first four months of the year, as
compared to the 177,000 jobs created per month on
average during the same period of 2017. The
unemployment rate dropped to 3.9% (its lowest level
since April 2000), while other indicators, such as the
difficulty to fill job vacancies, recruitment, and quit
rates, remained at pre-crisis levels. In this context,
wages grew at a faster rate.

In the Eurozone, GDP growth slowed considerably,
from an annualized 2.7% rate in the fourth quarter of
2017 to 1.7% in the first quarter of 2018. This
decrease was due to temporary factors, such as
adverse weather conditions and labor strikes and,
possibly, to a moderation in demand. In this
environment, the unemployment rate remained at
8.5% in March, its lowest level since January 2009,
while wages grew at a faster rate. Economic activity
is expected to recover during the second quarter,
driven by a higher household and business
confidence, as well as by still accommodative lending
conditions.

During the first quarter of 2018, U.K. economic
activity grew at a slower rate than in the fourth quarter
of 2017. This was partly due to the winter storms,
which led to modest growth in manufacturing
activities and to the contraction in construction. The
latter offset the good performance of the mining
industry, as well as of energy generation and
distribution. The Purchasing Manager’s Indices
suggest that this economic weakness could continue
in the second quarter of 2018.

Available indicators from Japan suggest that
economic activity weakened during the first quarter
of 2018, due to temporary climate-related factors and


to the seasonal effects of the Lunar New Year.
Particularly, these indicators point to a lower
dynamism of consumption and residential
investment. Nevertheless, the Purchasing Manager’s
Indices suggest that Japan’s economy may recover
in the second quarter.

Emerging economies continued to recover during the
first quarter of 2018. Leading indicators suggest that
this upward trend will continue for the remainder of
the year. Nevertheless, while commodity-exporting
economies could continue benefiting from the higher
commodity prices, increased volatility in international
financial markets could have an impact on countries
with higher levels of indebtedness and significant
external borrowing requirements. Additionally, the
Asian region is expected to grow at a moderate rate,
as a result of China’s policy initiatives to ensure
sustainable growth. Nevertheless, domestic and
external demand indicators in that country point to a
greater dynamism of the Chinese economy than was
anticipated at the beginning of 2018. However, the
escalation of economic tensions with the U.S. and its
high level of indebtedness could limit its growth
prospects for the next years.

International commodity prices rose in the last
weeks, driven by both the stronger demand for these
goods and different supply factors. Crude oil prices
continued to climb, in view of the reduction of
Venezuela’s oil production, the risk of restrictions
being imposed on crude oil exports from Iran, and
greater risks of an armed conflict in the region after
the recent announcement of the U.S. withdrawal from
the Iran nuclear deal. On another front, grain prices
rebounded, in response to the adverse weather
conditions prevailing in the U.S. Finally, the prices of
industrial metals exhibited some volatility as a result
of the changes in import tariffs imposed by the U.S.
on aluminum and steel producers.

**A.1.2. Monetary policy and international financial**
**markets**

The expansion of economic activity in advanced
economies has started to be reflected in several of
them in tighter labor markets and in a gradual
increase in wages and inflation (Chart 3). In March,
the U.S. personal consumption expenditure deflator
attained the Federal Reserve’s annual target of 2%.
As for Japan and the Eurozone, inflation remained
below their central banks’ targets, although it is
expected to gradually move closer to them.

11


-----

-2

2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018

s. a. / Seasonally adjusted data.
1/ Corresponds to the personal consumption expenditure deflator.
2/ Average of the Bank of Canada's three most preferred core inflation
indicators.
3/ Core inflation indicator preferred by the Bank of Japan. Excludes the
effect of Japan's consumption tax.
4/ Average of 18 emerging economies, weighted by their share in the global
economy and adjusted by purchasing power parity.
Source: Haver Analytics, BEA, Eurostat, and Statistics Bureau.

In this environment, the central banks of the major
advanced economies are expected to continue
shifting gradually towards a more neutral monetary
policy stance, although the pace at which these
institutions could adjust their monetary policies is
expected to show a greater divergence (Chart 4). In
contrast, conditions have been more heterogeneous
in emerging economies. While many economies
have continued to follow an accommodative policy
stance (as reflected in their latest monetary policy
statements), others like Turkey and Argentina raised
their reference interest rates to cope with the greater
financial instability.


*OIS: Fixed floating interest rate swap where the fixed interest rate is the
effective overnight reference rate.
** The average interest rate of the federal funds target range was used to
calculate the U.S. observed target rate (1.50%-1.75%).
Source: Bloomberg.

As expected, in its FOMC meeting of May, the
Federal Reserve maintained the federal funds target
range at between 1.5 and 1.75 percentage points. In
its last monetary policy statement it pointed out that
economic activity continued to grow at a moderate
rate, the labor market strengthened, and that both
headline and core inflation came close to the
symmetric 2% target, while medium-term headline
inflation is expected to remain at about 2%. In this
regard, inflation expectations drawn from the federal
funds rate futures imply an increase in the target rate
of 25 basis points by June and of an additional 25
basis points by the end of the year. In contrast,
private sector analysts consider a more rapid
process of monetary policy normalization,
forecasting three additional increases of 25 basis
points before the end of 2018.

In its April meeting, the Bank of Canada left its policy
interest rate unchanged at 1.25%, pointing out that,
in its forecast horizon, the economy is expected to
run above potential and inflation to be around its 2%
target, despite the uncertainty that prevails over the
trade policies of its main trading partners. The Bank
of Canada is hence expected to tighten monetary
conditions so that its target for the overnight rate
reaches 1.75% at the end of the year.

12

|End of 2018 201 xed inte get rang %). ng of|End of 2019 8 201 rest rate is th e was used t May, the|
|---|---|


-----

In its April meeting, the European Central Bank
(ECB) kept its monetary policy stance unchanged.
The ECB also emphasized that reference rates will
remain unchanged even after its asset purchase
program has been completed in September. At this
meeting, the ECB pointed out that the moderate rate
of growth of economic activity during the first quarter
of the year could have been influenced by temporary
factors. Also, that although risks appear to be
balanced, external ones have increased, particularly
those related to the implementation of protectionist
trade policies. Under this environment, the
expectations for monetary policy remained
practically unchanged. The ECB is thus expected to
end its asset purchase program at the end of 2018
and begin its process of gradually normalizing its
reference rate by mid-2019.

In its May meeting, the Bank of England kept its
reference interest rate unchanged. This decision was
not unanimous, since two members of the Monetary
Policy Committee considered that a 25 basis point
increase was needed to attain the inflation target.
Nevertheless, this central bank considers that the
inflation target will be reached sooner than expected,
as a result of the faster-than-expected fading out of
the pass-through effects of the weakening pound
sterling on prices. In this regard, most Committee
members considered that the risks of waiting in order
to gather more information to evaluate whether the
recent softening of economic activity is only
temporary before making any decision to raise their
reference interest rates are low. In this regard,
market instruments incorporate only a 25 basis point
increase in the reference rate for the second half of
2018.

In its April meeting, the Bank of Japan kept its shortterm deposit rate, the long-term government bonds
target rate, and the volume of its asset purchase
program unchanged. In its quarterly Outlook Report,
the Bank marginally raised its forecasts to growth
and inflation, and eliminated the phrase stating that
inflation was to reach its target in 2019.

The relative improvement in the U.S. economy and
the consequent divergence between expectations on
the pace of normalization of the Federal Reserve’s
monetary policy as compared to other central banks,
contributed to both the strengthening of the US dollar
vis-à-vis other currencies and to an increase in US
Treasury bills interest rates, which reached their
highest levels since 2008 for the 2-year rate, and
their highest level since 2014 for the long term rates.
The stock markets of most advanced economies
partly reverted the losses incurred at the beginning

|<-- Stock market FTSE-100 (UK) DAX (Germany) Nikkei (Japan) S&P 500 (USA) Eurostoxx (Europe) Shanghai (China)|<-- Currencies DXY 1/ CNY CAD JPY EUR GBP|10-year government bonds yields--> Canada United States Germany France United Kingdom Japan|
|---|---|---|


-7% 0% 7% -13% 0% 13% -70 0 70 -63 0 63 -41 0 41

Note: Interest rates correspond to interest rate swaps for 2- and 10-year
terms, except for Indonesia, where 1-year and 5-year interest rates were
used for 2- and 10-year interest rates, respectively, because those
maturities are not available in the market.
Source: Bloomberg.

13


of the year, supported by corporate reports that
reflected higher yields than those expected by
analysts (Chart 5).

As for emerging economies’ financial markets,
capital flows to these economies moderated, while
their currencies depreciated significantly. As a result,
the central banks of Argentina, Brazil, Hungary,
Indonesia, and Turkey intervened in their respective
financial markets (Chart 6).

**Chart 5**

**Change in selected financial indicators**

**(April 9 - May 14, 2018)**

Percentage, basis points


12%

11%

10%

9%

8%

7%

6%

5%

4%

3%

2%

1%

0%

-1%

-2%

-3%

-4%

-5%

-6%


40

35

30

25

20

15

10

5

0

-5

-10

-15

-20


1/ DXY: weighted average of the nominal exchange rates of the six main
worldwide-traded currencies and their share: EUR: 57.6%, JPY: 13.6%,
GBP: 11.9%, CAD: 9.1%, SEK: 4.2%, and CHF: 3.6%, calculated by
Intercontinental Exchange (ICE).
Source: Bloomberg.

**Chart 6**

**Performance of selected emerging**

**market assets**

**(April 9, 2018 - May 14, 2018)**

Percentage, basis points

**Interest rate**

**Region** **Country** **Currencies** **Stock market [Interest rate ]** **CDS**
**(2Y)** **(10Y)**

|Latin America|Mexico Brazil Chile Colombia Argentina|-19%|Col4|Col5|Col6|Col7|+525 bp|+|160 bp|+|141 bp|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|Emerging Europe|Russia Poland Turkey Czech Rep. Hungary||||||+187 bp||+89 bp|||
|Emerging Asia|South Korea Malaysia India Philippines Thailand Indonesia|||||||||||
|Africa|South Africa|||||||||||
|||-7% 0% 7%||-13% 0% 13%||-70 0 70||-63 0 63||-41 0 41||


-----

Looking ahead, given the escalation of a series of
risk factors, a scenario of greater volatility in
international financial markets cannot be ruled out.
The first of these risks is that financial markets
perceive monetary policy normalization in advanced
economies taking place at a faster pace than
expected, and thus generate sharp corrections in
financial asset prices and limit emerging economies’
financing sources. Second, the escalation of
protectionist trade policies around the world could
pose a risk for the expansionary trend of the current
economic cycle. Third, the election processes that
will take place in some emerging economies could be
reflected in higher volatility in financial markets.
Finally, the risks posed by geopolitical instability, the
high level of indebtedness of private non-financial
sectors in certain regions, and the high financial
asset valuations continue to prevail.

**A.2. Current situation of the Mexican economy**

**A.2.1. Mexican markets**

In the weeks after Banco de México’s last monetary
policy statement, the Mexican peso depreciated
against the US dollar by around 6.5%, practically
reverting all the appreciation exhibited throughout the
year (Chart 7). This depreciation was due mainly to
the generalized strength of the dollar against most
developed and emerging market currencies. The
peso also responded negatively to the uncertainty
related to the North American Free Trade Agreement
(NAFTA) renegotiations and, to a lower extent, to the
political uncertainty that is traditionally generated by
Mexican presidential elections (Chart 8). Under this
scenario, Mexican foreign exchange operating
conditions deteriorated moderately (Chart 9). It is
worth mentioning that the implied volatility and
skewness of Mexican peso/dollar options with 2month or longer tenors remain at high levels, relative
to the levels observed in other comparable
currencies (Chart 10).

|Col1|Col2|Col3|Col4|
|---|---|---|---|
|Range Mexican peso Canadian dollar Emerging currencies m|ean||May|
|an 15-Jan 29-Jan 1 urrencies’ mean a a, Peru, Turkey, ia, South Africa, ine represents Ba Banco de México Mexica Electoral polls show a possible majority in Congress by "Juntos Haremos Historia" coalition Donald Trump mentions NAFTA is close to be renegotiated|2-Feb 26-F nd range Philippin Russia, B nco de M with Bloo Ch n peso Pesos UST 10Y breaks 3% l|eb 12-Mar 26-Mar of the followin es, Poland, H razil, Colombia éxico’s last mon mberg data. art 8 exchange per dollar evel An|9-Apr 23-Apr 7-May g emerging countrie ungary, South Kore and Chile. The blac etary policy decision. rate nouncement of the next NAFTA renegotiation round on May 7|


Note: The period considered is from Banco de México’s last monetary policy
decision to date.
Source: Bloomberg.

14


**Chart 7**

**Accumulated index of selected emerging**
**currencies and Mexican peso in 2018**

Index (Dec 2017 = 100)

115

Range
Mexican peso
Canadian dollar

110 Emerging currencies mean


105

100


95

90


85

1-Jan 15-Jan 29-Jan 12-Feb 26-Feb 12-Mar 26-Mar 9-Apr 23-Apr 7-May

Note: Currencies’ mean and range of the following emerging countries:
Argentina, Peru, Turkey, Philippines, Poland, Hungary, South Korea,
Indonesia, South Africa, Russia, Brazil, Colombia and Chile. The black
vertical line represents Banco de México’s last monetary policy decision.
Source: Banco de México with Bloomberg data.


19.70 Electoral polls show a

possible majority in UST 10Y

19.50 Congress by "Juntos Haremos Historia" coalition breaks 3% level

19.30

19.10

18.90 Donald Trump mentions

NAFTA is close to be

renegotiated

18.70

18.50

18.30 Announcement of the next

NAFTA renegotiation

round on May 7

18.10

17.90

9-Apr 10-Apr 12-Apr 16-Apr 18-Apr 22-Apr 24-Apr 26-Apr 30-Apr 2-May 4-May 8-May 10-May


-----

**Chart 9**

**Mexican foreign exchange market operating**
**conditions index and peso-dollar exchange rate**

Index, pesos per dollar


government bonds positions. Particularly, inflows
were observed in practically all maturities over 3
years.

Finally, monetary policy target rate expectations
implied in the interest rate swap yield curve anticipate
a 25 bps increase in the reference rate during the
second half of the year (Chart 13).

**Chart 11**

**Government bond yield curve**

Percentage, basis points


90

80

70

60

50

40

30

20


22.0

21.5

21.0

20.5

20.0

19.5

19.0

18.5

18.0

17.5

17.0


8.00

7.75


50

40


J F M A M J J A S S O N D J F M A M J J A S O N D J F M A M


2016 2017 2018

Note: The index is calculated using the mean, the volatility, the skewness,
the kurtosis, the bid-ask spread and mean of simple differentials among
quotes of intraday operations, and the total traded volume. After obtaining
this data, the percentiles since 2011 are calculated and the average of the
7 percentiles for each day is considered. The black vertical line represents
Banco de México’s last monetary policy decision.
Source: Banco de México with Reuters data.


7.50

7.25


30

20


**Chart 10**

**Latest level of implied volatility in selected**
**emerging currencies-USD options (different**
**maturities)**
Percentage


**Chart 12**

**Mexican fixed-income market operating**
**conditions index and interest rate of nominal**
**bond maturing December 2024**

Index; percentage

80 8.0


7.00


10

0


0 5 10 15 20 25 30

Tenor (years)

Source: PIP.


20

18

16

14

12

10

8

6

4

|Turkey Turkey Mexico South Africa Brazil South Africa Mexico Brazil Russia Russia Colombia Colombia Poland Poland Chile Chile Hungary Hungary Czech Republic Indonesia Indonesia South Korea South Korea Czech Republic Malaysia Malaysia|Turkey Turkey Brazil Mexico South Africa South Africa Brazil Russia Russia Mexico Colombia Colombia Poland Poland Hungary H Cun hg ileary SC oh uil te h Korea Indonesia Indonesia South Korea Czech Republic MC az le ac yh s iaRepublic Malaysia|
|---|---|


5.5

5.0


7.5

7.0


6.5

6.0


**1M** **2M** **3M** **6M**

Source: Bloomberg.

Since the previous monetary policy statement, the
yield curve of government securities showed a
negative performance that resulted in generalized
increases of up to 47 basis points (bps) (Chart 11), in
an environment where Mexican fixed-income
market-operating conditions also deteriorated
moderately (Chart 12). Notwithstanding the above,
there was an increase in non-resident investors’


Note: Index calculated using the changes in intraday trading bond interest
rates, trade volatility, bid-ask spread, average of differences between
quotes, and the client and regular traded volume. With this data, the
percentiles are then calculated since 2012, and the percentile daily average
is used for each day. The black vertical line indicates Banco de Mexico's
last monetary policy decision.
Source: Banco de México with data from Bloomberg, PIP, and brokerage
firms.

15


70

60

50

40

30

20

10

0


J M M A O J M M A O J M

2016 2017 2018


-----

**Chart 13**

**Banxico overnight interest rate implied in 28-day**
**TIIE IRS curve**

Percentage

8.00

7.75 Banxico overnight rate

7.50 April 9, 2018

7.25 May 14, 2018

7.00

6.75

6.50

6.25

6.00

5.75

5.50


2017                          2018                          2019


Source: Banco de México with PIP data.

**A.2.2. Economic activity and determinants of**
**inflation**

According to INEGI’s flash GDP estimate, economic
activity continued to recover during the first quarter
of 2018 (even growing at a higher rate than in the
previous quarter), in contrast with the slowdown
exhibited during the first three quarters of 2017
(Chart 14). Particularly, exports continued to show
significant dynamism and private consumption
expanded further, while investment displayed an
uptick in growth between December 2017 and
February 2018.

**Chart 14**

**Gross Domestic Product**

Quarterly percentage change, s. a.


economic growth (Chart 15). These developments
were reflected in both automobile and nonautomobile exports. As for domestic demand,
according to its monthly indicator, private
consumption continued to expand during the first two
months of 2018, albeit at a slower pace than in
previous quarters. Latest timely indicators, although
of less coverage, show heterogeneous outcomes.
While revenues of retail stores exhibited an incipient
recovery as compared to observed figures in most of
2017, the weakness of sales of light vehicles
persisted. Moreover, from December 2017 to
February 2018, investment recovered as compared
to the stagnation it had been registering since the
end of 2015. This recovery was mostly driven by the
rebound in construction, mainly associated with the
reconstruction efforts after the earthquakes in
September and with some public infrastructure
projects, as well as by the recent recovery of
business spending on machinery and equipment.

**Chart 15**

**Total manufacturing exports**

Indices 2013 = 100, s. a.


140

130


120

110


100

90


3

2

1

0

-1

-2

-3

-4

-5


80

70


J

2012


A J O J

2013


A J O J

2014


A J O J

2015


A J O J

2016


A J O J

2017


A J O J M

2018


-6 Q-I 1/

I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV I

2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018

s. a. / Seasonally adjusted figures.
1/ The figure corresponding to the first quarter of 2018 refers to the flash
estimate of quarterly GDP released by INEGI.
Source: Mexico’s National Accounts System (SCNM, for its acronym in
Spanish), INEGI.

Manufacturing exports to the U.S. and to other
countries continued to exhibit significant dynamism
during the first quarter of 2018, consistent with world


s. a. / Seasonally adjusted series and trend series. The former is
represented by a solid line and the latter by a dotted line.
Source: Banco de México.

During the first quarter of 2018, on the production
side, the expansion of economic activity reflected the
dynamism of tertiary activities and the recovery of
industrial activity vis-à-vis the negative trend it had
exhibited during most of 2017 (Chart 16). Indeed, the
upward trend in services continued at the beginning
of 2018. Finance and insurance; real estate, rental
and leasing; professional, scientific, and technical
services; management of companies and
enterprises; public administration; and, retail trade
were the items that majorly contributed to this
positive performance. As for industrial activity, the

16


-----

significant recovery of construction and the incipient
rebound of manufacturing are noteworthy, as
compared to the weak figures exhibited during most
of 2017 (Chart 17). In contrast, mining continued on
a negative trend, remaining at significantly low levels.

**Chart 16**

**Economic Activity Indices**

Indices 2013 = 100, s. a.

120 140

Total IGAE 1/

Industrial production 2/

Services IGAE 1/

115 130

Agriculture IGAE 1/

110 120

105 110

100 100

FebruaryMarzo

March

95 90

J M M J S N J M M J S N J M M J S N J M M J S N J M M J S N J M M J S N J M

2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018

s. a. / Seasonally adjusted and trend series. The former is represented by a
solid line and the latter by a dotted line.
1/ Figures up to February 2018.
2/ Monthly industrial activity index. Figures up to March 2018.
Source: Mexico’s National Accounts System (SCNM, for its acronym in
Spanish), INEGI.

As to the cyclical position of the economy, i.e., the
slack conditions and their role in the price formation
process, several indicators, such as output gap
estimates (excluding the oil sector), suggest that
slack conditions at the beginning of 2018 remained
tight. In particular, labor market conditions remained
tight during the first quarter of 2018. National and
urban unemployment rates remained at historically
lows since the National Survey on Occupation and
Employment (ENOE, for its acronym in Spanish) first
started collecting data in 2005 (Chart 19). The
number of IMSS-insured jobs continued on an
upward trajectory. Nevertheless, according to
available information up to the fourth quarter of 2017,
developments in productivity and real average
earnings caused overall labor costs to decrease
further in real terms (Chart 20).


J M M J S N J M M J S N J M M J S N J M M J S N J M M J S N J M M J S N J M

2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018

s.a./ Seasonally adjusted series and trend series. The former is represented
by a solid line and the latter by a dotted line.
Source: Mexico’s National Accounts System (SCNM, for its acronym in
Spanish), INEGI.

**Chart 18**

**Output Gap Estimates [1/]**

**Excluding Oil Industry [4/]**

Potential output percentages, s. a.

8.0

Global Economic Activity Index (IGAE) 2/

6.0 Gross Domestic Product 2/

4.0 95% Confidence interval 3/

2.0

0.0

-2.0

-4.0

-6.0

-8.0

-10.0 Q-I

March

-12.0

J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J M

2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018

s. a. / Seasonally-adjusted figures.
1/ Output gap estimated with a tail-corrected Hodrick-Prescott filter; see
Banco de México (2009), “Inflation Report (April-June 2009)", p.74.
2/ First quarter of 2018 GDP figures refer to INEGI’s GDP flash estimate;
IGAE implied figures for March 2018 are consistent with INEGI’s GDP flash
estimate.
3/ Output gap confidence interval calculated with a method of non-observed
components.
4/ Excludes both oil and gas extraction, support activities for mining, and
petroleum and coal products' manufacturing.
Source: Prepared by Banco de México with data from INEGI.

17


**Chart 17**

**Industrial Activity**

Indices 2013 = 100, s. a.


115

110

105

100

95

90

85

80

75

70


-----

**Chart 19**

**National Unemployment Rate and Urban**
**Unemployment Rate**

Percent, s. a.


8

7

6

5

4

3


J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J M

2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018

s. a. / Seasonally-adjusted and trend series. The former is represented by
a solid line and the latter by a dotted line.
Source: National Survey of Occupations and Employment (ENOE, for its
acronym in Spanish), INEGI.

**Chart 20**

**Global Index of Labor Productivity (IGPLE, for**
**its acronym in Spanish) and Unit Labor Costs[1/]**

Indices 2013 = 100, s. a.

120

Productivity

115 Unit labor costs

110

105

100

95


developments took place in an environment where
interest rates remained at levels higher than those
observed on average in 2017, but without significant
changes as compared to the fourth quarter of 2017.
In general terms, delinquency rates remained at low
and stable levels, except those related to consumer
lending portfolio, which remained relatively high,
although showing incipient signs of not deteriorating
any further. Evidence therefore suggests that lending
markets are not facing demand-related pressures.

**A.2.3. Developments in inflation and inflation**
**outlook**

Annual headline inflation continued decreasing, from
5.04% in March 2018 to 4.55% in April, as a result of
lower annual price variations in both its core and noncore components (Chart 21 and Table 1).

**Chart 21**

**Consumer Price Index**

Annual percentage change

13 CPI

12 Core

Non-core

11

10

9

8

7

6

5

4

3

2


1


April


90


Q-IV 0

|Chart 21 Consumer Price Index Annual percentage change CPI|Col2|Col3|Col4|Col5|Col6|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|CPI Core||||||
|Non-core||||||
|||||||
|||||||
|||||||
|||||||
|||||||
|||||||
|||||||
|||||||
|||||||
|||||||
|||||||


I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV

2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017

s. a. / Seasonally-adjusted and trend series. The former is represented by
a solid line and the latter by a dotted line. Trend series estimated by Banco
de México.
1/ Productivity based on hours worked.
Source: IGPLE published by INEGI. Unit labor costs prepared by Banco de
México with figures from INEGI.

The real annual growth rate of domestic financing to
the private non-financial sector picked up during the
first quarter of 2018, as compared to the previous
one. This outcome is mostly attributed to the
dynamism of financing to large companies, since
lending to small and medium companies (known in
Mexico as PyMES, for their acronym in Spanish)
continued to expand at a moderate pace. Household
credit kept growing at low rates, although above
those registered at the end of 2017. These


J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A

2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018

Source: Banco de México and INEGI.

Specifically, annual core inflation dropped from
4.02% to 3.71% between March and April 2018. This
outcome is explained by the monetary policy actions
implemented by Banco de México, as well as the
fading of the shocks that affected this indicator last
year. The prices of food and non-food items
continued to exhibit lower variation rates mainly due
to the fluctuation of the exchange rate in previous
months (Chart 22). As for the services price
subindex, it has also been declining at an annual rate
(Chart 23 and Table 1). The above is partly explained
by the temporary price reductions in tourism
services, as well as the lower increases in the prices
of certain food-related services, as compared to
2017.

18


-----

**Chart 22**

**Merchandise Core Price Subindex**

Annual percentage change


**Chart 24**

**Non-core Price Subindex**
Annual percentage change

Non-core
Agriculture
Energy and goverment-approved fares


8

7

6

5

4

3

2

1

0


20

15

10

5

0

-5


J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A

2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018

Source: Banco de México and INEGI.

**Chart 23**

**Merchandise and Services Core Price Subindex**

Annual percentage change

Source: Banco de México and INEGI.

Annual non-core inflation registered 8.03% in March
2018 and then decreased to 7.07% in April. This
result is mostly explained by the reduction in the
prices of fruits and vegetables and LP gas, which
were partially offset by increases in gasoline prices
(Chart 24 and Table 1).


J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A

2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018

Source: Banco de México and INEGI.

The medians for short-term inflation expectations
from Banco de México’s Survey of Private Sector
Forecasters were adjusted downwards between
March and April, in line with the recent inflation
figures, which came in lower than was expected by
analysts. Medians for headline inflation expectations
for the end of 2018 and 2019, decreased from 4.09%
to 3.98% and from 3.60% to 3.58% in the March and
April surveys, respectively. In contrast, expectations
for the following 12 months from these surveys, both
relative to the month in which data is collected and to
the subsequent month, were adjusted upwards, from
3.85% to 4.01% and from 3.89% to 3.98%,
respectively. Furthermore, the medians for short- and
long-term inflation expectations remained stable at
around 3.5%. As for inflation expectations implied by
the quoted market prices of long-term money market
instruments (drawn from 10-year government
bonds), they continued to remain at levels close to
3.5% in this period, while inflation risk premia
decreased by around 10 basis points in the same
period.

19


-----

The decline in inflation in the first four months of 2018
is consistent with the forecasts presented by Banco
de México in its October – December 2017 Quarterly
Report. According to latest available information, and
considering the current monetary policy stance and
the horizon in which monetary policy operates,
looking forward, inflation is expected to be in line with
these forecasts. Such forecasts consider an orderly
behavior of the exchange rate, an absence of labor
market pressures, and non-core inflation continuing
to decrease as expected for the remainder of 2018.

The abovementioned scenario is subject to risks and
to a high level of uncertainty. The most important
upward risks are that the peso exchange rate
continues to be under pressure due to an


environment of higher external interest rates and US
dollar strength, and uncertainty associated with both
the NAFTA renegotiation and Mexico’s elections.
The risk of additional shocks in agricultural product
prices and upward pressures in the prices of certain
energy goods prevails. Taking into account the
cyclical conditions of the economy, the adjustment in
unit labor costs could also have an upward impact on
inflation. As for downward risks, there is the
possibility of a potential peso appreciation as a result
of a favorable outcome in the renegotiation of
NAFTA. Considering the aforementioned, the
balance of risks to inflation in relation to its expected
path remains biased upwards, under conditions of
significant uncertainty.


**Table 1**

**Consumer Price Index and Components**

Annual percentage change

**Item** **December 2017** **February 2018** **March 2018** **April 2018**

**CPI** **6.77** **5.34** **5.04** **4.55**

**Core** **4.87** **4.27** **4.02** **3.71**

**Merchandise** **6.17** **5.18** **4.64** **4.35**

Food, beverages, and tobacco 6.82 5.97 5.35 4.90
Non-food merchandise 5.62 4.53 4.04 3.90

**Services** **3.76** **3.49** **3.49** **3.15**
Housing 2.65 2.55 2.54 2.56
Education (tuitions) 4.74 4.83 4.84 4.84
Other services 4.63 4.06 4.07 3.24

**Non-core** **12.62** **8.49** **8.03** **7.07**

**Agriculture** **9.75** **9.69** **7.74** **5.24**
Fruits and vegetables 18.60 15.50 8.82 4.07

Meats, poultry, fish, and eggs 4.50 6.49 7.12 5.94

**EEnergy and government-authorized prices** **14.44** **7.81** **8.19** **8.18**

Energy goods 17.69 8.16 8.85 9.12

Government-authorized prices 8.36 7.08 6.85 6.36

Source: INEGI.

20


-----

-----

