-----

-----

**FOREWARNING**
This document is provided for the reader’s convenience only.
The translation from the official Spanish version was made
by Banco de México’s staff. Discrepancies may arise
between the original document in Spanish and its English
translation. It should be noted that the original Spanish
version is the only official document.


**1. PLACE, DATE, AND PARTICIPANTS**

**1.1. Place:** Av. Cinco de Mayo Street no.2, 5[th] Floor,
Col. Centro, Mexico City

**1.2. Date of Governing Board meeting: October 3,**
2018

**1.3. Participants:**

Alejandro Díaz de León-Carrillo, Governor

Roberto Del Cueto-Legaspi, Deputy Governor

Irene Espinosa-Cantellano, Deputy Governor

Javier Eduardo Guzmán-Calafell, Deputy Governor

Manuel Ramos-Francia, Deputy Governor

Miguel Messmacher-Linartas, Undersecretary of
Finance and Public Credit

Eduardo Magallón-Murguía, Deputy Secretary of the
Governing Board

Prior to this meeting, preliminary work by Banco de
México’s staff analyzing the economic and financial
environment, together with the developments in
inflation and the determinants and outlook for
inflation, was conducted and presented to the
Governing Board (see annex).

**2. ANALYSIS AND RATIONALE BEHIND THE**
**GOVERNING BOARD’S VOTING**

All members agreed that during the second quarter
of 2018, the world economy continued to grow at a
moderate pace, and that the divergence among the
main advanced economies’ performance increased.
In this context, some members mentioned that the
outlook for world economic activity has deteriorated
due partly to the materialization of some risks, such
as the intensification of trade disputes. Some
members agreed that the balance of risks to the
world economy continues biased to the downside. All
members agreed that the world economy is subject
to a high degree of uncertainty and that the following
are major risks: I) a further escalation of international
trade disputes; ii) a further tightening of financial
conditions; and, iii) political and geopolitical factors.


As for the risks of greater protectionist measures,
some members pointed out that the number and
intensity of these actions has been increasing
significantly. They also stated that evidence shows
that such measures are already affecting world trade
volume and capital expenditure, as well as indicators
of production, business confidence and household
confidence. One member mentioned that available
indicators suggest that the effect of these measures
has started to be evidenced in economies and
regions other than those directly involved in such
disputes. Most members noted that the intensity of
the trade disputes has differed across countries. In
some cases, such intensity seems to have eased, as
in the case of the trade negotiations between Mexico,
the U.S. and Canada; whereas in other cases, like
the trade dispute between China and the U.S., it has
worsened. One member highlighted the relevance of
the Chinese-U.S. case for the world economy, given
the size of both economies and their high share in
global value chains.

As for the second risk to the global economy, most
members mentioned the possibility of the U.S.
economy facing higher-than-expected inflationary
pressures, while one member stated that this
situation could lead to significant increases in the
yield curve. As for the risk related to political and
geopolitical factors, some members stated that in the
Eurozone some vulnerabilities associated with
domestic turmoil and political differences have
increased, stating as an example those related to the
approval of the budgetary process in Italy, the Brexit,
the U.S. midterm elections in November, and Brazil’s
presidential elections.

In addition to the aforementioned risks, some
members included the possibility of international
prices of crude oil and other energy goods continuing
on an upward trend, which could affect economic
activity and inflation worldwide. In this regard, one
member emphasized that the increase in oil prices
responds to several factors, such as a greater
demand in the United States, the inelastic supply by
OPEC countries, and the effects of the U.S. trade
sanctions imposed to Iran.

Most members stated that the divergence among the
main advanced economies’ performance has

increased. They also mentioned that, in contrast with
the Eurozone, Japan and the U.K., which have grown
below expectations, economic activity in the U.S.
exhibited higher growth, partly in response to the
fiscal stimulus implemented. Most members warned
that, under conditions of reduced slack in the
economy, the greater dynamism of the U.S. economy

1


-----

could exert greater pressure on inflation. As for the
prospects for growth for the U.S. economy, such
members expressed that they expect it to continue
growing at a high rate in the next semesters. Some
members highlighted that the latter is due to the
strength of consumption and investment in that
country, associated with the high levels of household
and business confidence indicators, and with the low
levels of unemployment. However, another member
pointed out that, in the medium run, the cyclical
position of the U.S. economy could start being a
factor that could hinder its dynamism. As to other
advanced economies, one member mentioned that
weak economic activity in the Eurozone, Japan and
the United Kingdom this year was a factor that
contributed to revise downward the forecasts for
growth for these countries, to rates below potential.
Some members mentioned that, in most advanced
economies, labor markets have tightened further and
their unemployment rates are below their natural
levels. One member added that, up to this point,
wages do not seem to be subject to pressures.

As for emerging economies, one member mentioned
that these exhibited slower dynamism than the
observed in previous quarters and have also faced
tighter financial conditions, in a scenario where
advanced economies are foreseen to raise their
interest rates. In the case of the Chinese economy,
some members indicated that it has been struck by
the effects of the intensifying trade disputes with the
U.S. and the environment of uncertainty that this
situation generates. In this regard, these members
pointed out that the outlook for manufacturing
activity, capital expenditure and business confidence
has been particularly affected. Most members added
that indicators for other emerging economies, such
as Argentina and Turkey, have deteriorated. In this
context, one member underlined that although
problems differ among economies, there are two
common factors: an inadequate macroeconomic –
particularly fiscal- management, and an institutional
weakness related, principally, to central bank
independence. As for expectations for growth for
emerging economies, one member stated that they
have been revised downwards and that greater
differences have been observed among countries.
The same member mentioned that in Latin America,
expectations for growth have been revised

downwards due to the slowdown of global trade
growth and to various idiosyncratic factors, whereas
another member added that growth expectations for
most crude oil exporting countries have improved
significantly.


Some members stated that in the main advanced
economies, headline inflation continues converging
to their central banks’ targets, albeit one of them
added that core inflation has remained below such
targets. Some members pointed out that in the
United States, inflation has fluctuated around the
Federal Reserve’s target, while in the Eurozone and
Japan it has remained below their central banks’
targets. In this context, some members indicated that
given the tightening labor markets in these
economies, in the future wages are expected to have
greater effects on prices. As for emerging

economies, some members mentioned that inflation
has trended upward gradually. One member noted
that in these economies, the outlook for inflation is
heterogeneous and that the risks of higher inflation
have escalated in several of them. In this regard, one
member added that pressures related to the
exchange rates’ depreciation could deteriorate even
further the outlook for inflation in emerging
economies. In light of the above, most members
mentioned that world inflation has increased, and
that the higher prices of energy have contributed to
such results. Some emphasized that the central
banks of both advanced and emerging economies
have stressed the possibility of inflationary pressures
arising in the short term due to the escalation of trade
protectionist measures. One member warned that, in
the short term, the balance of risks for world inflation
is biased to the upside, although with some
differences across countries.

All members mentioned that differences in the rate of
monetary policy normalization are expected among
the main advanced economies. Some members
pointed out that such divergence is a reflection of the
different stages of the business cycle each of these
economies is currently undergoing. In the case of the
United States, most members highlighted that, as
anticipated, in September the Federal Reserve
increased the target for the federal funds rate and
reiterated its prevision of increasing it gradually,
causing a rise in interest rates in all terms. One
member added that the latter was mainly observed in
short-term interest rates and, hence, the yield curve
remained relatively flat. The same member

mentioned that, in particular, the 5-year interest rate
was already at levels above 3%, while those of 30
years are already above 3.3%. Such member
expressed that these figures show that term premia
are still at low levels. Most members highlighted that,
in the event of inflationary surprises in the U.S., there
is a risk of a faster-than-expected process of
monetary policy normalization in that country. One
member mentioned that such inflationary surprises
could be due to demand-related pressures, given the

2


-----

reduced slack in the U.S. economy, or to the passthrough of import tariffs imposed by the U.S. onto
final prices in that country. In this regard, another
member made reference to the discussion about the
process of price formation in that country, and the
flattening of the Phillips curve, which suggests that
inflation’s response to the slack conditions in the U.S.
has been small. The same member added that
several explanations have been proposed to
describe this phenomenon, such as: globalization’s
disciplinary effect on prices and wages, productivity
gains related to automation, large businesses’
monopsonic position in labor markets, and the effects
through time of the presence of large e-commerce
retailers on the economy’s price formation process.
Such member pointed out that despite such
explanations, a high degree of uncertainty persists as
to the price formation process in the United States,
which increases the probability of inflationary
surprises. Such member highlighted that the risk is
not so much that inflation increases in an
environment where monetary policy normalization is
done gradually and with transparency, but rather that
inflationary surprises emerge. Some members
added that, in contrast with expectations for the
United States, those for Japan and the Eurozone
point to a barely moderate monetary policy
adjustment over a longer period. One of them
mentioned that, in England, the central bank has
maintained the projected pace of normalization,
despite the inflationary pressures it faces. Finally, the
same member pointed out that, among emerging
economies, tighter monetary policy stances are also
anticipated. In particular, this member stressed the
case of Argentina, whose central bank adopted
recently a monetary policy framework based on a
target for the monetary base.

All members pointed out that international financial
markets have undergone episodes of volatility and
considered that the prices of emerging economies’
assets have performed negatively in recent weeks.
Some members mentioned that this has occurred in
an environment of U.S. dollar strength and interest
rate increases. Most members stated that the lower
risk appetite observed in the last months has already
caused both an adjustment of investment portfolios
and capital outflows from some emerging

economies. In this regard, most members added that
differences among these economies were observed
depending on macroeconomic fundamentals and
idiosyncratic factors inherent to each of these
countries. These members highlighted that, in the
foreseeable future, an environment of higher external
interest rates and U.S. dollar appreciation is
expected, which would lead to a greater tightening of


financial conditions that will particularly affect
emerging economies. As for the risks to international
financial markets, most members emphasized those
previously described about world economic growth,
as well as those associated with sharp adjustments
in these markets, which would have a considerable
effect on financial asset prices.

Most members mentioned that the latest information
suggests that, at the beginning of the third quarter of
2018, economic activity in Mexico expanded, after
having contracted during the second quarter. One
member noted that this contraction was preceded by
two quarters of growth recovery. As for aggregate
demand, most members highlighted the higher
dynamism of exports. As for consumption, some
members pointed out that timely indicators suggest a
moderate recovery after the stagnation observed
during the previous quarter. Some members
coincided that investment has remained weak. As for
production, most members argued that its

performance is explained by the growth of services
and the slight recovery of industrial activity. One
member mentioned the favorable change in the trend
of construction, while some members noted the
recovery of manufacturing and the continuing
deterioration of mining. In this regard, one member
noted that this deterioration has been observed
mainly in crude oil extraction.

One member pointed out that, after the fluctuations
observed in previous months resulting mainly from
the natural disasters at the end of 2017, the trajectory
of economic activity is expected to normalize
throughout the second half of the year. In line with
the above, another member noted that, after the
growth forecasts of Banco de México’s latest
Quarterly Report were revised downwards, the
baseline scenario for growth for both 2018 and 2019
remains unchanged. Another member added that
expectations for growth slightly below potential
during both this year and 2019 prevail. Most
members argued that GDP growth for 2018 and 2019
is expected to be between 2.0 and 2.6% and 1.8 and
2.8%, respectively, as published in Banco de
México’s latest Quarterly Report. Some members
mentioned that the forecast for 2019 is subject to a
high degree of uncertainty and consider several
challenges, such as the incoming administration’s
implementation of public policy, a slight weakness in
the aggregate demand components, and the low
levels of crude oil production.

Most members stated that, given the complex
environment the economy is currently facing, the
balance of risks to growth remains biased to the

3


-----

downside, although such bias has decreased at the
margin as a result of the trade agreement recently
reached with the U.S. and Canada. One member
stated that the announcement of the new agreement
is, undoubtedly, positive news that may contribute to
strengthen confidence in Mexico. One member
explained that, although the ratification process will
be lengthy, which could give rise to uncertainty, this
should decrease significantly as compared to that
observed prior to the announcement, and therefore
help to boost domestic demand and, particularly,
private investment. Most members stated that there
is a risk of uncertainty as to the length of the
ratification process, that Congress does not ratify it
or that challenges arise in the implementation of
some chapters of the agreement. On top of the
aforementioned global risks, some members

mentioned as an additional risk to growth, the
deceleration of public expenditure that is generally
observed at the beginning of a new administration. In
this same regard, most members pointed out that
relevant details of the economic agenda of the
incoming administration remain to be explained.
Some members mentioned that another risk is for
crude oil production to remain significantly below the
expected levels. Among the risks to medium- and
long-term growth, some members included the
possible loss of efficiency and productivity of the
Mexican economy, as well as the possible impact to
competitiveness caused by domestic factors, such as
the deterioration of public security. One member
added other factors such as corruption, impunity, and
the absence of the rule of law, which affect
investment prospects. Another member also

included the risk of deviating from the ongoing fiscal
consolidation process and public policies that would
affect potential growth, as well as an eventual
slowdown of the U.S. economy.

Most members considered that the slack conditions
in the economy are estimated to have remained
similar to those observed during the second quarter,
pointing out that the economy’s cyclical conditions
continued to loosen vis-à-vis the levels observed at
the beginning of 2018. One of the members
emphasized that this is evident in practically all the
different slack indicators monitored by Banco de
México, except those related with the labor market.
However, another member mentioned that several
indicators currently suggest an output gap close to
zero. As to the labor market, some members stated
that its conditions remain tight. In this regard, one of
the members pointed out that the unemployment rate
is still at low levels and that although it has not
undergone additional decreases, it has remained
around its current level for a relatively long period.


The same member added that unit labor costs for the
overall economy have increased recently, though
starting from low levels and, in general terms, no
excessive wage pressures have been observed.
Another member argued that wages have increased
somewhat and that, for this reason, wage revisions
should be assessed fully to identify their effects on
the price formation process. In this regard, the same
member stated that it is important that the different
alternatives for wage revisions are associated with
productivity gains and do not generate overall cost
pressures on the economy. Another one stated that,
in that member’s opinion, demand-related pressures
stemming from such increases are a factor of greater
concern. Finally, as to the forecasts for economic
activity, some members pointed out that, if growth
expectations for the rest of 2018 and for 2019
materialize, less tight cyclical conditions would be
expected in the following quarters. Nevertheless, one
of the members noted that these conditions would be
consistent with an output gap not far from zero.

Most members mentioned that headline inflation has
been affected by the significant increases of its noncore component, emphasizing that, since June,
higher-than-expected rises in energy prices have
been observed, mainly those of gasoline and L.P.
gas. Such members noted that these price increases
stem from higher international references, stating
that the gradual adjustments of domestic gasoline
prices has made such increases more persistent.
Some members pointed out that the contribution of
energy prices to the increase in headline inflation
was significant during the first half of September and
larger than that exhibited in January 2017. One
member specified that in such two-week period,
gasoline prices registered an annual rate of change
of above 21%, whereas L.P. gas prices of above
26%. In this context, some members mentioned that
annual headline inflation increased from 4.85% to
4.88% between the first half of July and the first half
of September, while non-core inflation did so from
8.52% to 8.90% during the same period. As to the
evolution of core inflation, most members highlighted
that it has behaved according to expectations. The
same members mentioned that the core component
decreased from 3.64% to 3.56% between the first
half of July and the first half of September.
Nevertheless, most members noted that the rate at
which core inflation has been declining has been
contained by the indirect effects of non-core inflation
on production costs. One member added that core
inflation has shown a high degree of persistence,
despite the deceleration of productive activity and the
relatively more favorable behavior of the exchange
rate. The same member added that fundamental

4


-----

core inflation figures, drawn from price index data,
constructed with those items that are more sensitive
to the business cycle, has fluctuated between 3.4%
and 3.45% in the last five months.

Most members mentioned that expectations for
headline inflation for the end of 2018 were revised
upwards from 4.25 to 4.50% from July to September,
while those for the end of 2019 increased from 3.60
to 3.70% for the same period. One member
highlighted that such expectations are reflecting the
aforementioned shocks. Most members emphasized
that medium- and long-term expectations remained
around 3.50%. Some members observed that,
although expectations have remained stable, they
are still above the target. Most members also pointed
out that expectations for core inflation for the end of
2018 decreased from 3.60 to 3.53%, while those for
the end of 2019 remained practically unchanged.
Finally, one member underlined that the yield spread
between nominal and real government bonds
remains high, which suggests that markets are
perceiving upside risks for headline inflation in the
medium- and long-terms.

All members agreed that, although the shocks that
affected inflation in Mexico are of transitory nature,
they have delayed the convergence of headline
inflation to its target. One member added that noncore inflation is expected to remain high during the
next months and will continue to be affected by
pressures from energy prices, which will in turn affect
the trajectory of headline inflation. Another member
considered that the forecasts for inflation for the next
months remain complex. Most members also stated
that core inflation remains in line with forecasts and
is expected to continue its downward trend towards
3%. Some members pointed out that core inflation is
anticipated to decrease, but at a slower rate.

All members considered that the balance of risks to
the forecasted trajectory of inflation remains biased
upwards, in an environment of uncertainty where
external and domestic risks persist. One member
mentioned that, although some risks to inflation have
decreased as a result of the recently approved trade
agreement with the United States and Canada, other
risks have intensified. Another member added that
this balance deteriorated since the last monetary
policy decision, mainly due to the rise in energy
prices and expectations that they will continue to
increase. One member argued that some of these
risks are cyclical in nature, while others are of a more
structural nature. The same member emphasized
that both types of risks are operating in the same
direction and reinforcing each other. Among the main


risks to the upside, most members highlighted the
possibility of pressures on the peso exchange rate
due to external or domestic factors; a possible
escalation of protectionist measures worldwide,
which could affect inflation; additional upward
pressures on energy prices, as indicated by the
futures prices of some of these products; a possible
reversion in the favorable behavior of agricultural
products’ prices; and, the risk that wage negotiations
are not consistent with productivity gains. In this
regard, one member stated that wage pressures
could appear as a result of the tight labor market
conditions or the expected adjustment to minimum
wages. Some members also noted the risk of higherthan-expected levels of public expenditure. One of
the members emphasized that this could reduce the
rate at which core inflation has been decreasing.
Another member added the risk that the inertial trend
of a greater participation of current expenditure in
total government expenditure continues. Some
members stated that, if supply shocks, such as those
of energy prices, persist for a significant period, the
probability of second-round effects in the price
formation process could increase significantly. One
of the members pointed out that the persistence of
these shocks could also intensify the negative
consequences that protectionist measures could
have on inflation. Finally, another member

considered that, on balance, the aforementioned
factors jeopardize the convergence of inflation to the
3% target, within the time frame specified in Banco
de México’s latest Quarterly Report.

One member elaborated on the risks of a more
structural nature, stressing that the persistence of
inflation is currently high and that this may be due to
various factors. The same member indicated that, in
general terms, persistence is introduced into the
inflationary process through formal and informal
mechanisms that seek to protect economic agents
from inflationary and/or exchange rate risk, and that
these mechanisms are used in contracts or in other
forms of determining transactions in the economy, in
a context in which price formation does not seem to
be consistent with the 3% target. Such member
emphasized that there may be various reasons for
this, but that long-term inflation expectations have
remained at levels of around 3.5% for several years,
and that this fact implies that economic agents assign
a low probability to the event of attaining the 3%
target. In this context, the same member mentioned
the structural vulnerability of public finances as well
as the uncertainty about the management of fiscal
policy by the incoming administration. Such member
also considered that the most relevant risk is the lack
of total factor productivity growth in Mexico over the

5


-----

last two decades, stressing that under such
conditions it is difficult to believe that the economy is
in a good situation to efficiently absorb -that is, with
a low inflationary impact- adverse shocks, such as
those to the real exchange rate, the terms of trade,
and to the prices of energy and other commodities.
The same member argued that a necessary
condition for an economy to keep inflation low in a
continuous and sustained manner is through
constant gains in productivity. As for the downside
risks, some members highlighted that the ratification
of the trade agreement with the United States and
Canada could have favorable consequences on both
markets and exchange rate.

The majority of the members noted that since the last
monetary policy decision, the Mexican peso has
exhibited more resilience than the currencies of other
emerging economies, attributing this situation to both
the progress in the trade negotiations with the United
States and Canada, and the country’s prudent
macroeconomic management, highlighting the

monetary policy stance adopted by Banco de
México. In this sense, one member emphasized that
the monetary policy stance that has been

implemented has allowed interest rate differentials
between Mexico and the United States to remain
high, a fact that is one of the main reasons that
explain the relatively good performance of the prices
of Mexican assets. Another added to the above
factors the end of the electoral process in Mexico. As
for interest rates, one member indicated that shortterm rates registered slight changes, while increases
in medium- and long-term rates were observed.
Another member commented that, in general, the
country’s yield curve has remained relatively flat,
making it clear that monetary policy has been
effective in containing inflation expectations and the
term premia. One member pointed out that, although
there were outflows by foreign investors of fixed
income instruments, mainly medium and long term,
sovereign risk indicators did not show significant
adjustments and that they remain at levels consistent
with the country’s risk profile. The majority of the
members agreed that domestic financial markets and
Mexico’s exchange rate, in particular, could be
affected by the aforementioned external and
domestic risks.

In this context, the majority of the members
highlighted the importance of having solid

macroeconomic fundamentals, which have allowed
the economy to adjust in an orderly manner to a
particularly complex environment. One member
argued that maintaining solid macroeconomic
fundamentals is necessary to preserve favorable


conditions for economic activity and to avoid
vulnerabilities, which, in the event of risk

materialization, could lead to a rebalancing of asset
portfolios and to capital outflows. Another member
stated that prudent monetary policy actions are
essential to reach and maintain macroeconomic
stability. The same member stated that,

nevertheless, in the absence of an adequate support
from fiscal policy, these actions would have higher
costs for the economy and they might even be
insufficient. For this reason, the member emphasized
the importance, beyond a solid fiscal position in
2019, of paying timely attention to the challenges that
the country’s public finances face in the medium and
long runs. Such member stated that, in that
member’s opinion, the most relevant matter for the
monetary and fiscal authorities at this stage is to
evaluate how to safeguard what has already been
achieved and how to address the pending issues in
a timely manner. In this sense, one of the members
warned that public finances display a high level of
vulnerability, pointing out that in the years previous
to 2017 public indebtedness had increased

considerably. In particular, this member mentioned
that, from 2007 to 2016, the Historical Balance of
Public Sector’s Financial Requirements (SHRFSP,
for its acronym in Spanish) went from 28.8 to 48.7%
of GDP, and from 2013 to 2016, from 37.2 to 48.7%
of GDP. That member added that, despite the
reduction of the SHRFSP in 2017, it is difficult for this
decline to be sustainable, since it was based, to a
large extent, on cutbacks in public investment, which
is currently at very low levels. The same member
warned that, given the country’s fiscal situation, and
taking into account the expected future increases in
international interest rates, the conditions of access
to financing can turn less favorable. Furthermore,
such member argued that, in addition to the structural
vulnerability of public finances, there is also
uncertainty about the fiscal management of the
incoming administration. Another member added
that the president elect and his transition team have
stated their commitment to preserve the health of
public finances. However, the same member
highlighted that it is necessary to know in detail the
public policies of the new administration and their
potential effects on productivity and on the country’s
competitiveness. One member stated that financial
markets discount that a solid fiscal position will be
continued.

Elaborating on the structural challenges that the
economy faces, one member highlighted the lack of
total factor productivity (TFP) growth over the past
two decades and the weakness of investment. The
same member pointed out that according to INEGI

6


-----

figures the last spike in the TFP was observed in
1998, and that from that year to 2016 it fell by 10%.
Such member noted that from 2007 to 2012, this
indicator decreased 0.8% each year, whereas from
2013 to 2016 it did so by 0.2% each year. The same
member attributed the above to various factors: a) a
regulation and, more generally, rules of economic
interaction, that allow excessive market power in
some sectors – including several strategic ones—
and the few incentives for innovation, research and
development; b) a fiscal and social security system
that generates large distortions in the labor market,
spurring informality; and, c) the prevalence of
corruption and insecurity which, together with the
aforementioned factors, threatens the rule of law
and, particularly property rights. The same member
considered that given such factors, the slower
dynamism of investment over several years should
not be surprising. Such member expressed concerns
about some of the public policy proposals that have
been discussed recently, and about their possible
effect over the economy’s development in the long
run. First, such member reflected upon different
commentator’s opinions regarding the objectives that
a central bank ought to have. Such member
emphasized that monetary policy cannot influence
the potential growth of an economy, and that, at best,
it can only affect the cyclical component of aggregate
demand in order to guide inflation towards a
particular target. In this sense, such member stated
that assuming there is a trade-off between growth
and inflation which can be harnessed systematically
by a central bank, in the short and long run, implies
returning to past discussions and debates that have
been solved in both academic and practical terms.
Such member noted that this argument is based on
fifty years of economic analysis, at an international
level, as well as on the historical experience of
Mexico and many other countries in the last decades.
Second, such member indicated that the proposals
about using the international reserves to finance
public spending, for example in investment or any
other type of expenditure, do not take into account
the fact that international reserves are not a source
of net wealth, since these have to be financed with
the issuance of liabilities by the central bank. The
same member emphasized that the implementation
of such proposals would directly jeopardize the
central bank’s independence and its main statutory
mandate, leading to a situation of fiscal dominance
over monetary policy. The same member argued
that, in the best case, implementing some of these
measures would generate a greater inflationary bias,
besides the one the Mexican economy already has,
and, in the worst case, it would be a return to policies
that have already been tried and have failed, and that


would imply returning to times of recurring financial
and balance of payments crises.

Regarding the factors to be taken into consideration
for the monetary policy decision, the majority of the
members highlighted that core inflation –the
component that responds more clearly to the
monetary policy stance– has evolved, in general, as
anticipated, and is expected to continue to decrease,
although some of them pointed out that at a lower
rate and subject to greater risks. In this regard, one
member emphasized that such component has
exhibited a significant degree of persistence. In this
context, the majority acknowledged that monetary
policy faces challenges and that it must avoid that the
supply shocks that have affected non-core inflation
contaminate the economy’s price formation process.
One member mentioned that the latter is important
since these shocks can continue for a considerable
period, significantly increasing the risk of secondround effects. The same member added that the
latter risk is high in an environment where long term
inflation expectations have persistently remained
above the target, arguing that, in this context, the
central bank's credibility could be affected, which
would imply high costs for the Institution and the
economy. Another member said that the current
conditions make the monetary policy decision
complex since, as mentioned before, inflation is still
high and its speed of convergence has decreased,
while its core component remains on a downward
trend and domestic conditions have improved.

The majority of the members reiterated that the lower
uncertainty after the trade agreement reached in
North America has contributed to the Mexican peso’s
resilience. One member argued that the latter opens
up some room for maneuver for monetary policy in
Mexico in the face of the increases expected for the
federal funds rate in the United States. Another
member noted that while such trade agreement
reduces an important source of uncertainty, it is
unlikely to have enough impact on the exchange rate
as to significantly increase the likelihood of inflation
converging to its target during the forecast horizon.
The same member specified that the current
monetary policy stance, prudent and defensive –both
domestic and relative to the United States– has
contributed to the recent favorable evolution of the
Mexican financial markets. The same member
argued that the latter has taken place in an
environment in which monetary policy’s risk-taking
channel is operating intensively and, therefore,
capital flows are very sensitive to rate differentials. In
this regard, the same member stated that both the
inflation differential between the two countries which

7


-----

is anticipated in the short term, and the reduction in
the interest rate differential that markets expect, are
factors of concern because of the deterioration that
such differentials would entail for Mexico’s domestic
and relative monetary policy stance.

Some members pointed out that, in the current
circumstances, the likelihood of additional

adjustments in the monetary policy stance in the
short term has increased. One of them warned that
either if the persistence shown by core inflation
continues, or if some of the anticipated risks
materialize or if other risks arise, Banco de México
would need to act in a decisive and forceful manner.
Another member pointed out that, in the event of an
adverse scenario in which the real exchange rate
would need to adjust, it is important to prevent
medium and long-term inflation expectations from
being affected, and to avoid possible second-round
effects on the economy’s price formation process.
Elaborating on Mexico’s monetary policy, one
member detailed that given the shocks that have
affected inflation since 2017, the monetary policy
stance has been adjusted in order to ensure that
inflation converges to its target in a time frame
consistent with the full operation of the monetary
policy transmission mechanism. Some members
stressed that Banco de México has been

communicating about several changes in such
horizon, currently deferring inflation’s convergence to
the second quarter of 2020. One member expressed
that such forecast is subject to a high degree of
uncertainty. The same member considered that the
language of the monetary policy statement should
convey clearly such possibility and also that the
outlook for inflation is complicated. Likewise, the
same member expressed disagreement with the
forecasts made by analysts and market participants,
which suggest that Banco de México is about to
conclude its restrictive cycle and that it is likely to
start a loosening cycle in 2019. Finally, the majority
of the members agreed that, given a complex
environment in which external and domestic risks
persist, the Governing Board should remain attentive
to the evolution of the factors that could entail
additional pressures on inflation and delay its
convergence to the goal, in order to be able to react
in a timely manner.

**3. MONETARY POLICY DECISION**

To guide its monetary policy actions, Banco de
México’s Governing Board follows closely the
development of inflation vis-à-vis its anticipated
trajectory, taking into account the monetary policy
stance adopted and the time frame in which


monetary policy operates, as well as available
information on all inflation determinants and on
medium- and long-term inflation expectations,
including the balance of risks for such factors. Given
the Mexican economy’s recent developments, that
the shocks that have affected inflation recently are of
a transitory nature, and that the expected trend for
core inflation remains downward, Banco de México’s
Governing Board has voted by majority to maintain
the target for the overnight interbank interest rate
unchanged at 7.75%. One member voted for
increasing the rate by 25 basis points. The Governing
Board will monitor the potential pass-through of the
shocks that have affected non-core inflation as well
as other factors that could affect the evolution of core
inflation, which is particularly relevant in the present
scenario, since this indicator is still above 3%. The
central bank will take the necessary actions,
specifically, maintaining or possibly strengthening
the current monetary policy stance so that headline
inflation converges to Banco de México’s target
within monetary policy’s period of influence.

Banco de México’s Governing Board will maintain a
prudent monetary policy stance and will continue to
follow closely the potential pass-through of exchange
rate fluctuations to prices, the monetary policy stance
relative to that of the U.S. under an adverse external
environment, and the conditions of slack in the
Mexican economy. In the presence and possible
persistence of factors that, by their nature, involve
risks to both inflation and inflation expectations,
monetary policy will be adjusted in a timely and
robust manner to achieve the convergence of
inflation to its 3% target and to strengthen the
anchoring of medium- and long-term inflation
expectations so that they attain such target.

**4. VOTING**

Alejandro Díaz de León-Carrillo, Roberto Del CuetoLegaspi, Irene Espinosa-Cantellano and Javier
Eduardo Guzmán-Calafell voted in favor of leaving
the target rate unchanged at 7.75%.

Manuel Ramos-Francia voted in favor of raising the
target rate by 25 basis points to 8.00%.

**5. DISSENTING VOTE**

For some time, inflation has been subject to a
complex environment characterized by both cyclical
and structural factors. This situation is evident as
shown by long-term inflation expectations, which
have remained around 3.5 percent for several years,
regardless of the stage of the business cycle the

8


-----

Mexican economy is undergoing. Although there are
several reasons for this, all of them are potentially
reflected in the lack of growth of total factor
productivity over the last two decades. This condition
makes it more difficult for the Mexican economy to
absorb supply- or demand-related shocks with low
inflation. Due to the aforementioned, core inflation
currently shows a high degree of persistence. Such
persistence, together with perspectives for non-core
inflation, makes it unlikely for the current forecast for


headline inflation to be attained. Recently, Banco de
México has already adjusted on several occasions its
estimates for the time frame in which headline
inflation is expected to converge to its target.
Considering the current inflation forecast targeting
framework for monetary policy, as well as the factors
that are affecting core inflation, in my opinion, not
responding as a consequence of this environment
could be very costly for the central bank’s credibility.

9


-----

**ANNEX**

The information in this section was prepared for this
meeting by the staff of Banco de México’s General
Directorate of Economic Research and General
Directorate of Central Bank Operations and Payment
Systems. It does not necessarily reflect the
considerations of the members of the Governing
Board as to the monetary policy decision.

**A.1. External conditions**

**A.1.1. World economic activity**

During the second quarter of 2018, the world
economy continued to grow at a moderate pace,
although the divergence among the main advanced
economies’ performance increased (Chart 1).
Indeed, while several advanced economies have
grown below expectations and emerging economies
exhibited a lower dynamism, economic activity in the
U.S. registered higher growth. Under conditions of
reduced slack in the economy, this could exert
greater pressure on inflation.

**Chart 1**

**World GDP Growth**

Annual percentage change, s. a.

12

10

8

6

4

2

0

-2

World

-4 Advanced economies

Emerging and developing economies Q2

-6

2001 2003 2005 2007 2009 2011 2013 2015 2017

s. a. / Seasonally adjusted data.
Note: The sample of countries used in the calculations accounts for 84.6%
of world GDP measured by purchasing power parity.
Source: Prepared by Banco de México with information from Haver
Analytics and International Monetary Fund.

The outlook for the world economy is subject to a
high degree of uncertainty due to the risks associated
to a further intensification of international trade
disputes, a greater tightening of financial conditions,
and geopolitical factors. Uncertainty regarding
escalating trade disputes has been reflected in a
deterioration of indicators of business activity and
production, business confidence, and capital

expenditure.


In an environment where advanced economies are
expected to raise their reference interest rates at
different paces, an additional tightening of global
financial conditions could also be observed. There
are other risks to world economic growth, including
higher crude oil prices and various geopolitical
factors. In this context, the forecasts for world
economic growth for 2018 and 2019 have

moderated, reflecting the expectation of weaker
conditions in some of the main advanced economies,
including the Eurozone and the United Kingdom, as
well as in some emerging economies, like Argentina
and Turkey.

In the U.S., economic activity grew at an annualized
quarterly rate of 4.2% (seasonally adjusted figures)
during the second quarter of 2018, after having
grown 2.2% during the first quarter of the year.
Available data suggests that private consumption
and investment continued to grow at a high rate
during the third quarter of 2018, fueled by the high
levels of consumer and business confidence.
Inventory figures reveal that these might have also
contributed positively to growth, after the strong
rundown of inventories exhibited during the second
quarter of 2018. For the following quarters, economic
activity is expected to continue growing at a high
pace, driven partly by the fiscal stimulus. However, in
the medium run, a deceleration is anticipated as this
stimulus gradually fades out and financial conditions
become less accommodative.

U.S. industrial production continued to grow during
July and August, due to the favorable performance of
its three main components. Gas and electricity
generation, in particular, grew at a high rate, while
mining production maintained the positive trend it has
exhibited since the end of 2016. In turn,

manufacturing production continued to expand
moderately, mainly due to the rebound in vehicle and
auto parts production. Leading indicators suggest
that manufacturing will continue to observe a
dynamism similar to that of previous months.

U.S. labor market conditions continued to strengthen.
The non-farm payroll increased by 185,000 jobs on
average during June and August, above the rate
needed to keep pace with the growing labor force
(Chart 2). Since April, the unemployment rate has
stabilized at around 3.9%, below the natural
unemployment rate estimated by the U.S.

Congressional Budget Office (CBO). The tightening

10


-----

of the labor market was also reflected in the difficulty
to fill vacancies, while vacancy and quit rates
remained at pre-crisis levels. In this context, wage
growth continued to pick up.

**Chart 2**

**USA: Non-farm Payroll**

Monthly change and 3-month moving average of the

monthly change in thousand jobs, s. a.

400 9

Change in total nonfarm payroll Unemployment rate
August

350

8

300

7

250

200 6

150

5

100

4

50

0 3

2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018

s. a. / Seasonally-adjusted figures.
Source: BLS.

In the Eurozone, available data suggests that
economic activity continued to grow at a moderate
rate during the third quarter of 2018, after having
contracted during the first half of the year due to a
negative contribution of net exports. Private
consumption and investment have been driven by
the higher income of households, higher business
profits, and the higher levels of installed capacity. In
this environment of moderate growth, the region’s
unemployment rate remained at 8.1% in August,
below the estimated long-term level, while wages
started to grow at a faster rate. Nevertheless, a
greater divergence in regional economic growth has
been observed between economies like France and
Germany, and others like Italy. Looking ahead, the
weakening of consumer and business confidence
indexes is one of the main risks to the Eurozone’s
dynamism. If such weakening continues, it may affect
adversely the levels of investment and consumption.

In Japan, available indicators point to a weaker
growth of economic activity during the third quarter of
2018, after the 3% (seasonally adjusted annualized
quarterly rate) rebound observed during the second
quarter due to the higher levels of fixed investment.
Net exports weakened, while private consumption
has been affected by several natural disasters that
struck in July and September. In this environment,
Japan’s unemployment rate registered 2.4% in
August (close to its lowest level in the last two
decades), while wages rebounded.


In most emerging economies, economic activity has
weakened due to the growing international trade
tensions, the tighter financial conditions, and several
idiosyncratic factors. Economic growth slowed
significantly in several countries, such as Turkey,
Argentina, Brazil, India, and South Africa. A further
escalation of trade tensions between the U.S. and
China may also have an adverse effect on both
economic activity and inflation in China and other
emerging economies, mainly Asian.

During recent weeks, the international prices of
commodities posted heterogeneous results. In a
context of increasing uncertainty about the effects of
U.S. trade sanctions to Iran’s oil exports, at the end
of August oil prices rose under expectations that the
Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries
(OPEC) and other oil producers would decide to
leave their production levels unchanged, as was
confirmed by their decision taken on the meeting of
September 23. In contrast, the prices of industrial
metals remained at low levels due to the forecasts of
a weaker global manufacturing expansion and a
possible escalation of trade disputes between the
U.S. and China. Finally, the prices of grains fell after
the U.S. Department of Agriculture revised upwards
its forecast for world wheat production.

**A.1.2. Monetary policy and international financial**
**markets**

In a context of tighter labor market conditions in the
main advanced economies, higher crude oil prices,
and greater macroeconomic imbalances in several
emerging economies, inflation remained on an
upward trend, although there is still a persisting
divergence among countries (Chart 3). In recent
months, inflation in the U.S. rose and remains
currently around its target, while in the Eurozone and
Japan, it has remained below their central banks’
targets. In this context, the central banks of advanced
economies are expected to continue a gradual
process towards a more neutral monetary policy
stance, albeit with differences in terms of the speed
at which they adjust their policies (Chart 4). Both the
U.S. Federal Reserve and the Bank of Canada are
anticipated to continue raising their reference rates
before the end of 2018, while the Bank of England
and the European Central Bank (ECB) are expected
to do so by the second half of 2019. The Bank of
Japan is expected to adopt a more cautious policy
stance as to raising its reference rate.

11


-----

**Chart 3**

**Selected Advanced Economies: Core Inflation**


3 USA
Eurozone
Japan 1/
Canada 2/
United Kingdom

2

1


0

-1

2014 2015 2016 2017 2018


1/ Excludes fresh foods, energy, and the direct effect of the consumption
tax increase.
2/ Excludes food, energy, and the effect of adjustments on indirect taxes
(CPI-XFET).
Source: Haver Analytics, BEA, Eurostat, and Statistics Bureau.


3.0% **― Federal Reserve*** Forecasts

**― Bank of England**

2.5% **― Bank of Japan**

**― ECB key deposit facility rate**

2.0% **--- Implied trajectory of OIS curve at Jul.30,2018**

**― Implied trajectory of OIS curve at Sep.27,2018**

1.5%

1.0%

0.5%

0.0%

-0.5%

-1.0% End of 2018 End of 2019 End of 2020

2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020

|Col1|Col2|es: Cor change|e Infla|tion|
|---|---|---|---|---|
||||A|ugust|
|||2017|2018||
|||t effect of justments tatistics Bu Trajec Forecasts|the cons on indire reau. tory of||
|% % %|― Bank of Japan ― ECB key deposit facility rate --- Implied trajectory of OIS curve at Jul.30,2018 ― Implied trajectory of OIS curve at Sep.27,2018||||
|%|||||
|%|||||
|%|||||


1/ OIS: Fixed floating interest rate swap where the fixed interest rate is the
effective overnight reference rate.

- In the case of the U.S. observed reference rate, the average interest rate
of the federal funds target range is used (2.00% - 2.25%).
Source: Bloomberg.

As was expected, in its September meeting, the
Federal Reserve raised the target range for the
federal funds rate to between 2 and 2.25%, and
reiterated its forecast of increasing it gradually,
causing an increase in interest rates in all terms. In
its previous monetary policy statement, the Fed
omitted the phrase describing monetary conditions
as accommodative. The Fed’s Chairman clarified
that change did not imply a shift in its monetary policy
stance. As to its forecasts for economic and financial
variables, the slightly upward revisions in economic
growth estimates for 2018 and 2019; the marginal
adjustments to the projections of unemployment
--which is expected to remain below the long-term
rate throughout the forecast period--, and a few


changes in the forecasts for inflation --which is
estimated to remain around its target in the medium
term-- stand out. The FOMC’s forecasts for the
federal funds rates suggest an additional increase of
25 basis points (bps) in December, in line with the
expectations of analysts and those implied by
financial market variables. The Fed estimates point
to three additional increases of 25 basis points to the
target rate during 2019 and another one of 25 bps in
2020, in order to attain a range of between 3.25 and
3.50%, placing the target rate above 3%, which
corresponds to the Fed’s forecast for the long-term
rate.

In its September meeting, the ECB left its forward
guidance and key deposit facility rate unchanged,
reiterating that the latter will remain at that level at
least until the summer of 2019. The ECB also
confirmed that in October it will reduce its asset
purchase program from 30,000 to 15,000 million
euros, stating that, though depending on incoming
data, it anticipates concluding this program in
December. The ECB revised slightly downwards its
growth forecasts for 2018 and 2019 in light of
expectations of a lower contribution of foreign trade,
while keeping its inflation forecast for the next two
years unchanged at 1.7%. The European Central
Bank Governor described the risks to economic
growth as balanced and pointed out that uncertainty
regarding inflation expectations has decreased and
that inflation is expected to increase gradually in the
medium term, driven by an accommodative monetary
policy, the economic upturn, and wage increases.
Nevertheless, he also mentioned that monetary
stimulus is still essential to get inflation near its
target. Monetary policy expectations implied by
market instruments continue to anticipate that the
first raise to the key interest rate will take place until
the third quarter of 2019.

In its September meeting, the Bank of England left its
reference rate unchanged at 0.75%, after raising it by
25 basis points in August. The Monetary Policy
Committee pointed out that, if the economy performs
as expected, it would be appropriate to continue
tightening its monetary policy stance gradually and to
a limited extent. Although the Bank of England
highlighted that wages and consumption have grown
above expectations, it pointed out that uncertainty
regarding the Brexit has increased. In this context,
market variables suggest that the next reference rate
increase will take place during the third quarter of
2019.

In its September meeting, the Bank of Canada left its
reference rate unchanged at 1.5% and pointed out

12


-----

that the latest economic data suggests that a raise in
the reference rate will be needed to achieve the
inflation target in the medium term. Nevertheless, it
reiterated that it will continue tightening its monetary
policy stance gradually, following closely the
economy’s response to higher interest rates, and
monitoring the trade negotiations with Mexico and
the U.S. and their impact on inflation expectations.
Both professional forecasters and market indicators
therefore anticipate that the Bank of Canada will
raise its target rate by 25 basis points in its October
meeting.

Finally, in its September meeting, the Bank of Japan
left unchanged its short-term reference rate at 0.1%
and its reference rate indexed to its 10-year bond at
0%. In its monetary policy minutes, this central bank
pointed out that domestic demand is expected to
continue to grow. Nevertheless, it is monitoring the
impact of U.S. protectionist trade policies and their
possible effect on the Japanese economy, in
particular, on the global value chains. The Bank of
Japan also reiterated that it will continue with a highly
accommodative monetary policy for as long as
needed to reach its price stability target.

In most emerging economies, although headline
inflation has remained below the targets of their
respective central banks, it has increased further due
to factors such as the recent depreciation of their
currencies, the rise in energy prices, and, in some
cases, the lower slack in their economies. The
central banks of Argentina, the Philippines,

Indonesia, the Czech Republic, Russia, and Turkey
raised their monetary policy target rates, while other
central banks are anticipated to adopt a more
restrictive monetary policy stance in the following
months given the deteriorated balance of risks to
inflation.

In this environment, in recent weeks international
financial markets underwent episodes of volatility
and the prices of emerging economies’ assets
performed negatively. As mentioned above, the
strength of the world economy continues to be


subject to a high degree of uncertainty due to risks
associated mainly with a further intensification of
international trade disputes, a further tightening of
financial conditions, and with geopolitical factors.
Since Banco de México’s last monetary policy
meeting, most currencies have depreciated against
the US dollar, while the indexes of advanced
economies fell in the last month, except for those of
Japan and the U.S., which benefited from the positive
dynamism of the U.S. economy. Fixed income
markets registered interest rate increases, in a
context where the main central banks are expected
to continue the normalization process of their
respective monetary policies (Chart 5). The instability
of some emerging economies also led to a cautious
attitude by investors. The outflow of foreign
investment continued in emerging economies, while
the prices of both fixed and variable income financial
assets remained on a downward trajectory,

influenced by the possible impact of U.S.

protectionist trade policies and various idiosyncratic
factors. Nevertheless, differences among these
economies were observed depending on their
macroeconomic fundamentals and factors inherent
to each country. Countries with the largest
macroeconomic imbalances, like Argentina, Turkey,
South Africa, and Brazil, have undergone the
sharpest exchange-rate depreciations (Chart 6).

Looking ahead, risk factors to both international
financial markets and world economic activity persist.
The possible consequences of an increased loss of
confidence among households, businesses, and
investors due to the protectionist trade measures
already implemented and their possible

intensification stand out. Another persisting risk is
that the main advanced economies adjust their
respective monetary policies more rapidly than
expected if an unexpected pick-up in inflation takes
place. In this regard, the financial risks stemming
from the high valuations of some financial assets and
the uncertainty associated with certain geopolitical
events, the rising oil prices, and the deteriorated
macroeconomic imbalances of some emerging
economies also deserve mention.

13


-----

**Chart 5**

**Change in Selected Financial Indicators**

**(July 30 – September 28, 2018)**

Percent, basis points


14% 40
13%12% Italy 35
11% 30
10%

9% 25
8% Italy UK
7% Nikkei (Japan) 20
6% Canada
5%4%3% S&P 500 (USA) SpainUSAGermany CanadaSpainUSA 1510

-1%-2%-3%-4%-5%-6%-7%2%1%0% Emerging markets 1/CAC 40 (France)Eurostoxx (Europe)FTSE-100 (UK)FTSE MIB (Italy)DAX (Germany)Shangai (China)IBEX (Spain) Emerging currencies 3/CHFCADEURGBPDXY 2/CNYJPYNZDAUD **<--** **2-year government bonds interest rate -->JapanFranceUK** **bonds interest rate-->10-year government JapanFranceGermany** 50-5-10-15-20
-8% **<-- Stock markets** **Currencies**
-9% -25

1/ MSCI Emerging Markets Index (includes 24 countries).
2/ DXY: Weighted average of the nominal exchange rate of the six main
world-traded currencies (calculated by Intercontinental Exchange, ICE) with
the following weights: EUR (57.6%), JPY (13.6%), GBP (11.9%), CAD
(9.1%), SEK (4.2%), and CHF (3.6%).
3/ J.P. Morgan Index constructed from a weighted average of the nominal
exchange rate of emerging economies’ currencies with the following
weights: TRY (8.3%), RUB (8.3%), HUF (8.3%), ZAR (8.3%), BRL (11.1%),
MXN (11.1%), CLP (11.1%), CNH (11.1%), INR (11.1%), and SGD (11.1%).
Source: Bloomberg and ICE.


**Chart 6**

**Performance of Emerging Market Assets since**

**July 30, 2018**

Percent, basis points

**Region** **Country** **Currencies** **marketsEquity** **Interest rates 2Y** **Interest rates 10Y** **CDS**

**Mexico** **-0.80%** **0.17%** **-22** **9** **-2**

**Brazil** **-6.98%** **-2.11%** **48** **80** **54**

**Latin America** **Chile** **-2.78%** **-1.61%** **27** **3** **-4**

**Colombia** **-4.26%** **2.11%** **18** **13** **6**

**Argentina** **-31.11%** **13.47%** **76** **123** **179**

**Russia** **-4.42%** **7.69%** **130** **43** **8**

**Poland** **-1.39%** **-2.28%** **2** **2** **2**

**Emerging Europe** **Turkey** **-17.89%** **2.47%** **556** **-38** **63**

**Czech Republic** **-2.02%** **0.30%** **33** **27** **-4**

**Hungary** **-1.50%** **2.65%** **23** **36** **-3**

**South Korea** **0.78%** **1.98%** **2** **-7** **-7**

**Malaysia** **-1.90%** **1.25%** **2** **-1** **11**

**Asia** **India** **-5.80%** **-2.58%** **8** **1** **11**

**Philippines** **-1.64%** **-7.09%** **56** **50** **5**

**Thailand** **3.28%** **3.44%** **7** **6** **-7**

**Indonesia** **-3.35%** **-1.38%** **15** **-35** **20**

**Africa** **South Africa** **-7.42%** **-2.66%** **26** **45** **22**

Note: Interest rates correspond to interest rate swaps for 2-year and 10-Note: Interest rates corresponds to interes rate swaps for maturities of 2 and 10 years. In the case of Indonesia we
year maturities. In the case of Indonesia, rates with 1-year and 5-year
maturities are used because there are no quotes for 2-year and 10-year
maturities. For Argentina, rates in US dollars are used as they are the most
liquid ones and those that best reflect the performance of that country’s
fixed-income market.
Source: Bloomberg.


**A.2. Current situation of the Mexican economy**

**A.2.1. Mexican markets**

In the weeks after Banco de México’s latest monetary
policy decision, the Mexican peso depreciated 0.9%
against the US dollar, in an environment where most
emerging market currencies have undergone greater
exchange rate depreciations (Chart 7). The resilience
of Mexico’s foreign exchange market can be
associated with the country’s prudent

macroeconomic management and with the favorable
developments related to the trade agreement
reached with the U.S. and Canada. The Mexican
peso remains the emerging currency with the best
performance so far this year, appreciating by 5%
(Chart 8).

In this context, foreign-exchange market operation
conditions remained stable during practically the
entire period (Chart 9). Particularly, in relation to the
implied exchange-market conditions measured

through the implied volatility on foreign currency
options, the peso stood out among all emerging
market currencies due to its stability (Chart 10). A
moderate reduction in derivatives positions in favor
of the Mexican peso was also observed, mainly
among foreign investors with short-term investment
horizons.

**Chart 7**

**Mexican Peso and Intraday Depth**

Pesos per US dollar


Source: Calculated by Banco de México with "tick by tick" data from Reuters
Matching platform.

14


-----

**Chart 8**

**Percentage Change of Selected Currencies vs.**

**US dollar during the Period**

Percent

South Korea5 Mexico


Since Banco de México’s previous monetary policy
statement to date, the yield curve of government
securities’ interest rates increased by up to 25 basis
points (bps), reaching their highest levels since 2011
(Chart 11). The slope of the yield curve, measured
through the spread between 30- and 3-year bonds,
steepened by around 34 bps to levels of 42 bps
(Chart 12). The aforementioned took place in a
context where the operating conditions of this market
also remained stable.

**Chart 11**

**Government Bond Yield Curve**

Percent, basis points


-120 -100 -80 -60 -40 ChileRussia-20 -5 0 20

Colombia

Brazil -10

South Africa

-15

Turkey -20

-25

-30

-35

-40

-45

Argentina


-50


Year-to-date depreciation Year-to-date appreciation

Source: Banco de México with Bloomberg data.


**Chart 9**

**Mexican Foreign Exchange Market Operating**

**Conditions and Peso-dollar Exchange Rate**

Index (5-day moving average), pesos per US dollar


90

80


70

60


50

40


30

20


22.0

21.5

21.0

20.5

20.0

19.5

19.0

18.5

18.0

17.5

17.0


Source: PIP.

**Chart 12**

**Zero-coupon Curve of Government Securities**

**Interest Rates**

Percent


J M A J J S O D J M A J J S O D J M A J J S


2016 2017 2018

Note: Index calculated using the mean, volatility, skewness, kurtosis, bidask spread and mean of simple differentials all of them related to quotes of
intraday operations, and the total traded volume. After obtaining this data,
the percentiles since 2011 are calculated and the average of the 7
percentiles for each day is considered. The black vertical line represents
Banco de México’s last monetary policy decision.
Source: Prepared by Banco de México with Reuters data.

**Chart 10**

**Changes during the Period in Volatility Implied**

**in US Dollar Options at Different Tenors**

Basis points

1,600 Brazil


Source: Banco de México with PIP data.

During recent weeks, some capital outflows by
foreign investors were registered, reducing their
exposure to long-term instruments denominated in
Mexican pesos (Chart 13).

Finally, expectations regarding the level of the
monetary policy target rate implied by the yield curve
did not change significantly relative to the previous
period’s levels. Markets foresee that the target rate
will reach 7.77% in the central bank’s monetary
policy decision of October and 7.84% by the end of

15


8.50

8.40

8.30

8.20

8.10

8.00

7.90

7.80

7.70

7.60

7.50


6M 1Y 2Y 3Y 4Y 5Y 6Y 7Y 8Y 9Y 10Y 15Y 20Y 25Y 30Y


1,400

1,200

1,000

800

600

400

200


0

-200

-400


Colombia Colombia

South KoreaCzech RepublicMexicoHungary PolandSouth KoreaCzech RepublicMexicoHungary South KoreaCzech RepublicHungaryPolandMexico

Malaysia Malaysia Malaysia

**1M** **2M** **3M** **6M**


Colombia
Czech Republic

Hungary

Poland

South Korea

**Mexico**

Malaysia

|Brazil Brazil Turkey South Africa Chile Turkey Indonesia South Africa Russia Chile Colombia Indonesia Poland CR ou loss mia bia Poland|Turkey Turkey Brazil South Africa Brazil Chile South Africa IR n Cdu oos lons meia s bia RIC n uh d si ol se n iaesia ia Colombia|
|---|---|


Source: Bloomberg.


-----

the year (Chart 14). The consensus among
professional forecasters is that no changes in the
target rate are expected in the October monetary
policy decision and that it will remain at 7.75% until
the end of the year.

**Chart 13**

**Non-resident Investors’ Risk**

**Position on Bonos M**

Thousand million Mexican pesos (nominal value)


activity expanded. The IGAE July figures showed an
improvement in its three main economic activity
groups relative to their performance in the second
quarter of 2018 (Chart 16).

**Chart 15**

**Gross Domestic Product**

Quarterly percentage change, s. a.


2

1


1,850

1,840

1,830

1,820

1,810

1,800

1,790

1,780

1,770

1,760

1,750


0

-1

|Col1|September|
|---|---|


J F M A M J A S

2018


Note: The vertical black line represents Banco de México’s last monetary
policy decision.
Source: Banco de México.

**Chart 14**

**Banxico Overnight Interbank Rate Implied in**

**28-day TIIE IRS Curve**

Percent Percentage


-2 Q-II

I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV I II

2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018

s. a. / Seasonally adjusted figures.
Source: Mexico’s National Accounts System (SCNM, for its acronym in
Spanish), INEGI.

**Chart 16**

**Global Index of Economic Activity**

Indices 2013 = 100, s. a.


120

115


140

130


8.50

8.25 Banxico overnight rateBanxico overnight interbank rate (target rate)

8.00

July 30, 2018

7.75

Oct 01, 2018

7.50

7.25

7.00

6.75

6.50

6.25

6.00

5.75

5.50

J         M         S         J         J         O         F         J N

2017                          2018                          2019

Source: Banco de México with PIP data.

**A.2.2. Economic activity and determinants of**
**inflation**

During the second quarter of 2018, economic activity
in Mexico contracted relative to the first quarter
(Chart 15). This result was due to both the reversion
in the dynamism exhibited by investment at the
beginning of the year, and a weakening of both
consumption and exports. Nevertheless, at the
beginning of the third quarter, Mexico’s economic


s. a. / Seasonally adjusted and trend series. The former is represented by a
solid line and the latter by a dotted line.
Source: Mexico’s National Accounts System (SCNM, for its acronym in
Spanish), INEGI.

As for external demand, manufacturing exports grew
at a higher rate during July and August 2018, vis-àvis the weakness exhibited during the second quarter
of this year. By destination, exports to the U.S.
continued to grow, while those to the rest of the world
continued to exhibit the same negative trend that has
persisted since the beginning of 2018 (Chart 17).
According to Mexico’s National Accounts System,
during the second quarter of 2018, private
consumption remained at a level similar to that of the
previous quarter. With information up to July,
revenues of retail stores continued to exhibit positive

16


110

105


120

110


100

95


100

90


J

2012


A J O J

2013


A J O J

2014


A J O J

2015


A J O J

2016


A J O J

2017


A J O J

2018


A J

|BBaannxxiiccoo oovveerrnniigghhtt riantteerbank rate (target rate) July 30, 2018 Oct 01, 2018|Col2|
|---|---|


-----

results, while, during July and August 2018, sales of
light vehicles continued weakening, in contrast with
the significant growth they registered between 2014
and 2016. During the second quarter of 2018, both
private and public investment slowed down, which
led to a partial reversion of the rebound that overall
investment had exhibited during the first quarter of
this year.

**Chart 17**

**Total Manufacturing Exports**

Indices 2013 = 100, s. a.

140

Total

130 Rest of the world

United States

120

110

100

90

80

August

70

J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J A

2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018

s. a. / Seasonally adjusted series and trend series. The former is
represented by a solid line and the latter by a dotted line.
Source: Prepared by Banco de México with data from the Tax
Administration Service (SAT, for its acronym in Spanish), the Ministry of the
Economy (SE, for its acronym in Spanish), Banco de México, the National
Institute of Statistics and Geography (INEGI, for its acronym in Spanish),
Mexico’s Merchandise Trade Balance, and National System of Statistical
and Geographical Information (SNIEG, for its acronym in Spanish).

As for production, at the beginning of the third quarter
of 2018, services continued on an upward trend and
secondary activities continued showing an incipient
recovery, while primary activities decelerated slightly
(Chart 16). The rebound of tertiary activities was
driven mainly by the contribution of the components
of finance and insurance; real estate and rental and
leasing; transportation and warehousing; information
and cultural industries; wholesale trade;


accommodation and food services; and, educational
services and health care and social assistance.
Regarding industrial activity, construction recovered
slightly, while manufacturing continued exhibiting
some improvement vis-à-vis the weak results
observed during most of 2017. In contrast, mining
continued on a negative trend (Chart 18).

**Chart 18**

**Industrial Activity**

Indices 2013 = 100, s. a.

115

110

105

100

95

90 Total

85 Mining (22.3%)

Manufacturing (49.7%)

80 Construction (23.3%)

75 Utilities (4.7%)

July

70

J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J

2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018

s. a. / Seasonally adjusted series and trend series. The former is
represented by a solid line and the latter by a dotted line.
Source: PEMEX and Mexico’s National Accounts System (SCNM, for its
acronym in Spanish), INEGI.

As for the economy’s cyclical position, at the
beginning of the third quarter of 2018, slack
conditions are estimated to have remained at levels
similar to those observed during the second quarter
(Chart 19). Regarding labor market conditions, both
the urban and national unemployment rates
remained at low levels (Chart 20), while the number
of IMSS-insured jobs continued exhibiting positive
results, albeit with a certain lesser dynamism.
According to available information from the second
quarter of 2018, as a result of the growth of real
average earnings, unit labor costs in real terms for
the overall economy increased, reaching levels
above their long-term trend (Chart 21). At the
beginning of the third quarter of 2018, manufacturing
unit labor costs also followed an upward trend.

17


-----

8.0

6.0

4.0

2.0

0.0

-2.0

-4.0

-6.0

-8.0

-10.0

-12.0


**Chart 19**

**Output Gap Estimates [1/]**

**Excluding Oil Industry [4/ ]**

Potential output percentages, s. a.

Global Economic Activity Index (IGAE) 2/


J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J

2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018

s. a. / Seasonally-adjusted figures.
1/ Output gap estimated with a tail-corrected Hodrick-Prescott filter; see
Banco de México (2009), “Inflation Report (April-June 2009)", p.74.
2/ Second quarter of 2018 GDP figures; IGAE figures up to July 2018
consistent with GDP figures.
3/ Output gap confidence interval calculated with a method of unobserved
components.
4/ Excludes both oil and gas extraction, support activities for mining, and
petroleum and coal products' manufacturing.
Source: Prepared by Banco de México with INEGI data.

**Chart 20**

**National Unemployment Rate and Urban**

**Unemployment Rate**

Percent, s. a.

8.5

Urban unemployment rate

8.0

7.5 National unemployment rate

7.0

6.5

6.0

5.5

5.0

4.5

4.0

3.5

3.0

August

2.5

J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J A

2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018

s. a. / Seasonally-adjusted and trend series. The former is represented by
a solid line and the latter by a dotted line.
Source: National Survey of Occupations and Employment (ENOE, for its
acronym in Spanish), INEGI.


**Chart 21**

**Global Index of Mexican Labor Productivity**

**(IGPLE, for its acronym in Spanish) and of Unit**

**Labor Costs[1/]**

Indices 2013 = 100, s. a.

120

Productivity

115 Unit labor costs

110

105

100

95

Q-II

90

I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV I II

2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018

s. e. / Seasonally-adjusted and trend series. The former is represented by
a solid line and the latter by a dotted line. Trend series estimated by Banco
de México.
1/ Productivity based on hours worked.
Source: IGPLE published by INEGI. Unit labor costs prepared by Banco de
México with INEGI data.

In July and August of 2018, financing to the private
non-financial sector grew at a more moderate rate as
compared with the first half of the year. This was due
to the smaller growth of domestic financing to
companies, as well as to the continued slowdown of
consumer lending. The aforementioned took place in
a context where financing costs reached levels
above those observed on average during 2017 and,
in general, showed slight increases vis-à-vis the first
quarter of 2018. Business and housing delinquency
rates remained at low and stable levels, while those
related to consumer lending apparently stopped
worsening, as they had been doing since the end of
2016, although they still remain at relatively high
levels. Evidence therefore suggests an absence of
demand pressures in the loanable funds market.

**A.2.3. Developments in inflation and inflation**
**outlook**

Between July and the first half of September, annual
headline inflation rose from 4.81 to 4.88%. This
increase is explained by a higher price inflation in the
non-core component, mainly attributed to increases
in energy prices. In contrast, core inflation continued
falling. Nevertheless, core inflation’s rate of decline
has been affected by the indirect effects of energy
price increases on the production costs of some
items of this sub-index (Chart 22 and Table 1).

18


-----

13

12

11

10

9

8

7

6

5

4

3

2

1

0


**Chart 22**

**Consumer Price Index**

Annual percentage change

CPI
Core
Non-core


J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J

2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018

Source: Banco de México and INEGI.

Despite the aforementioned indirect effects, annual
core inflation fell from 3.63% in July to 3.56% during
the first half of September. Noteworthy was the
reduction in the annual rate of change of
merchandise prices, driven by the lower increases in
the prices of non-food items, which were partially
offset by the higher prices of food items (Chart 23 and
Chart 24 ). Service prices also grew at a lower annual
rate, due partly to a reduction in the price increases
of educational services vis-à-vis the previous year
(Chart 25 and Table 1).

**Chart 23**

**Merchandise Core Price Subindex**

Annual percentage change

8

Food, beverages and tobacco

7 Non-food merchandise

6

5

4

3

2

1

1st half Sept.

0

J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J

2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018


**Chart 24**

**Merchandise and Services Core Price Subindex**

Annual percentage change

7

Merchandise

6 Services

5

4

3

2

1

1st half Sept.

0

J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J

2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018

Source: Banco de México and INEGI.

Annual non-core inflation remains high and continues
to increase. Between July and the first half of
September, this component jumped from 8.38 to
8.90%, due to the increases in energy prices, mainly
those of gasolines and L.P. gas. It is worth noting
that, although these price increases stem from higher
international references, the gradual adjustment in
domestic gasoline prices has made them more
persistent. In contrast, the annual rate of change of
agricultural prices remained at low levels (Chart 25
and Table 1).

**Chart 25**

**Non-core Price Subindex**
Annual percentage change


J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J

2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018

Source: Banco de México e INEGI.


20

15

10

5

0

-5


Non-core
Agriculture
Energy and goverment-authorized prices


Source: Banco de México and INEGI.


19


-----

The medians for short-term inflation expectations
drawn from Banco de México’s Survey of Private
Sector Forecasters increased between July and
September. The rise in the median for headline
inflation expectations for the end of 2018 stands out,
as it was adjusted upwards from 4.25 to 4.50%
during the same months, after the inflation data
observed in June, July and August –particularly,
those pertaining to the non-core component– were
above forecasters’ figures. The median for headline
inflation expectations for the end of 2019 was also
adjusted from 3.60 to 3.70%, as revealed by the
surveys of the same months. In contrast, the median
for core inflation for the end of 2018 fell from 3.60 to
3.53%, while that for the end of 2019 remained
practically unchanged at 3.43%. The medians for
expectations for the following 12 months from these
surveys, both relative to the month in which data is
collected and to the subsequent month, were
adjusted downwards, from 3.85 to 3.76% and from
3.80 to 3.70%, respectively. Finally, the medians for
medium- and long-term inflation expectations

remained stable at around 3.5%. As for inflation
expectations implied in quoted market prices of longterm money market instruments (drawn from 10-year


government bonds), they remained near 3.5% during
the same period. Inflation risk premia increased
during the same period.

Annual headline inflation is expected to continue
moving towards the 3% target during the rest of 2018
and in 2019, being close to it during the first half of
2020. Annual core inflation is also foreseen to
continue decreasing during the time frame in which
monetary policy operates. Inflation faces several
risks. To the upside: a) pressures on the peso
exchange rate due to an environment of higher
external interest rates and to other persisting external
and domestic factors; b) additional pressures on
energy prices (as revealed by the futures quotes of
some of these products); c) a further escalation of
protectionist and compensatory measures worldwide
that could affect negatively the evolution of inflation;
and, d) greater-than-anticipated levels of public
expenditure. Moreover, if wage negotiations are not
consistent with productivity gains, inflationary

pressures on the economy could also appear. To the
downside: a) the ratification of the new trade
agreement with the U.S. and Canada could have a
favorable impact on markets and on the Mexican
peso exchange rate.


**Table 1**

**Consumer Price Index and Components**

Annual percentage change

**December 2017** **June 2018** **July 2018** **1st half Sept. 2018**

**CPI** **6.77** **4.85** **4.85** **4.88**

**SubyacenteCore** **4.87** **3.64** **3.64** **3.56**

**Merchandise** **6.17** **4.02** **4.02** **3.91**

Food, beverages and tobacco 6.82 4.55 4.55 4.69

Non-food merchandise 5.62 3.57 3.57 3.27

**Services** **3.76** **3.31** **3.31** **3.20**

Housing 2.65 2.61 2.61 2.61

Education (tuitions) 4.74 4.81 4.81 4.68

Other services 4.63 3.58 3.58 3.70

**No SubyacenteNon-core** **12.62** **8.52** **8.52** **8.90**

**Agriculture** **9.75** **2.23** **2.23** **1.22**

Fruits and vegetablesFruits abd vegetables 18.60 0.67 0.67 -1.03

Meats, poultry, fish and eggsLivestock 4.50 3.21 3.21 2.40

**Energy and government-authorized prices Energéticos y Tarifas Aut. por Gobierno** **14.44** **12.59** **12.59** **14.01**

Energy productsEnergy 17.69 17.16 17.16 19.32

Government-authorized pricesTarifas Autorizadas por Gobierno **8.36** **4.39** **4.39** **4.07**

Source: INEGI.

20


-----

-----

-----

