P.O. Box, CH-8022 Zurich
Telephone +41 44 631 31 11
Telefax +41 44 631 39 10
www.snb.ch
snb@snb.ch

Geneva, 15 June 2006
**Press release**

# Monetary policy assessment at mid-year

**National Bank raises the target range for the three-month Libor by 0.25 percentage points to 1.0–2.0%**

The Swiss National Bank (SNB) is raising the target range for the three-month Libor with immediate effect by 0.25 percentage
points to 1.0–2.0%. It intends to hold the rate in the middle of the target range for the time being.

The economy continues to develop favourably, with economic activity becoming more broad-based and having an
increasingly positive effect on the labour market. The National Bank now expects GDP to expand by a little more than 2.5% in
2006. Despite the most recent developments in oil prices, inflation has remained moderate. The SNB forecasts average
annual inflation of 1.2%.

By raising the target range, the National Bank is further adjusting its monetary policy stance to economic activity. The SNB’s
move ensures that the inflation outlook will remain favourable. On the assumption that the three-month Libor will remain
unchanged at 1.5%, annual inflation is expected to reach 1.2% in 2007 and 1.9% in 2008. Notwithstanding the interest rate
increase, monetary policy remains expansionary. Should the economy perform as expected, the National Bank will further
pursue the gradual adjustment of its monetary policy. If the Swiss franc were to appreciate rapidly, the SNB would respond
appropriately.

Swiss National Bank


-----

