# abcde g

**Communications**


P.O. Box, CH-8022 Zurich
Telephone +41 1 631 31 11
Fax +41 1 631 39 10

Zurich, 15 March 2007

### Monetary policy assessment of 15 March 2007


### National Bank raises the target range for the three-month Libor by 0.25 percentage points to 1.75–2.75% 

The Swiss National Bank (SNB) is raising the target range for the three-month Libor with
immediate effect by 0.25 percentage points to 1.75–2.75%. The SNB intends to hold the
rate in the middle of the target range for the time being.

Switzerland's economy is in excellent shape. As expected, it continues to perform
positively. This is having a favourable effect on the labour market. For 2007, the National
Bank still expects real GDP growth to remain at approximately 2%. By raising the target
range, the National Bank is ensuring that the inflation outlook will remain favourable.

The drop in oil prices in the second half of last year will hold back inflation until the
middle of 2007. Assuming that the three-month Libor will remain unchanged at 2.25%,
the National Bank expects an average annual inflation rate of 0.5% in 2007, 1.4% in 2008
and 1.6% in 2009. On the assumption that monetary policy will remain unchanged,
projected inflation will thus continue to show a slight upward trend over time.
Consequently, in order to ensure price stability in the long term, the SNB will probably
have to continue its policy of interest rate normalisation. However, any assessment of the
inflation outlook is subject to greater uncertainty. While, on the one hand, structural
changes in the economy are having more of a dampening effect on prices, the high level
of capacity utilisation and exchange rate movements, on the other, are exacerbating the
risk of higher production costs being increasingly passed on to prices. Should the inflation
outlook change, the National Bank will take appropriate measures.


**International environment**

The analysis of the international situation has changed little since the last monetary
policy assessment. The US economy is set to expand close to its potential growth rate in
2007. The European economy will continue to perform favourably. The decline in oil prices
will curb this year’s rate of inflation measured with respect to the year-back quarter.


-----

# abcde g

15 March 2007 2


**Economic outlook**

Economic activity in Switzerland continues to be brisk. According to a provisional
assessment by SECO, real gross domestic product (GDP) in the fourth quarter of 2006 grew
at an annualised rate of 1.8% compared with the previous period. Based on its analysis of
a number of indicators, the National Bank does not exclude that fourth-quarter growth
may be somewhat higher. The broad-based, healthy economic situation had a positive
impact on the labour market. Year-on-year growth in employment was the highest in five
years. The upward trend in the labour market has given consumer sentiment yet another
lift.

Most demand components can again be expected to shore up economic growth in the next
few quarters. The upbeat consumer sentiment and the income trend will push up
household spending. Considering the high level of capacity utilisation and the bright
economic outlook, equipment investment is also set to rise. Exports will be another factor
boosting economic growth. The healthy economy will stimulate the labour market again
this year and result in a further drop in the unemployment rate.

The National Bank expects economic developments to be broad-based and balanced also in
2007, yet possibly somewhat less dynamic. The SNB still projects real GDP to expand by
approximately 2%. Consequently, the economy progresses somewhat faster than its longterm average. However, special factors, including strong competition from new providers
in the transition countries and emerging markets of Asia as well as the fact that the Swiss
labour market has been opened up to foreign nationals, are continuing to ease the
pressure on prices.


**Monetary developments**

The policy of gradual adjustments to the interest rate pursued to date is increasingly
affecting financial market conditions. In the course of 2006, short-term interest rates
adjusted to the longer-term rates. The interest rate curve flattened, which led to a rise in
real interest rates for short and medium-term maturities. The changes in the interest rate
structure sparked a switch from savings deposits to higher-interest time deposits. The
annual growth rates of M1 and M2, which include sight and savings deposits, were
negative in the fourth quarter of 2006. By contrast, M3, which comprises time deposits,
showed a moderate increase.

The growth rate of mortgage lending continues to recede gradually, while that of other
loans, however, is witnessing continued strong growth, which is mainly attributable to
unsecured loans. During phases of strong economic performance, this category exhibits
particularly sharp growth rates. However, these loans are still below the level they had
reached at the beginning of the boom years of 1999/2000.

After having lost ground against the euro over an extended period, the Swiss franc has
recovered slightly as of late. The exchange rate is important to the National Bank insofar
it i fl th i fl ti tl k ith di tl i th i f i t d d


-----

# abcde g

15 March 2007 3


indirectly via economic activity. So far, the exchange rate has had no notable effect on
inflation. Experience has shown that the development of exchange rates impacts on
consumer prices with a time lag. There is a great deal of uncertainty, however, regarding
the extent and the duration of this effect.

The National Bank has pointed out on several occasions that we ought not be deceived by
the relative stability of the Swiss franc/euro exchange rate. There have been several
instances in the past when the Swiss franc firmed during a bearish spell in the financial
markets. The same applied to the latest developments in the financial markets. Exchange
rates have shown increased volatility again in recent times. Financial market participants
and entrepreneurs should be aware of the exchange rate risks they incur.

**Reasons for the monetary policy decision**


The inflation prospects have changed since the monetary policy assessment in December
2006. In the current year, the inflation rate will be lower than was expected at that time.
Once the dampening effect on inflation emanating from the decline in oil prices in the
second half of 2006 has waned, we will witness an increase in annual inflation starting in
the middle of 2007. This rise will be more significant than expected at the last
assessment. The reason for this is the softening of the Swiss franc, which has partially
neutralised the impact of the last increase in the interest rate. This development in the
Swiss franc will push up future inflation by stimulating the economy and increasing import
prices. By lifting the target range, the National Bank is ensuring that inflation will remain
within the range defined as price stability also in the longer term.

**Inflation forecast based on a three-month Libor of 2.25%**


The inflation forecast of the National Bank maps the future development of prices on the
assumption that the three-month Libor will remain constant over the forecasting period.
The inflation projection published after the interest rate increase in December 2006 was
based on an unchanged three-month Libor of 2.00% (green curve). The new inflation
forecast calculated with a constant interest rate of 2.25% is shown in red. Until
approximately the end of 2007, the curve is a little lower than in December. After that, it
is significantly higher for the period of one year. During the course of 2009, the new
forecast drops below the previous one again. This reflects the dampening effect of today’s
interest rate decision. While inflation dynamics have become weaker, they are still
trending upwards over time. This shows that, even with a three-month Libor of 2.25%,
monetary policy still has a slightly expansionary effect.

However, the inflation forecast is subject to some uncertainty. Economic developments
might be more vigorous than expected. The recent softening of the Swiss franc against
the euro may in time lead to stronger price pressure on imported European goods. A
further weakening of the Swiss franc would increase this risk even more.


-----

# abcde g

15 March 2007 4


**Course of normalisation to be pursued further for the time being**

With today’s decision to increase the three-month Libor by 25 basis points, the SNB has
maintained its monetary policy course of gradual normalisation. In order to ensure longterm price stability, it will probably have to continue with this policy. However, any
assessment of the inflation outlook is subject to greater uncertainty. While, on the one
hand, structural changes in the economy are having more of a dampening effect on prices,
the high level of utilisation of resources and exchange rate movements, on the other, are
exacerbating the risk of higher production costs being increasingly passed on to prices.
Should the inflation outlook change, the National Bank will take appropriate measures.


-----

# abcde g

15 March 2007 5


Observed inflation March 2007

**2003** **2004** **2005** **2006**


**Q1** **Q2** **Q3** **Q4** **Q1** **Q2** **Q3** **Q4** **Q1** **Q2** **Q3** **Q4** **Q1** **Q2** **Q3** **Q4**

Inflation 1.05 0.50 0.40 0.50 0.06 0.87 0.91 1.38 1.35 1.06 1.18 1.10 1.23 1.33 1.20 0.50


Inflation forecast of December 2006 with Libor at 2.00% and of March 2007 with Libor at
2.25%

**2006** **2007** **2008** **2009**


**Q1** **Q2** **Q3** **Q4** **Q1** **Q2** **Q3** **Q4** **Q1** **Q2** **Q3** **Q4** **Q1** **Q2** **Q3** **Q4**

Forecast December 2006,
0.50 0.40 0.31 0.44 0.65 0.74 0.85 1.00 1.17 1.38 1.64 1.90
Libor at 2.00%


Forecast March 2007,
0.13 0.22 0.44 1.06 1.22 1.33 1.41 1.47 1.54 1.60 1.66 1.75
Libor at 2.25%


-----

