**Bank of Israel**

**Report to the public of the Bank of Israel’s discussions prior to setting the**
**interest rate for April 2008**

**The discussions took place on 20 and 24 March 2008**

**General**

Before the Governor makes the monthly interest rate decision, discussions are held at
two levels. The first discussion takes place in a broad forum, in which the relevant
background economic conditions are presented, including real and monetary
developments in Israel’s economy and developments in the global economy.
Participants in this discussion include the Governor, the Deputy Governor, the
directors of the economic departments of the Bank (the Research, Monetary, Foreign
Currency, and Foreign Exchange Activity departments) and economists from various
departments who prepare and present the material for discussion. The data, estimates
and assessments in these minutes are those that were available at the time of the
discussions.
In the narrow forum, the directors of the economic departments present their
recommendations regarding the interest rate and, following a discussion, the Governor
makes his decision.

A. THE BROAD-FORUM DISCUSSION—THE STATE OF THE ECONOMY

**1. Developments on the real side**

_General assessment_
This month, the expectation that the economic slowdown in the US would continue
into 2009 strengthened. The slowdown in the growth of the developed economies, in
particular that of the US, is expected also to affect Israel. The expected slowdown in
growth in Israel reflects the expected slowdown in the growth of exports and private
consumption as a result of the global slowdown and the decline in the value of assets.
Consequently, the Bank of Israel's forecast of growth was lowered this month to 3.2
percent for 2008. The current account surplus of some $5 billion in 2007 is expected
to become a deficit of some $500 million in 2008. The average rate of unemployment
in 2008 is expected to reach about 7.4 percent.

_The National Accounts_
The national accounts data published this month for 2007 indicate that in the last
quarter of 2007, the growth rate was 6.1 percent as compared to 5.8 percent in the
second and third quarters and 5.5 percent in the first quarter of 2007 (all in annual

POB 780 Jerusalem 91007 Israel
Tel: 972-2-6552712/3 Fax: 972-2-6528812 www.bankisrael.gov.il


-----

terms relative to the previous quarter). The rapid growth in the last quarter of 2007
primarily reflected the acceleration of growth in exports and of investment in the
economy.

_The composite state-of-the-economy index_
The composite state-of-the-economy index rose by 0.4 percent in February, which
indicates that economic activity continued to expand, though at a slower pace than in
the previous few months. The rise in the index was due mainly to the increase in
manufacturing production, the export of services and the index of productivity in
commerce and services. The drop in the export of goods moderated the increase in the
index this month. The rise in the index between January and February was slightly
revised from 0.3 percent to 0.4 percent.

_The labor market_
The data of the Manpower Survey showed that the rate of unemployment continued to
decline from 7.2 percent in the third quarter of 2007 to 6.7 percent in the fourth
quarter. This was the result of the sharp drop of 0.5 percentage points in the labor
force participation rate while employment remained constant.
The number of salaried posts in the economy rose in the last quarter of 2007 by 4.9
percent relative to the same period in 2006. During the fourth quarter of 2007, the
nominal wage per salaried post grew by 2.9 percent relative to the same period in
2006 while the real gross wage per salaried post and labor cost per unit of output
remained unchanged.

_Foreign trade and the balance of payments_
The export of goods (excluding diamonds) expanded during the period of December–
February by about 5 percent relative to the previous three months. However, exports
during the month of January 2008 dropped by 4.4 percent relative to December.
Exports in February continued to decline by 3.2 percent relative to January
(seasonally adjusted and in monthly dollar terms).
The import of goods (excluding ships, planes and diamonds) grew by about 9
percent in December–February relative to the previous three months. Imports in
January 2008 fell by 1.2 percent relative to December and continued to decline in
February by about one percent relative to January (in dollar terms and seasonally
adjusted).

**2. Budget data**
During the first few months of the year, the government deficit was consistent with
the deficit ceiling of 1.6 percent of output. The level of expenditure during the first
two months of the year was somewhat lower than that consistent with full
implementation of the budget. Relative to the same period in the previous year,
revenues from direct taxes dropped by about 12 percent in February, primarily as a
result of exceptionally large one-time revenues at the beginning of 2007 and the drop
in tax rates. Taking these effects into account, tax revenues in the first two months of
the year were higher than the seasonal trend consistent with the budget forecast.


-----

**3. Developments on the nominal side**

_Inflation_
The Consumer Price Index (CPI) dropped by 0.2 percent in February 2008, which was
in line with the average assessment of local forecasters and lower than the seasonal
trend consistent with the center of the target range (0.2 percent for the month of
February). In the last twelve months the CPI rose by 3.6 percent, which is above the
inflation target.
The CPI without energy and food, which constitutes 79 percent of the overall index,
rose by 1.7 percent in the past twelve months, and the CPI without fruits and
vegetables and energy and food, which constitutes 76 percent of the overall index,
rose by 0.9 percent.

_Expectations and forecasts of inflation and of the Bank of Israel interest rate_
The expectations of inflation for the next 12 months, as derived from the capital
market (break-even inflation), rose in March to an average of about 2.7 percent in
contrast to an average level of about 2.4 percent in February. The local forecasters
believe, on average, that inflation during the next 12 months will be 2.7 percent (as
compared to 2.5 percent last month). This is based on the assumption of a devaluation
in the exchange rate to NIS 3.69 to the dollar one year from now.
On average, local forecasters expect that the cumulative change in the CPI for the
months March to May 2008 will be 0.9 percent (as compared to the seasonal trend
consistent with the center of the target range for these three months of 1.1 percent).
At the time of the meeting, local forecasters on average predicted that the interest
rate for April would be reduced by 0.5 percentage points and that the Bank of Israel
interest rate would be 3.4 percent at the end of 2008.
At the time of the decision on the interest rate for April, the slope of the _makam_
yield curve reflected the financial market's expectations of a small decline in the Bank
of Israel interest rate in coming months.

_The makam and bond markets_
The interest rate on CPI-indexed bonds fell on average from 2.7 percent in February
to 2.2 percent in March. The nominal yield on unindexed 5-year government bonds
fell during the last month by about 0.2 percentage points and its average level during
March was about 4.9 percent. The yield on one-year _makam fell by about 0.5_
percentage points in March compared to its level in February, to an average level of
3.9 percent.

_The interest rate differential and the yield gap between Israel and abroad_
Prior to this interest rate decision, the Bank of Israel interest rate was 1.50 percentage
points higher than the US federal funds rate and 0.25 percentage points lower than the
ECB rate.
The spread between unindexed shekel yields and 10-year US bond yields rose
during the last month from 185 basis points on February 25[th] to 208 basis points on
March 18[th].


-----

_The expected real interest rate_
The expected real rate of interest (the Bank of Israel interest rate minus expectations
of inflation) for the coming year was about 1.1 percent on average in March, which
represents a decline of about 0.8 percentage points relative to February. This was a
result of the reduction in the Bank of Israel interest rate by 0.5 percentage points and a
small increase in expectations of inflation for the coming year.

_The money supply_
The annual rate of increase of the (M1) money supply in February (measured over the
previous twelve months) was about 14 percent.

_The econometric models[1]_
Various scenarios were examined using the Bank of Israel’s econometric models.
However, since this month the models yielded contradictory results, it was difficult to
use them to analyze the relevant factors. According to the Research Department’s
quarterly model, in a scenario in which the unemployment rate rises from 7.2 percent
in the first quarter of 2008 to 7.4 percent at the end of 2008, with the exchange rate
stabilizing at NIS 3.40 to the dollar, and the Bank of Israel interest rate remaining at
3.75 percent during the rest of 2008, the rate of inflation in 2008 would be 2.9
percent.
According to the Monetary Department's quarterly model, with the exchange rate
averaging about NIS 3.5 to the dollar in the last quarter and the Bank of Israel interest
rate falling from an average of 4.1 percent in the first quarter of 2008 to an average
level of 3.2 percent in the last quarter, the inflation rate for 2008 would be 2.1 percent.
The results of both models are particularly sensitive to assumptions about the
behavior of exchange rates.

**4. The foreign currency market and the share market**

_The foreign-currency market_
In view of the irregular behavior of the shekel exchange rate, the Bank of Israel
intervened in the foreign exchange market to purchase foreign exchange on the 13[th]
and 14[th] of March. A week later, on March 20[th], the Bank of Israel announced that
starting from the 24[th] of the month it would increase its foreign exchange reserves by
about $10 billion over a period of two years, through the purchase of about $25
million each trading day.
During the month since the previous interest rate discussions, the shekel
strengthened against the dollar, from about NIS 3.58 to the dollar (on February 25[th])
to NIS 3.52 (on March 24[th]), i.e., an appreciation of about 1.7 percent. During the
same period, the shekel weakened against the euro, from NIS 5.30 to the euro on
February 25[th] to NIS 5.44 on March 24[th], an appreciation of 2.6 percent.

1 The Bank of Israel uses econometric models to test various scenarios. Due to their nature, including the fact that
their results naturally depend on assumptions about relevant exogenous variables, the scenarios should be viewed
as one input among several in the discussions on the interest rate.


-----

_The share market_
Between the previous interest rate decision on February 25[th] and March 23[rd], the Tel
Aviv 25 share price index fell by about 8.1 percent; from the beginning of the year it
had fallen by about 15.5 percent. This occurred against the background of the sharp
declines in share markets around the world.

**5. Israel’s financial risk, the sovereign risk premium**

Israel’s risk premium, as measured by the five-year CDS spread, rose this month from
about 73 basis points to about 80 basis points, which is its highest level since the
beginning of the global credit crisis. CDS spreads for most emerging economies
increased at similar rates.

**6. Global economic developments (see Appendix for further details)**

During the past month, the expectation has strengthened that the slowdown in
economic growth in the US will continue into 2009, which will affect other
economies worldwide. The current expectation for annual growth rates in the United
States in 2008 and 2009 is less than one percent. In addition, liquidity and credit
problems are becoming increasingly serious and there is deepening concern over the
further weakening of financial institutions. Share markets worldwide were
characterized by sharp declines, particularly the shares of the financial sector. The
collapse of Bear Stearns prompted the Fed to assist in its purchase by JP Morgan for a
very low price. The Fed also took special steps to provide liquidity to the market.
On the other hand, the sharp increases in energy and commodity prices worldwide
have increased fears of inflationary pressures.
The Fed reacted to the US economy's weak performance and to the problematic
functioning of the financial markets by lowering the interest rate by 0.75 percentage
points to 2.25 percent on March 18[th].
At the time of the Bank of Israel's interest rate discussions for the month of April,
there was an expectation in the financial markets of an additional reduction by the Fed
later in the year. In addition, there was an expectation of a lowering of the interest rate
later in the year by the ECB and the Bank of England.

B. THE NARROW-FORUM DISCUSSION––THE INTEREST RATE DECISION
FOR MARCH 2008

One of the members of the committee participating in the discussion recommended
reducing the interest month for the month of April by 0.25 percentage points. That
member explained that the rate of inflation for the past 12 months had been above the
path consistent with price stability and that expectations of inflation as derived from
the capital market for the coming year, as well as the assessments of forecasters, are
above the center of the target range. In the opinion of this member of the committee, a
reduction of the interest rate was nonetheless recommended since current conditions
justified accepting a somewhat longer deviation of inflation from the target range.


-----

This was particularly so in view of the fears of a global slowdown that would weaken
global demand and reduce growth and inflation in Israel. The strengthening of the
shekel in recent months, which is moderating inflationary pressures in the economy, is
also providing support for a reduction in the rate of interest. The reduction in the rate
of interest is expected to offset the effects of the strengthening of the shekel on
economic activity. At the same time, the participant pointed out that a larger reduction
than this in the rate of interest for April was not recommended, in light of the
expectation that the shekel would weaken in the second half of the year, primarily in
view of the assessment that the current account is expected to move from a surplus of
about $5 billion in 2007 to a small deficit in 2008. This, together with the package of
measures in the foreign exchange market (which was announced by the Bank of
Israel) is expected to bring about a weakening of the shekel, i.e., the trend in the
foreign exchange rate is not expected to continue its mitigating effect on inflationary
pressure in the economy, as occurred during 2007 and the first quarter of 2008.
Four members of the committee recommended reducing the rate of interest for
April by 0.5 percent. In their opinion, it will be possible to achieve the inflation target
for 2008 even if the rate of interest for April is reduced by this amount. This view is
based on, among other things, the trend in inflation which was slightly below the
center of the target range in 2007 (if the prices of food and energy are excluded).
These participants explained that they do not expect that the increased prices of inputs
will continue to be a major inflationary factor in 2008. These members of the
committee stated that they attribute great weight to the expected effect of the global
slowdown on the Israeli economy. In addition, the participants pointed to the
strengthening of the shekel against other currencies, which is supported by the
significant reductions in the Fed rate, as one of the main factors in their assessment. In
their opinion, the reduction of the interest rate by 0.5 percent in April (following a
similar reduction in March), together with the steps being taken by the Bank of Israel
in the foreign exchange market, constitute a package of measures whose goal is to
weaken the effect of the global slowdown on the Israeli economy.
The Governor decided to reduce the interest rate for April by 0.5 percentage points.
The following reasons were mentioned:

  - The decision to reduce the rate of interest by 0.5 percent in April is consistent
with returning inflation to the price stability target of 1–3 percent before the
end of the year. There are factors that are expected to moderate price
increases. This month, as well, assessments became more certain that the
deepening of the growth slowdown in the US and its expected continuation
into 2009 can be expected to reduce inflationary pressures in the economy,
both as a result of the probability of a reduction in the demand for Israel's
exports, and in view of the weakening of local demand that will result, and of
the wealth effect on demand. In addition, the strengthening of the shekel
against the other currencies since mid-December is working to reduce the
pressure for price increases in coming months, though to a smaller extent than
in the past. The reduction in interest rates worldwide, and particularly the
additional reduction of the Fed rate last month and the expectation of
additional reductions worldwide, are supporting the value of the shekel and
keeping inflation pressures in check in Israel.


-----

  - The reduction in the interest rate by 0.5 percent points is likely to support the
continued growth of the economy, which is an important consideration given
the forecasts of a slowdown in global growth and its possible effects on the
Israeli economy.

In light of the above considerations, the Governor decided to cut the interest rate for
April by 0.5 percentage points, to 3.25 percent.

The Bank of Israel will continue to monitor economic developments closely with the
intention of achieving the price-stability target. Subject to this, the Bank will continue
to support the attainment of a range of objectives of macroeconomic policy, in
particular the encouragement of employment and growth. In addition, the Bank will
continue to support the stability of the financial system.

The decision was made and published on 24 March 2008.

**Those participating in the narrow-forum discussion:**
Prof. Stanley Fischer, Governor of the Bank of Israel
Prof. Zvi Eckstein, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Israel
Dr. Karnit Flug, Director of the Research Department
Dr. Edward Offenbacher, Director of the Monetary Department
Mr. Barry Topf, Director of the Foreign Currency Department
Mr. Balfour Ozer, Member of the Executive
Dr. Ohad Bar-Efrat, Advisor to the Governor and Head of International Affairs
Mr. Gaby Fiszman, Chief of Staff to the Governor
Dr. Yossi Saadon, Bank of Israel Spokesperson


-----

**Appendix: Major Global Economic Developments**

_U.S._
The economic data published this month strengthened the assessments that the
American economy is indeed entering a recession. At the same time, the increase in
the prices of commodities and energy and the influence of the weak dollar on the
prices of imports are raising the fears of inflation in the United States.
The Fed's index of economic activity fell to its lowest level since 2001, which is
consistent with the scenario of a slowdown in the American economy. Additional
evidence of the economic slowdown can be seen in the record deficit in the federal
budget in February that resulted from a drop in tax revenues and a high level of
expenditure.
Although the rate of unemployment fell from 4.9 to 4.8 percent in February, this
was a result of a drop in the rate of labor force participation as unemployed
individuals gave up searching for a job. An analysis by sector shows that the loss of
jobs in the private sector was even larger and was partially offset by the addition of
jobs in the public sector.
The financial crisis, which began as a result of the collapse of the lower end of the
mortgage market, continued to spread. This month, the Fed took special steps to
increase liquidity in the market. According to the Term Securities Lending Facility
plan, the Fed offered market makers an exchange of Treasury bonds for a variety of
investment instruments for a period of 28 days. Following the collapse of Bear
Stearns, the Fed added another program that provides liquidity to market makers. In
addition, the Fed announced the expansion of the Term Auction Facilities, the
expansion of currency exchange programs with European banks and the expansion of
repo tenders.
Despite the increase in the prices of commodities and energy, the CPI remained
unchanged in February.
Against the background of the economic slowdown in the US and the problematic
functioning of the financial markets, the Fed reduced the rate of interest by 0.75
percentage points at its meeting on March 18[th] to a level of 2.25 percent. The market
expects further interest rate reductions during the rest of the year.

_Europe_
This month, the European Council joined the ECB in lowering its forecast of growth
for 2008 in Europe to 1.8 percent. At the same time, the rate of unemployment in
Germany and the euro zone as a whole declined last month and manufacturing
production grew by more than expected. German exports even increased despite the
drop in exports to the US.
Inflation in the euro zone during the past twelve months increased to 3.3 percent in
February. There is concern that the new wage agreement signed with the
metalworkers union in Germany may lead to wage increases in other sectors and to an
additional rise in the price index.


-----

Against this background, the ECB left the interest rate unchanged at a level of 4
percent. According to the average prediction among forecasters, the interest rate will
decline by 0.5 percent by the end of the year.

_Japan_
Growth in Japan accelerated during the fourth quarter of 2007 to 3.5 percent in annual
terms. This was primarily explained by an increase of 7.7 percent in exports and an
increase in investment. Demand was high in the emerging markets which account for
about one half of Japan's exports. In contrast, demand in the US economy was weak.
The inflation rate over the last twelve months was 0.7 percent in January.
The central bank left the interest rate unchanged due to concerns regarding the
effect of the crisis in the US on the Japanese economy.
Investment houses expect the central bank to leave the interest rate unchanged
during the remainder of the year.

_The emerging markets_
Growth has remained strong in most emerging market countries. The rate of growth in
manufacturing production in Asia and Latin America remained high. China's trade
surplus shrank by 64 percent in February to about $8.5 billion due to both an increase
in imports and a drop in exports.
Inflation in most of the Asian countries was led primarily by food and energy prices
and is continuing to rise. As a result of the strengthening of the Indian currency,
inflation in India fell during the second half of the year.


-----

