**Bank of Israel**

**Report to the public of the Bank of Israel’s discussions prior to setting the**
**interest rate for June 2008**

**The discussions took place on 22 and 26 May 2008**

**General**

Before the Governor makes the monthly interest rate decision, discussions are held at
two levels––the first in a broad forum, and the second in a narrower forum.
In the broad-forum discussion, the relevant background economic conditions are
presented, including real and monetary developments in Israel’s economy and
developments in the global economy. Participants in this discussion include the
Governor, the Deputy Governor, the directors of the economic departments of the
Bank (the Research, Monetary, Foreign Currency, and Foreign Exchange Activity
departments) and economists from various departments who prepare and present the
material for discussion. The data, estimates and assessments in these minutes are
those that were available at the time of the discussions.
In the narrow forum, the directors of the economic departments present their
recommendations regarding the interest rate and, following a discussion, the Governor
makes his decision.

A. THE BROAD-FORUM DISCUSSION—THE STATE OF THE ECONOMY

**1. Developments on the real side**

_General assessment_
Recent data on real activity change the earlier assessment regarding the extent and
timing of the expected slowdown in growth.

_National Accounts data_
The main data are as follows:
In the first quarter GDP increased by 5.4 percent, and business sector product by 6.1
percent, annual rates. These are high rates of growth, but slightly below those of the
previous quarters. The growth reflects the exceptional rise in imports of consumer
durables (mainly cars), which resulted in a marked increase in revenues from valueadded and excise taxes on imports. Excluding these tax revenues, GDP grew in
2008:Q1 by 4.2 percent.
Expenditure on consumer durables surged by a huge 99 percent in the first quarter.
Private consumption including durables rose at an annual rate of 14.1 percent, and
excluding durables, by 6.1 percent. These rates of increase are higher than in the

POB 780 Jerusalem 91007 Israel
Tel: 972-2-6552712/3 Fax: 972-2-6528812 www.bankisrael.gov.il


-----

previous quarter, and probably reflect the impact of the appreciated shekel and
indicate that growth was based more on demand, particularly consumer demand, than
in the past.
Imports rose sharply in the first quarter, at an annual rate of 18.7 percent
compared with 6.8 percent in the previous quarter. Exports increased by 12.6 percent,
following their rise of 14.7 percent in the previous quarter; excluding start-ups,
exports rose by 7.9 percent.
Gross domestic investment declined by 10.2 percent as a result of depletion of
stocks, and investment in fixed assets increased by 9.6 percent, due to the large
investment in cars by the business sector.

_The composite state-of-the-economy index_
The April composite state-of-the-economy index rose by 0.1 percent. This, together
with the upward revision of the indices for the previous two months––that for
February from 0.4 percent to 0.8 percent, and for March, from 0.5 percent to 0.6
percent––indicates the continued expansion of economic activity. The rise in the
index in April was due mainly to the rise in the indices of manufacturing production
and trade and services revenue, with goods exports moderating the increase.

_The labor market_
Unemployment continued to decline, with employment increasing further. According
to trend data of the Manpower Survey, the unemployment rate was 6.5 percent in
February.[1] National Insurance data showed a further, albeit moderate, increase in the
number of employee posts, which rose at an annual rate of 4 percent in the three
months December 2007 to February 2008 compared with the same three months a
year earlier. The average increase in 2007 was 5.1 percent.
The nominal wage rose sharply: in the public sector it rose by 8.9 percent in the
three months December 2007 to February 2008 compared with that in the same
months a year earlier, partly due to the payment of various non-recurring wage
components following the new wage agreement; in the business sector the nominal
wage rose over the same period by 3.6 percent.

_Foreign trade and the balance of payments_
Israel’s foreign trade continued to rise in April. Goods imports totaled $5.5 billion,
and goods exports, $3.9 billion, i.e., there was a $1.6 billion trade deficit. Since the
beginning of 2008 the cumulative deficit in the goods account was $4.5 billion,
compared with $2.3 billion in the equivalent period in 2007.
The current account surplus declined in the first quarter of 2008, consistent with the
assessment that it will either be balanced or even show a deficit over the whole of
2008. Goods imports (in dollar terms, excluding ships, aircraft and diamonds) grew by
20 percent in the first quarter of 2008 and goods exports by 16.5 percent, compared
with the first quarter of 2007.

**2. Budget data**

1 The data from the Manpower Survey, including the rate of unemployment in the first quarter, were
published on 28 May 2008, after the decision on the interest rate had been made, and were not available
at the time of the discussion.


-----

According to budget data available to date, government expenditure is consistent with
full expenditure of the budget. On the revenue side, the rise in direct tax revenues
slowed, while import tax revenues and non-tax revenues increased (some of which
may be temporary). Since the beginning of the year the government has had a budget
surplus higher than the seasonal path, due mainly to non-tax revenues. These
developments are consistent with the achievement of the target deficit in 2008.

**3. Developments on the nominal side**

_Inflation_
The rise in the Consumer Price Index (CPI) in April––1.5 percent, compared with the
assessments of private forecasters of a rise of about 0.9 percent––exceeded
expectations for the second month in succession. The surprise in the last two indices
compared with the forecasts was essentially due to the rise in the housing component,
which rose by 1.1 percent in April, and which reflects the weakening of the link
between the housing index and changes in the NIS/$ exchange rate. Other components
of the index that increased were food, and transport and communications––against the
background of the rises in world prices of food and energy––and clothing and
footwear, education, and culture and entertainment. In the last twelve months the CPI
has risen by 4.7 percent, while the CPI excluding the energy, food and fruit and
vegetables components has risen by 2 percent. The index excluding food and energy
rose by 2.9 percent over the previous twelve months.

_Expectations and forecasts of inflation and of the Bank of Israel interest rate_
The expectations of inflation for the next 12 months as derived from the capital
market (break-even inflation) have shown an upward trend since February, and at the
time of the meeting (26 May 2008) stood at 2.8 percent. At the same time, the slope of
the _makam yield curve reflected the financial markets’ expectations of a rise of one_
percentage point in the Bank of Israel interest rate in the next twelve months.
Following the publication of the April CPI, the private forecasters raised their
predictions of the rise in the May and June CPIs to 0.7 percent and 0.4 percent
respectively. They also raised their forecasts of inflation during the next 12 months to
3.3 percent, slightly higher than the upper limit of the inflation target range. Their
assessment of inflation in 2009 is 2.3 percent, close to the midpoint of the target
range.
Local forecasters estimate, on average, that the interest rates for June and July will
be increased by 0.3 percentage points each.

_The makam and bond markets_
Since the publication of the March CPI, nominal yields on short-term instruments
have risen by about 0.4 percentage points.
The yield on one-year makam rose by about 0.3 percentage points in May from its
April level, to an average level of 4 percent. The nominal yield on unindexed 5-year
government bonds rose during the last month by about 0.2 percentage points to an
average of 5.4 percent. The interest rate on CPI-indexed 5-year government bonds
rose in May to an average of 2.5 percent, from an average of 2.4 percent in April.


-----

_The interest rate differential and the yield gap between Israel and abroad_
Prior to the decision on the June interest rate, the Bank of Israel interest rate was 1.25
percentage points higher than the US federal funds rate, and 0.75 percentage points
lower than the ECB rate.
The gap between unindexed shekel yields and 10-year US bond yields remained
steady at about 2 percentage points.

_The expected real interest rate_
The expected real rate of interest (the Bank of Israel interest rate _minus inflation_
expectations) twelve months forward was about 0.5 percent on average in May,
similar to its level in April.

_The money supply_
The (M1) money supply rose by 4.1 percent in April, its highest increase in the last
year-and-a-half. Over the last twelve months it has risen by 16.5 percent.

_The econometric models[2]_
Various scenarios were examined using the Bank of Israel’s econometric models.
However, in recent months they have yielded contradictory results, thus making it
difficult to rely on their outputs. According to one of the quarterly models, in a
scenario in which prices abroad rise by 1.5 percent a year, the unemployment rate
stays steady, the exchange rate is NIS 3.51 to the dollar, and the Bank of Israel
interest rate rises to 5.5 percent by the end of 2008, the rate of inflation in 2008 will
be about 3.6 percent.
According to another quarterly model, in a scenario in which the average exchange
rate in the last quarter of 2008 is about NIS 3.39 to the dollar, and the Bank of Israel
interest rate rises from an average level of 3.3 percent in the second quarter of 2008 to
an average level of 3.7 percent in the last quarter, inflation will reach 4.5 percent in
2008. Assuming that the interest rate is reduced to an average level of 3.2 percent in
the second quarter of 2009, inflation in 2009 will be 1.5 percent.
The results of the models are particularly sensitive to changes in the exchange rate.

**4. The foreign currency market and the share market**

_The foreign-currency market_
During the month since the previous interest rate discussions, the shekel strengthened
against the dollar by 3.9 percent, from NIS 3.46 to the dollar on 28 April to NIS 3.33
on 23 May. During the same period the shekel strengthened against the euro by 3.5
percent, from NIS 5.42 to the euro on 28 April to NIS 5.24 on 23 May.
Since 24 March 2008 the Bank of Israel has been implementing its plan to
increase the foreign exchange reserves by $10 billion in the next two years by

2 The Bank of Israel uses econometric models to test various scenarios. Due to their nature, including the fact that
their results naturally depend on certain assumptions about relevant variables, the scenarios should be viewed as
one input among several in the discussions on the interest rate.


-----

purchasing about $25 million a day on the market. Since the plan was introduced until
the discussions on the interest rate for June, the Bank has purchased about $850
million.

_The share market_
From the previous interest rate decision on 28 April until 25 May the Tel Aviv 25
share price index remained unchanged. The leading share markets around the world
showed mixed trends in May.

**5. Israel’s financial risk, the sovereign risk premium**

Israel’s risk premium, as measured by the five-year CDS spread, continued to decline
in May, falling from 60 basis points prior to the previous interest rate decision to 52
basis points on 26 May. CDS spreads for most emerging economies declined at
similar rates.

**6. Global economic developments (see Appendix for further details)**

The world’s financial markets were somewhat calmer, but it is too soon to assess how
long the pressures in the financial sector will persist.
The latest economic data indicate that global growth and growth in the US have
slowed. Concurrently, global inflation has accelerated, due mainly to the steep rises in
commodity and fuel prices. This background leads to growing uncertainty regarding
the expected path of interest rates in the major markets. A slowdown in growth
increases the probability of expansionary monetary policies. On the other hand,
inflationary pressures increase the likelihood of contractionary monetary policies.
Prices of forward contracts imply expectations that the Fed will leave the interest rate
unchanged at its next meeting (with a probability of 90 percent), and that the ECB and
the Bank of Japan will raise their interest rates by 25 basis points by the end of the
year (with high probability).

B. THE NARROW-FORUM DISCUSSION––THE INTEREST RATE DECISION
FOR JUNE 2008

The participants in the discussion focused on the 1.5 percent rise in the April CPI,
which was about half a percentage point higher than expected. Unlike previous
indices that were affected mainly by world energy and food prices, this time the index
reflected also rises in domestic prices. Thus, the point was made that in the last twelve
months the index excluding energy and food prices rose by 2.9 percent, close to the
upper limit of the inflation target range, and higher than its rise of between 1.4 percent
and 1.8 percent in the last few months. It was also noted that the fall in the value of
the dollar is not evident in prices, because of the weakened pass-through between
them, and because of domestic demand pressures.
A variety of factors likely to influence future inflation were discussed: a possible
halt in the rise of commodity prices, as per the latest IMF assessment; the possibility


-----

that oil prices will cease to rise or will even decline; and seasonal drops in the CPI
later in the year following a relatively high inflation rate expected to be announced for
May,.
Another point raised related to inflation expectations one year forward. The two
high CPIs for March and April, particularly the latter, resulted in private forecasters
raising their predictions to above the upper limit of the target inflation range.
In the course of the discussion the National Accounts data for the first quarter of
2008 were analyzed. These show that real activity increased, contrary to earlier
assessments that the growth in real activity would start to slow. The point was made
that the figures relate to the first quarter, whereas a slowdown in growth is expected
later in the year. It was also noted that excluding taxes on imported durables (that
showed an exceptional rise), GDP rose in the first quarter at a more modest rate of 4.2
percent. Export data were also analyzed: these rose faster than expected, despite the
strengthening of the shekel.
The conclusion drawn was that there is no evidence to date that the slowdown in
the US is having an impact on Israel’s economy. The explanation may be that despite
the slowdown in the US rate of growth, high-tech US imports continue to expand at a
relatively constant rate, and this has affected Israel’s economy as most of Israel’s
exports to the US are in this category.
One member of the executive recommended that the Governor raise the interest rate
by 0.5 percentage points. This member was of the opinion that the expected
acceleration in inflation would be reflected in a persistent deviation from the price
stability target, in light of the following factors: the exceptional rise in the CPI in
April, which was the highest rise in the April index in the last five years; the adjusted
indices also showed exceptional rises, the highest in April in the last four years; the
rise in the CPI since the beginning of 2008 is consistent with an annual increase of 4
percent; inflation expectations calculated from the capital market have risen, and are
close to the upper limit of the target range, and expectations twelve months forward
reported in the Companies Survey and predicted by Israeli forecasters are above the
upper limit of the range. The same member added that although much of the surge in
inflation may be attributed to prices abroad, the effect of domestic price rises is
certainly not negligible.
Four members of the executive recommended that the Governor raise the interest
by 25 basis points. They stressed the acceleration in inflation in the last few months.
However, they made several points in favor of a more modest rise of 25 basis points:
the uncertainty regarding the development of energy and food prices abroad; the
effect of the expected global slowdown in growth on domestic demand, and hence on
inflation in Israel; the expected slowdown in Israel’s economic growth later in the
year; the fact that the financial crisis is not over yet; and the strength of the shekel,
which is expected to influence the level of activity and inflation, despite the
weakening of the pass-through between the exchange rate and inflation.
After considering all the above points, the Governor decided to raise the interest
rate for June by 25 basis points, to 3.5 percent.
This increase in the interest rate is required to return inflation to the price stability
target range, and thereby to provide the basis that is essential for sustained growth.
The Bank of Israel will continue to monitor economic developments closely, and will


-----

stand ready to raise the interest rate as necessary to preserve price stability. Subject to
this, the Bank will continue to support the attainment of a range of objectives of
macroeconomic policy, in particular the encouragement of employment and growth.
In addition, the Bank will continue to support the stability of the financial system.

The decision was made and published on 26 May 2008.

**Those participating in the narrow-forum discussion:**
Prof. Stanley Fischer, Governor of the Bank of Israel
Prof. Zvi Eckstein, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Israel
Dr. Karnit Flug, Director of the Research Division
Dr. Edward Offenbacher, Head of the Monetary Department of the Research Division
Mr. Barry Topf, Director of the Market Activity Division
Mr. Balfour Ozer, Member of the Executive
Dr. Ohad Bar-Efrat, Advisor to the Governor and Head of International Affairs
Mr. Gaby Fiszman, Chief of Staff to the Governor
Dr. Yossi Saadon, Bank of Israel Spokesperson


-----

**Appendix: Major Global Economic Developments**

_U.S._
The weakness in the economy that was originally focused in the housing market
spilled over and affected consumer expenditure, which accounts for some two-thirds
of the US’s real product. Consumer confidence indices showed a decline, and
consumer expenditure also fell in the first quarter of 2008. At the same time, after
years of increases investment dropped. The labor market also gave evidence of further
decline, which is expected to add to the impact on consumption. This was the
background to the weak growth of 0.6 percent in 2008:Q1. On the other hand, it is
anticipated that growth will recover slightly in the second half of the year. However,
there are serious risks attendant on the growth forecast in light of the great uncertainty
regarding the development of the financial crisis, and developments in the US housing
market and commodity and oil prices. The investment houses expect growth of 1.2
percent in 2008 and 1.4 percent in 2009. These are below US potential growth rates of
2.5 percent to 3 percent.
Inflation risks remain high, particularly against the background of the rise in
commodity and energy prices. The CPI dropped a little in April, and over the previous
twelve months rose by 3.9 percent. Core inflation was 2.3 percent in the last twelve
months. The Fed expects inflation to moderate in the next quarters, in line with its
expectation of some easing of energy and commodity prices and of demand pressures.
It nevertheless also notes the high degree of uncertainty regarding inflation forecasts.
The Fed continued to inject liquidity into the markets and also continued to lower
the interest rate. At its last meeting (on 30 April 2008) it cut the interest rate by 25
basis points to 2 percent. Financial market prices imply no change in the Fed interest
rate at its next meeting at the end of June, with a 90 percent probability.

_Europe_
Growth on the eurozone was 0.7 percent, in annual terms, in the first quarter of the
2008, compared with growth of 0.4 percent in the first quarter of 2007. The growth in
2008:Q1 exceeded expectations, and was due mainly to relatively buoyant growth in
Germany and France. There is mounting evidence, however, that growth is slowing in
Europe, and it appears that this trend will strengthen in the next few months,
particularly in light of the strength of the euro and the weakness of the US economy––
which have an adverse effect on European exports––the high interest rate, and high
commodity prices. Confidence indices have fallen in Europe, manufacturing
production dropped in March, as did retail sales. Spain, with its lowest rise in the last
eight years, is already exhibiting signs of weaker growth, as are Italy and the
Netherlands. The President of the ECB noted that growth is expected to slow as early
as in the second quarter of 2008. The investment houses on average expect growth to
decline to 1.5 percent in 2008, and to 1.3 percent in 2009.
Inflation in the eurozone remained above the ECB target of 2 percent. Inflation
over the previous twelve months slowed in April to 3.3 percent, compared with 3.6
percent in March. The ECB expects that inflation will remain at its high level in the
near future, and that it will moderate only gradually.
The ECB left the interest rate unchanged this month, at 4 percent. Statements by
ECB personnel indicate that they do not intend to cut the rate of interest, and that they


-----

do not rule out the possibility of a rise. The investment houses, however, expect on
average that the ECB will lower the interest rate in the second half of 2008. Prices on
the financial markets imply a reduction of 25 basis points by the end of 2008, with a
40 percent probability.

_Japan_
Growth in Japan accelerated in the first quarter of 2008, and reached 3.3 percent,
annual rate. Japan’s potential growth rate is estimated at 1.5 percent. The growth rate
in Japan is expected to slow, however, in light of the slowdown in growth in the US,
the rise in commodity and oil prices, and the strong yen. Consumer confidence indices
indicate weakness, due mainly to the decline in the real wage. Against the background
of the global slowdown in growth, the crisis in the financial markets, and the rise in
commodity prices, the Bank of Japan reduced its growth forecast for 2008 from 2.1
percent to 1.5 percent.
Inflation continue to rise in the last few months, mainly due to the rise in oil and
commodity prices. The CPI rose by 1.2 percent in March, its largest jump in the last
ten years. The Bank of Japan raised its estimate of the rise in the CPI excluding the
fresh foods component in 2008 from 0.4 percent to 1.1 percent.
In light of the downside risk to growth in Japan and to global growth, this month
the Bank of Japan changed its monetary policy, which had been directed towards
gradual increases in the interest rate, but it noted that maintaining a low rate may
harm growth in the long run. The investment houses expect that the central bank will
leave the interest rate unchanged at 0.5 percent at its next meeting at the end of May.
They also expect the interest rate to remain unchanged till the end of the year. Prices
on the financial markets imply a rise of 25 basis points in the interest rate by the end
of 2008, with a 76 percent probability.

_The emerging markets_
Growth in most emerging markets has remained strong, despite the slowdown in the
leading world economies. The emerging markets are expected to be affected relatively
moderately by the latest global developments, in particular due to their strong
economic fundamentals, and due to high commodity prices that help the balance of
payments in the exporting countries in this group.
In the emerging economies inflation constitutes the major problem. The
combination of high commodity prices and strong domestic demand continue to boost
inflationary pressures in them. This trend is expected to continue and even gain
strength in the next few months.
In light of high inflation, many emerging market central banks changed their policy
in the last two months, and are no longer waiting for weak growth to moderate
inflation, but have begun introducing contractionary monetary policies. Nevertheless,
the central banks in these countries are expected to remain cautious in light of the
risks to growth.
In China, against the background of a drop in exports in 2008:Q1, the growth rate
declined to 10.6 percent, annual rate. Inflation in April surged to 8.5 percent over the
previous twelve months, in light of the rise in food, oil and commodity prices, as well
as a rise in labor costs.


-----

