-----

-----

**FOREWARNING**
This document is provided for the reader’s convenience
only. The translation from the official Spanish version was
made by Banco de México’s staff. Discrepancies may arise
between the original document in Spanish and its English
translation. For this reason, the original Spanish version is
the only official document.


**1. PLACE, DATE, AND PARTICIPANTS**

**1.1. Place:** Meeting held by virtual means.

**1.2. Date of Governing Board meeting:** June 23,
2021.

**1.3. Participants:**

Alejandro Díaz de León-Carrillo, Governor.
Galia Borja-Gómez, Deputy Governor.
Irene Espinosa-Cantellano, Deputy Governor.
Gerardo Esquivel-Hernández, Deputy Governor.
Jonathan Ernest Heath-Constable, Deputy
Governor.
Gabriel Yorio-González, Undersecretary of Finance
and Public Credit.
Elías Villanueva Ochoa, Secretary of the Governing
Board.

Prior to this meeting, preliminary work by Banco de
México’s staff analyzing the economic and financial
environment as well as the developments in inflation
and the determinants and outlook for inflation, was
conducted and presented to the Governing Board
(see Annex).

**2. ANALYSIS AND RATIONALE BEHIND THE**
**GOVERNING BOARD’S VOTING**

**_International environment_**

**The majority pointed out that global economic**
**activity continues to strengthen, mainly because**
**of vaccine availability and stimulus spending.**
**They added that the economic recovery has been**
**heterogeneous across countries, highlighting**
**that China and the United States continue leading**
**the global recovery. One member highlighted the**
improvement in Europe due to the process of
reopening in several countries, while in Japan weak
conditions prevail due to new confinement measures.
He/she noted that emerging economies show a
greater heterogeneity because of the upsurge of
infections in some regions and a reduced room to
provide additional stimuli. He/she added that ample
slack conditions prevail in most economies. In this
regard, **some members stated that the recovery is**
still incomplete. **One member considered that a**


complete recovery is still far from being attained and
highlighted that several productive sectors, and
especially employment, still remain below prepandemic levels. **Another member pointed out that**
unemployment in middle- and low-income countries
continues to be much higher than it was before the
pandemic, with significant differences across sectors
and by gender, with older women being the most
affected. He/she mentioned that emerging

economies continue facing obstacles to achieve a
significant and sustained recovery.

**The majority noted the upward adjustment in**
**global growth forecasts, which is expected to**
**continue to be supported mainly by the recovery**
**in the United States and China. One member**
mentioned that the world economy is expected to
grow faster in 2021 than in the last 48 years. Another
member pointed out that the current recovery is
foreseen to be the fastest since World War II. As for
risks, **some members mentioned those associated**
with the pandemic. **One member added the risk of**
continued disruptions in production chains, which is
anticipated until there is a complete normalization of
activities around the world.

**The majority mentioned that global inflation**
**continued increasing as a result of pressures on**
**various commodity prices, base effects, and**
**cost-related** **pressures** **associated** **with**

**bottlenecks in production. Some members added**
labor market pressures and higher transportation
costs. **The majority pointed out that in some**
**economies inflation is above the targets of their**
**respective central banks. They noted that in the**
**United States, the annual Consumer Price Index**
**(CPI) inflation reached 5% in May, the highest**
**figure since September 2008.**

**Some** members mentioned that inflation

expectations are at high levels worldwide. **One**
member highlighted that while market expectations
in advanced economies have recently declined, they
remain at higher levels than those recorded in 2019.
**Another member stated that in the United States, 2-**
year inflation expectations have been above 3% over
the last weeks. **Some members pointed out that**
inflation pressures are expected to be transitory. One
member said that this perception is shared among
international organizations, central banks and
analysts, and that it is reflected in the implied
trajectory according to various market instruments.
He/she argued that this derives from the fact that the
base effects are expected to fade, that the observed
increases in international commodity prices are
expected to stabilize and even revert, and that the

1


-----

pressures that are currently present in certain
markets are expected to ease, in view of an eventual
response from supply.

**The majority highlighted the risk of supply chain**
**disruptions being longer-lasting than anticipated**
**and inflationary pressures being more persistent**
**than anticipated.** **One member stated that, although**
these disruptions are considered to be transitory, a
permanent destruction of the production capacity of
certain links in global chains cannot be ruled out.
He/she noted that, in such scenario, the shortage of
inputs would have more serious and lasting
consequences, exerting significant pressures on
inflation. He/she added that, if the Federal Reserve
normalizes its monetary policy more rapidly, this
would exacerbate volatility in financial markets and
accentuate inflationary pressures, especially in
emerging economies. **Some members added the**
presence of inflationary pressures stemming from the
recovery of demand in the face of large fiscal stimuli,
especially in the United States. **One member**
considered that the balance of risks for global
inflation has started to deteriorate. Another member
emphasized that the effects associated with the
pandemic are unprecedented and that their impact
on economic activity and inflation is very uncertain.
He/she added that the rate of infections and vaccine
availability have been significant determinants of
consumer confidence and labor markets. He/she
pointed out that the disruptions caused by the
pandemic are very different from those observed in
other crises, and therefore it has been more complex
to identify their short- and medium-term effects. In
this regard, he/she mentioned that economic activity
and inflation forecasts have not fully captured the
challenges of the current situation. **One member**
stated that the risk of a higher-than-expected inflation
seems to have started to mitigate given the recent
adjustments in commodity prices, food prices in
particular. He/she mentioned that other sources of
concern regarding the risk of higher inflation, such as
disruptions in supply chains, higher freight costs, and
labor market pressures are associated with unusual
operating conditions caused by the pandemic.
He/she sustained that it can be foreseen that as the
normalization of activities continues, the operating
conditions will also improve and wage pressures will
begin to fade as a result of increases in labor supply.

**The majority highlighted that the central banks of**
**advanced** **economies** **left** **their** **monetary**

**stimulus unchanged. One** considered that less
monetary stimuli are expected in the medium term.
**The majority pointed out that in the Federal**
**Reserve's latest monetary policy decision the**


**forecasts for inflation and economic growth**
**increased, as well as the expectations for the**
**federal funds rate.** **One member noted that the**
president of that central bank emphasized that some
of the communication tools used, such as the socalled dot-plot, did not represent a decision or a plan
of the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC).
**Most members added that such institution has**
**begun to analyze an eventual reduction in its**
**asset purchases. In this regard,** **some members**
mentioned that any change will be announced in a
timely manner in order to avoid sharp adjustments in
financial markets. Some members emphasized that
the Federal Reserve will maintain its current policy
stance until the economy has made substantial
further progress towards meeting its objectives. One
member mentioned that it is important to remember
that the Federal Reserve policy stance remains
highly accommodative. He/she recalled that,

although the members of its committee

acknowledged an increase in inflation, they attributed
said increase to transitory factors and reiterated that
risks to economic recovery persist. He/she sustained
that, even after incorporating the recent changes in
the members’ projections, the interest rate would
remain at very low levels, at least, until the end of
2023. Regarding the new Federal Reserve monetary
policy framework, he/she considered that it has
allowed it to achieve historically low levels of real
interest rates. He/she stated that this implies that it
has successfully dealt with the problems associated
with the lower limit of the reference rate, without
affecting long-term inflation expectations and

achieving a greater stimulus. As to the possibility of
an anticipated tightening of monetary conditions,
he/she considered it improbable that the Federal
Reserve would act hastily, as it would affect the
economic recovery. He/she mentioned that said
entity has been very consistent in its narrative and
highly coherent in its actions, and therefore it is
unlikely that the withdrawal of monetary stimulus will
occur before there are clear signs of a large and
inclusive economic recovery. He/she mentioned that
the above is compatible with analysts’ expectations.

**Some members mentioned that given the increases**
in inflation and its expectations, central banks in
some emerging economies have adopted less
accommodative policy stances. **One member said**
that given the inflationary pressures, some monetary
authorities are expected to continue withdrawing the
stimulus. **Another member stated that in most**
emerging economies monetary policy stances are
foreseen to remain highly accommodative. He/she
argued that although there are some cases where
higher policy rates are expected towards the end of

2


-----

2021, these are economies where the reference rate
is close to zero or in which adjustments are explained
by idiosyncratic factors. He/she added that in most of
these economies real interest rates remain in
negative terrain, even in those that are currently
undergoing significant deviations of inflation from
their target. He/she highlighted that this is partly due
to the fact that inflationary pressures are considered
to be transitory and that the increase in international
commodity prices is a dominant factor on inflation in
these economies, and therefore monetary policy
cannot do much to counteract such pressures.

**All members noted that after the Federal**
**Reserve's** **monetary** **policy** **announcement,**

**international financial markets exhibited some**
**volatility. However, the majority considered that,**
**in general, these markets have performed**
**favorably. They highlighted the increases in**
**equity markets, with some of them reaching all-**
**time highs, as well as some stability in the**
**foreign exchange and government securities’**
**markets. Some members highlighted the flattening**
of the US yield curve. One member mentioned that
such flattening incorporates the expectation of
higher-than previously anticipated increases in shortterm interest rates, which contributes to lower
inflation expectations and inflation risk premia for
longer-term rates. **Some members highlighted that**
the latter exhibited some volatility. **One member**
considered that, looking ahead, global financial
conditions will continue to be favored by the Federal
Reserve’s accommodative policy stance.

As for emerging economies, **some members said**
that the global environment implies a higher external
demand for these economies, as well as higher
inflationary risks. **One member added that said**
environment also implies financial conditions that
could be tighter and more volatile for these
economies. He/she pointed out that as interest rates
rise along the US yield curve, these economies will
face greater difficulties in attracting and retaining
capital, as well as exchange rate adjustments and
pressures on short- and long-term interest rates.
He/she stressed the challenges that each economy
faces because of the evolution of the pandemic and
the social effects that this has implied, as well as their
macroeconomic characteristics. **Another member**
highlighted that capital flows to fixed income assets
in emerging economies registered moderate inflows,
mainly to China, while those to equity assets
registered moderate mixed flows.

**Most members considered the possibility of**
**higher-than-expected inflation being the main**


**risk for global financial markets. One member**
pointed out that this would lead to an earlier-thanexpected tightening of monetary policy, which could
compromise economic recovery. **Another member**
added that central baseline scenarios for the global
economy show a greater recovery, although
differentiated among countries, with uncertain effects
on inflation and financial markets that are prone to
generate episodes of volatility. He/she stated that
high uncertainty prevails in financial markets, which
is associated with the levels of inflation in the United
States, its outlook, and its implications for the yield
curve. He/she also stated that, according to surveys
among investors, an additional risk for financial
markets is a possible monetary policy mistake in that
country.

**_Economic activity in Mexico_**

**The majority of members highlighted that the**
**Mexican economy recovered notably in March**
**and moderated in April. One member noted that**
advances in the vaccination process have supported
the reactivation of the economy. **Another member**
emphasized that, although economic activity

continues to improve, its recovery is still fragile and
partial and the economy is far from its potential. **As**
**for demand, most members agreed that the**
**external** **sector** **continues** **to** **support** **the**

**recovery. In this regard, one member highlighted the**
reactivation of external demand, especially that from
the United States. Another member pointed out that
manufacturing exports, particularly automotive

exports, continued to perform well. **One member**
mentioned that external accounts show an increase
in imports and a reduction in the trade balance
surplus.

**Most members stated that, although investment**
**and consumption have improved, they still**
**remain below their pre-pandemic levels. One**
member expressed his/her concern about the
weakness and the particularly low levels of
investment, while another member emphasized that
this will affect economic recovery. **One member**
mentioned that private consumption had an annual
variation of -0.7% in March. **Another member**
highlighted that it is 6% below the highest level
reached in 2019. **One member highlighted the**
weakness exhibited by consumption of domestic
services and semi-durable goods. **Some members**
noted that several indicators, such as consumer
confidence, the real wage bill and remittances, have
improved and have supported consumption. **One**
member considered that these indicators suggest

3


-----

that the recovery of consumption will continue in the
following months.

**Regarding supply, the majority of members**
**highlighted the heterogeneous behavior of**
**different sectors. They noted that industrial**
**production, particularly manufacturing, has been**
**negatively** **affected** **by** **the** **shortage** **of**

**semiconductors, especially in the automotive**
**sector. One member mentioned that, as a result, the**
latter has continued to operate below its installed
capacity. **Another** member noted that industrial
activity was also affected by the loss of dynamism in
construction. **Most members noted that tertiary**
**activities continued to recover, albeit with high**
**heterogeneity across subsectors.** **One** member
added that trade-related activities have continued to
improve, although he/she explained that their
recovery continues to be slow. **Another** member
stated that services are expected to continue
recovering. However, he/she noted that

accommodation and food services and arts,
entertainment and recreation remain considerably
affected.

**Most members noted that the labor market**
**continues to recover, although it remains**
**deteriorated vis-à-vis its pre-pandemic levels.**
**Some** members highlighted that the labor

participation rate increased in April. **One member**
pointed out that it stood at 59.02%, a level higher
than that of March, although below its pre-pandemic
levels. He/she stated that in severe crises, it is the
number of firms that go bankrupt what directly affects
employment. In this regard, he/she mentioned that it
is worrisome that from May 2019 to September 2020,
over 20% of all the firms in the country closed, which
contrasts with an increase in firm creation of only
12%, whereby Small and Medium-size Enterprises’
(SMEs) were the most affected with a rate of
business closures of 21.2% and a rate of firm
creation of only 2.8%. **Another member explained**
that, after contracting by 12.5 million between
February and April 2020, formal and informal
employment had recovered by 11.5 million in April
2021, two million of which had been reincorporated
to the labor market during the first four months of the
year. He/she added that, as of May 2021, IMSSinsured jobs were 2.45% below the levels of
February 2020.

**Most** **members** **pointed** **out** **that** **the**

**underemployment** **rate** **declined** **in** **April.**

However, some members noted that currently it is at
almost twice the usually observed level. **One**
member underlined that the unemployment rate


increased to 4.65% in April, which represents 2.7
million people. He/she added that this occurs in a
context in which the Economically Active Population
rose, reflecting the incorporation of both more
employed persons and more people seeking
employment. **Another member noted that the Non-**
economically Active Population still includes around
two million people available for employment above its
pre-pandemic levels. **One member highlighted that**
disaggregated data by sector and gender reinforce
the outlook of an uneven and weak recovery of the
labor market.

**Most members stated that slack conditions are**
**foreseen to persist in the economy as a whole.**
**Some members highlighted the sharp differences**
between sectors. **One member noted that slack is**
expected to diminish gradually. **Another** member
noted that the negative output gap continues to be
above 4% and is not expected to close before 2023.

**Most members highlighted that, according to the**
**Central Institute's forecasts, growth is expected**
**to reach 6% in 2021 and 3% in 2022. One member**
noted that the dynamics of the growth rate for 2021
are partly due to a rebound effect generated by last
year’s contraction. **Some members stated that the**
recovery would be driven by the strength of external
demand, advances in the vaccination process, and
the reopening of activities. One member mentioned
that differences between sectors are expected to
continue. **Some members pointed out that the**
balance of risks for growth is equilibrated. **One**
member stated that the risks described in the
Quarterly Report January-March 2021 persist.
**Another member emphasized that the pandemic**
continues to be the most important challenge for
economic activity. He/she added that Mexico’s
COVID-19 traffic light monitoring system has recently
reversed in some states, which indicates that there is
still uncertainty about the recovery.

**_Inflation in Mexico_**

**The majority of members pointed out that**
**inflation in Mexico continues to be affected by**
**the direct and indirect effects of the pandemic.**
**They mentioned that inflationary pressures are**
**associated with base effects, as in the case of**
**energy prices, with reallocation of spending, with**
**pressures** **stemming** **from** **increases** **in**

**international commodity prices, and with other**
**supply pressures.** Regarding the latter, **one**
member stated that, in response to such pressures,
the prices of wheat, corn and soybean by-products
have increased. He/she added that the reallocation

4


-----

of spending generated an increase in mobile phone
and internet services’ prices. **Some members**
mentioned that base effects, changes in

consumption patterns, and increases in commodity
prices, which explain the increase in inflation, are of
a transitory nature.

**Most members noted that inflation has been**
**affected by supply pressures. One member stated**
that the prices of intermediate goods have increased
considerably, which was reflected in the producer
price index with increases that have not been
observed in a long time and also highlighted the
possibility of additional supply shocks, such as the
observed pressures on the prices of basic food items.
**Another member pointed out that factors such as the**
differentiated reopening of activities across countries
and sectors has had an impact on the provision of
inputs, transportation and inventory management,
leading to bottlenecks in production. He/she added
that production costs have also increased due to the
new sanitary and social distancing requirements in
production processes, and the lower availability of
labor. He/she added that suppliers of goods and
services have shown a lower response capacity, as
well as delays and product shortages. He/she argued
that, due to the pandemic, supply has less capacity
to absorb the growth in demand without exerting
pressures on prices. **One member considered that,**
due to the unprecedented nature of the crisis, it is
difficult to foresee the size and duration of supplyrelated pressures and their interaction with demand
patterns.

**In this context, most members mentioned that**
**headline inflation has been close to 6% and that**
**it is significantly above Banco de México’s target.**
**One member argued that the current levels are due**
to the significant price changes that a reduced
number of products have registered and, therefore,
in his/her view, the 6% increase is far from being
generalized. He/she noted that some prices that had
registered the highest increases have already started
to stabilize.

Regarding non-core inflation, **some members**
mentioned that it was affected by a decrease in
energy inflation and by upward pressures on
livestock and agricultural product prices. **One**
member pointed out that the latter have undergone
pressures from adverse weather events and from a
strong increase in their demand. **Another member**
noted that non-core inflation has gone from 2.6% in
January to double-digit levels since April.


**Most members highlighted the rise in core**
**inflation, which is associated with the increase in**
**services inflation and the persistently high levels**
**of** **merchandise** **inflation.** **Some** members

expressed their concern about core inflation’s
resistance to decline. They explained that since May
2018 it has remained around 3.8% and recently has
trended upwards. One member emphasized that the
core component has shown persistence despite the
ample slack conditions. He/she noted that non-food
merchandise inflation remains high, while food
merchandise inflation increased. He/she added that
an upward trend can be observed in the core
component, which is foreseen to continue for several
months. **Another member highlighted that, while**
between April 2018 and February 2021, core inflation
had not exceeded 4%, since March it has remained
above that level. He/she argued that this component
faces problems that go beyond base effects. He/she
noted that, when controlling for seasonal effects,
monthly inflation has increased rapidly in a
considerable proportion of merchandises and

services. He/she explained that the prices of certain
merchandises, such as clothing and footwear, have
been adjusted upwards to recover from the low profit
margins registered during the pandemic. **One**
member stated that the prices of 75% of
merchandises are increasing at a rate of over 4% and
show annual variations of around 6% as a whole.
**Most members noted that, with the reopening of**
**activities, services inflation has reversed the**
**downward trend it had shown during most of**
**2020. One member mentioned that it has increased**
consistently since the beginning of 2021. **Another**
member added that this change in trend is a risk to
inflation given that the depressed demand so far has
contributed to contain price increases in this item. As
the economy opens during the post-pandemic
period, more pressures on these prices will be
observed, derived from new consumption patterns.

**This same member indicated that, although**
supercore inflation remains on target, it is an
analytical concept that needs to be taken with
caution. He/she recalled that it is interpreted as the
one that responds more to the economic cycle.
He/she mentioned that its current level of 3.1%
indicates that, since the economy remained in the
contraction part of the cycle for almost 3 years, the
pressure on prices that are more susceptible to
cyclical factors is low. However, he/she stated that
this indicator does not show a level compatible with
the inflation target, given that it only reflects 35% of
the generic items of core inflation. He/she added that
supercore inflation would have to show a higher

5


-----

level, in view of a higher economic growth rate, even
if the latter were due to a base effect.

**Most** **members** **pointed** **out** **that** **inflation**

**expectations for the end of 2021 increased once**
**again** **and** **that** **medium-** **and** **long-term**

**expectations remained stable at levels above the**
**3% target. Some** members mentioned that shortterm expectations are the most sensitive to the
observed data. One member indicated that inflation
levels above those anticipated contributed to the
increase in inflation expectations for this year and the
next one. Some members highlighted that, based on
different surveys, the median of expectations for the
next 12 months remains close to 3%. One member
added that said median even decreased gradually
and is close to the target. He/she added that,
although inflation expectations drawn from market
instruments increased at the margin, they are still
within the variability interval, which suggests that
markets anticipate that the inflation increase will be
transitory. In turn, **another member detailed that in**
Banco de México’s latest survey, specialists
assigned a probability of 54% to inflation locating
above 5.1% at the end of 2021, and a probability of
59% to inflation ending 2022 above 3.6%, which
contradicts the projection that the target would be
attained in mid-2022. In addition, he/she specified
that, after new inflation data for June are released,
analysts are anticipated to assign an even higher
probability of inflation locating very much above the
target level this year and the following one.

**Most** **members** **mentioned** **that,** **after**

**incorporating the recent behavior of inflation, the**
**new expected trajectories for headline and core**
**inflation for the following quarters are higher**
**than those published in the Quarterly Report**
**January–March 2021. He/she added that headline**
**inflation is forecast to lie around the 3% target in**
**the third quarter of 2022. One** member recalled
that, in the monetary policy release of May, headline
and core inflation were anticipated to converge to the
target in the second quarter of 2022. He/she added
that in the Quarterly Report January-March 2021 it
was stressed that the central forecast scenario for
inflation excluded additional pressures and that their
materialization would imply a more adverse scenario
for inflation. He/she pointed out that, in the updated
inflation forecast, the convergence of headline
inflation to its target would be delayed until the third
quarter of 2022 and that core inflation’s convergence
would also take longer. Some members highlighted
that, since the previous monetary policy decision, the
inflation trajectory for the following eight quarters has
been revised significantly upwards. **One member**


underlined that the central proposition of the last
Quarterly Report and of many analysts is that the
current inflationary pressures generated by shocks
and the arithmetic effect derived from a low base of
comparison are transitory, and thus they should
begin to dissipate over the next twelve months.
However, skepticism persists over the possibility of
inflation converging to the target starting in the
second quarter of next year. The aforementioned due
to the high uncertainty and to a balance of risks for
inflation biased to the upside. He/she expressed
his/her concern about the magnitude of the deviation
from previous forecasts being observed once again,
in particular, regarding the convergence of inflation
to its target. Inflation expectations could deteriorate
given a continuous adjustment of the forecasts
towards higher inflation.

**Most** **members** **pointed** **out** **that** **inflation**

**pressures are anticipated to be transitory. Some**
members highlighted the moderation in energy
prices, the stabilization in international commodity
prices, and that the effects related to reallocation of
spending are one-off. **One member mentioned the**
fading of increases in agricultural and livestock
product prices. **Another member mentioned that**
inflation dynamics in Mexico followed the global
upward trend, although more noticeably. He/she
pointed out that a reversal in the inflation trend
starting from May had already been previously
expected, due to the fading of base effects.
Nevertheless, he/she pointed out that, after

considering the most recent data, currently a new
rebound in inflation is anticipated, which may
continue until August or September, due to
unanticipated factors, different from the base effect.
He/she highlighted that, unlike other emerging
economies, the increase in inflation in Mexico
between January and May largely responded to
structural factors. **One member pointed out that, in**
line with the new forecasts, a very significant base
effect could be observed during the fourth quarter of
2021. In addition, he/she stated that economic
activity is estimated to moderate in 2022, coinciding
in general terms with the moment in which some
base effects of inflation will fade.

**Among upward risks to inflation, most members**
**highlighted the possibility of a higher external**
**inflation, high persistence of core inflation,**
**episodes of exchange rate depreciation, cost-**
**related pressures or reallocation of spending.**
**Some members added possible volatility episodes in**
financial markets. **One member highlighted the risk**
of droughts exerting pressure on agricultural and
livestock prices. Another member mentioned a more

6


-----

dynamic economic activity. One member considered
that there are risks regarding the recovery of pent-up
demand, especially in the service sector. Regarding
downward risks, **some members mentioned the**
effects of the negative output gap and greater social
distancing measures. One member emphasized the
possibility of an exchange rate appreciation.

**Most members considered that the balance of**
**risks that could affect the anticipated path for**
**inflation within the forecast horizon is to the**
**upside. One** member mentioned that short and
medium-term risks should be clearly differentiated.
He/she pointed out that the balance of risks in the
short term has deteriorated considerably.

Nonetheless, he/she argued that medium-term risks,
albeit remaining high, have improved given the
stability of the exchange rate, the containment of
energy prices, and a better outlook for international
commodity prices. Another member highlighted that
risks to non-core inflation are also biased to the
upside, due to: i) new supply shocks associated to
both increases in energy and commodity prices, and
in transportation costs, and ii) pressures on
agricultural and livestock product prices.

**_Macrofinancial environment_**

**Most members indicated that domestic financial**
**markets have exhibited a stable behavior. One**
member mentioned economic growth and its
expectations, sound public finances, a lower current
account deficit, and a less restrictive monetary policy
stance among the factors that have contributed to
said behavior. However, the majority of members
**pointed out that the Federal Reserve's latest**
**decision led to certain volatility. In this regard,**
**they highlighted the recent exchange rate**
**depreciation, after it attained a level close to**
**19.70 pesos per dollar. However, one member**
highlighted that, at the margin, the Mexican peso has
started to appreciate again.

**Most members noted that shorter-term interest**
**rates** **increased,** **while** **longer-term** **rates**

**decreased. One member stated that this was due to**
expectations of a less accommodative monetary
policy stance in the near future. **Some** members
highlighted the favorable performance of the stock
market. One member mentioned that default premia
showed an improvement. **Another** member

considered that although outflows of foreign
investors' holdings of government securities have
been absorbed by local financial intermediaries and
investors, a cautious environment persists, which
could translate into a lower appetite for local assets.


**One** member recalled that China's inclusion in
various global fixed income indexes has contributed
to the fact that it has received two thirds of the fixed
income flows towards emerging economies in the
last 18 months. He/she stated that although part of
this adjustment may be transitory, the low level of
participation of foreign investors in primary auctions
of government securities in Mexico stands out.
**Another member noted that greater external**
volatility and, in the medium term, lower monetary
stimuli at a global level, could exert pressure on the
exchange rate and affect capital flows.

**The majority of members mentioned that bank**
**credit has continued to contract. Some members**
highlighted the decline in consumer credit and in
lending to SMEs. **One member noted that this has**
occurred despite the ample liquidity available to
banks. **Another member added that this has taken**
place in an environment of tight financing conditions
and that the decline in credit is also a result of lower
demand due to a precautionary behavior and the
lower payment capacity of SMEs in the face of the
economic slowdown. He/she emphasized that only
mortgage lending continues registering positive
growth rates. **One member pointed out that since**
2016 lending has displayed a slowdown and that,
since the beginning of the pandemic, it has
contracted proportionally more than during the 20082009 financial crisis. He/she noted that, despite the
measures taken by the authorities, credit so far has
been weak and that intermediation margins are still
above pre-pandemic levels.

**Some members pointed out that recent studies show**
that, both in advanced and emerging economies,
credit is highly important for a faster and more robust
economic recovery, and that its absence will affect
consumption and investment. **One member stated**
that this would have negative consequences for the
recovery of sales, for critical sectors such as
construction, and that it could affect the reactivation
of SMEs. **Another member mentioned that, in a**
context of high uncertainty, a tightening of financial
conditions could be counterproductive. In this regard,
he/she considered essential to foster conditions that
continue ensuring the efficiency and stability of the
financial system, so that it encourages the adequate
channeling of resources among economic agents.
**One member noted that the domestic sources of**
financing continued to expand at high rates in
response to the demand for liquidity from households
and firms. He/she added that in April and May there
was a reactivation of corporate debt issuance in the
domestic and foreign markets. Regarding credit risk,
he/she mentioned that although delinquency rates

7


-----

remain at low levels, those corresponding to housing
and corporate lending have increased. He/she
considered it crucial for development banks to
resume their countercyclical role as inducers of credit
to the private sector in order to promote firms'
recovery, mainly of SMEs, and to seize the space
provided by their high capitalization levels.

**_Monetary policy_**

**Most members of Banco de México's Governing**
**Board highlighted that, although the shocks that**
**have affected inflation are of a transitory nature,**
**given their variety, magnitude, and the extended**
**time frame in which they have been affecting**
**inflation, they may pose a risk to the price**
**formation process. They deemed necessary to**
**strengthen the monetary policy stance by**
**increasing the target for the overnight interbank**
**interest rate by 25 basis points to 4.25%, to attain**
**an orderly adjustment of prices and enable the**
**convergence of inflation to its target. Some**
members voted for leaving the target unchanged at
4.00%. The majority agreed that, looking ahead,
**monetary policy implementation will depend on**
**the evolution of the factors that have an**
**incidence** **on** **inflation,** **on** **its** **foreseen**

**trajectories within the forecast horizon, and on**
**its expectations.**

**One** **member argued that in small open emerging**
economies, such as Mexico, which supplement their
domestic savings with external sources of financing,
it is essential to maintain a solid macroeconomic
policy stance that fosters an orderly adjustment in the
economy and attracts capital. In this regard, he/she
stated that monetary policy should contribute to
contain increases in risk premia along the yield
curve, as well as possible adjustments to the
Mexican peso exchange rate, in addition to
maintaining low and stable inflation around its target.
He/she also pointed out that the shocks that have
recently affected inflation pose significant challenges
to monetary policy implementation. He/she

highlighted that it must be ensured that relative price
adjustments take place in an orderly manner and that
possible effects on the economy's price formation
process and on inflation expectations are avoided.
He/she added that the baseline scenario for inflation
foreseen in the Quarterly Report did nor incorporate
additional pressures, and that their materialization
would imply a more adverse scenario for inflation.
He/she highlighted that in said report the Governing
Board indicated that it would determine its monetary
policy stance with the aim of guaranteeing an orderly
price adjustment and ensuring the convergence of


inflation to the 3% target. In this regard, the most
recent information clearly shows considerable
additional pressures for headline and core inflation
and a revision of its forecasts for the next eight
quarters. He/she considered that a tightening of the
monetary policy stance will contribute to a downward
trajectory of headline and core inflation towards 3%.

**Another member considered that the internal and**
external outlook for inflation has continued to
deteriorate significantly. In particular, he/she pointed
out that although inflationary pressures are largely,
but not exclusively, explained by supply shocks, their
transitory character can clearly turn out to be more
lasting than previously anticipated. In view of this,
he/she emphasized that it must be ensured that
second-round effects are not generated and that the
risk of expectations being contaminated or of the
credibility of the Central Bank's commitment to the
convergence of inflation to its target becoming
deteriorated, is avoided. He/she pointed out that a
significant correction in the observed data and in
inflation forecasts cannot be ignored and requires a
timely adjustment of the monetary policy stance.
He/she stated that, although most analysts do not
anticipate an increase in the reference rate in this
decision, the minimum adjustment made is

necessary and pertinent to give a clear and strong
signal of the Central Bank's commitment to primary
mandate. He/she added that price stability must be
reinforced to avoid adverse consequences on the
population, particularly on the most vulnerable.
He/she emphasized the importance of the monetary
policy statement mentioning the adjustment of
inflation forecasts with respect to the trajectories in
the last Quarterly Report, the delay in the
convergence to the target, and that the balance of
risks for inflation is biased to the upside. He/she
added that this decision does not necessarily imply
the beginning of a monetary tightening cycle but an
adjustment, and that the following decisions will be
taken accordingly, as new information emerges.

**One member noted that the absolute and relative**
monetary policy stances suggest that the room for
lowering the reference rate has been exhausted and
that the monetary stimuli should even be reduced.
He/she considered that signaling that the downward
cycle will continue in order to support economic
activity may be very risky. He/she stressed that when
implementing monetary policy, the costs of the
decisions taken should be evaluated. In the face of
uncertainty due to unanticipated shocks or

measurement problems in the indicators, the cost for
price stability is lower when mistakenly maintaining a
conservative position than when mistakenly taking a

8


-----

riskier position. He/she considered that the improved
economic outlook reduces the need for further
monetary stimulus measures. He/she added that the
monetary policy stance that was needed in 2020,
when the economy contracted 8.5% and inflation
ended at 3.15%, is different from what is needed
now, given that growth is expected to be 6% and
inflation could close the year nearly at double its
target level. The urgency that had previously favored
the reduction in the reference rate loses more
strength in light of the deterioration in the balance of
risks to inflation. He/she pointed out that the
credibility of monetary policy and the Central
Institute's commitment to price stability must be
maintained, avoiding any notion that the Central
Bank has, a _de facto dual mandate. He/she stated_
that recent and estimated future inflationary
pressures, both domestic and external, in an
international scenario prone to volatility and less
accommodative monetary conditions worldwide,
require immediate action. He/she pointed out that
this decision shows that Banco de México is
prepared to make difficult decisions, consistent with
its primary mandate. He/she added that this will place
the Central Bank in a better position to ensure that
the expected trajectory for inflation materializes.
He/she highlighted that given the uncertainty and a
balance of risks for inflation that is clearly biased to
the upside, in the following decisions it will be
necessary to show resolve in order to avoid a deanchoring of expectations and a greater vulnerability
to external or internal shocks.

**Another member mentioned that the monetary**
policy stance has been calibrated in an

unprecedented context, ensuring the convergence of
inflation to its target within the horizon in which
monetary policy operates. He/she noted that, given
that the economy is in a non-traditional cycle, there
are no structural demand pressures that imply
generalized price increases. He/she pointed out that
it is important to reflect on monetary policy ability to
respond to the supply shocks being confronted,
considering that there are factors that are beyond the
control of the monetary authority and that in the short
term may have an impact on inflation. He/she stated
that the Central Bank should seek to keep mediumand long-term inflation expectations anchored in
order to avoid second-round effects. In this regard,
he/she mentioned that, according to estimates,
monetary policy implementation had, up to that point,
maintained medium- and long-term inflation

expectations anchored. He/she considered the
importance of monitoring that this continues to take
place, and that monetary policy should be conducted
in such a way as to enable the orderly convergence


of inflation to its target. He/she noted that the best
way to meet this objective is by following the prudent,
cautious, gradual and predictable approach that has
characterized monetary policy. He/she emphasized
that acting in a prudent and gradual manner is not
synonymous with being tolerant, and that the Central
Bank has the tools and experience to act in a timely
manner, and even preemptively, if necessary, in
order to ensure that inflation converges to its target
in the horizon in which monetary policy operates.

**One** **member argued that, if the reference rate**
remains unchanged, the inflation target would not be
jeopardized, because the factors that account for its
recent increase are not only exogenous but also
transitory. He/she stated that, in reality, monetary
policy can do very little to offset price pressures
caused by base effects and by external factors.
He/she recalled that, when pressures are demandrelated, monetary policy can be more efficient, but
that with an atypically high output gap and a labor
market barely recovering, this type of pressures are
limited, and that for this reason the current pressures
actually come from abroad or are supply-related.
He/she mentioned that, in contrast, an early
withdrawal of the monetary stimulus would imply
major costs for the economy in a context in which the
recovery is still incipient and fragile. He/she stressed
that said cost would fall on the margins of the
economy that are currently more damaged, affecting
the recovery of credit and removing an essential
support for the reactivation of many small- and
medium-size enterprises, and delaying the still
incipient recovery of the aggregate demand
components most affected by the pandemic: private
consumption and investment. Finally, he/she

recalled that Banco de México’s goal is to preserve
low and stable inflation, in an efficient manner, that
is, not at all costs, but rather at the lowest cost
possible. In this regard, he/she considered that in the
current juncture, Banco de México must emphasize
and inform comprehensively and clearly about the
transitory nature of the ongoing inflationary shocks,
which would contribute to provide certainty to
markets as to the framework of monetary policy
implementation and would reinforce the anchoring of
inflation expectations without harming the

possibilities of economic recovery.

**3. MONETARY POLICY DECISION**

Although the shocks that have affected inflation are
expected to be of a transitory nature, given their
variety, magnitude, and the extended time frame in
which they have been affecting inflation, they may
pose a risk to the price formation process. In this

9


-----

context, it was deemed necessary to strengthen the
monetary policy stance in order to avoid adverse
effects on inflation expectations, attain an orderly
adjustment of relative prices, and enable the
convergence of inflation to the 3% target. With the
presence of all its members, the Governing Board
decided by majority to increase the target for the
overnight interbank interest rate by 25 basis points to
4.25%. Two members voted for leaving the target
unchanged at 4.00%. Looking ahead, monetary
policy implementation will depend on the evolution of
the factors that have an incidence on inflation, on its
foreseen trajectories within the forecast horizon, and
on its expectations.

The Governing Board will take the necessary actions
based on incoming information in order for the policy
rate to be consistent with the orderly and sustained
convergence of headline inflation to the 3% target
within the time frame in which monetary policy
operates. It is necessary to safeguard the institutional
framework, strengthen the macroeconomic
fundamentals and adopt the necessary actions on
both monetary and fiscal policy fronts, to enable a
better adjustment of domestic financial markets and
of the economy as a whole.

**4. VOTING**

Alejandro Díaz de León-Carrillo, Irene EspinosaCantellano, and Jonathan Ernest Heath-Constable
voted in favor of increasing the target for the
overnight interbank interest rate by 25 basis points to
4.25%. Galia Borja-Gómez and Gerardo EsquivelHernández voted in favor of leaving the target for the
overnight interbank interest rate unchanged at
4.00%.

**5. DISSENTING OPINIONS / VOTES**

**Vote. Galia Borja-Gómez**

Inflation has been subject to significant pressures in
recent months. Most of them, however, seem to be
associated with supply-related problems and to
changes in consumption patterns, as a result of the


pandemic -which remains the most important
challenge- and thus I believe will hardly be solved
through monetary policy. It is reasonable to conclude
that these pressures are transitory and will decrease
over time, as long as inflation expectations remain
well anchored. Up to now, there is no evidence that
medium- and long-term inflation expectations have
been affected by the observed inflation shocks, and
they are consistent with the time frame in which
monetary policy operates. Under economic
circumstances of high uncertainty, an unpredictable
tightening of the monetary policy stance could be
interpreted as a change in the cycle rather than a
reinforcement of the current policy stance, which
would lead to an even greater tightening of local
financial conditions, and therefore be
counterproductive. In my opinion, and given the nontraditional cycle we face, the best way to meet our
constitutional objective is to be consistent with our
communication and monetary policy approach,
which has been characterized for being prudent,
cautious, gradual, and predictable.

**Vote. Gerardo Esquivel-Hernández**

I believe the decision to raise the interest rate was
hasty. Although it is true that inflation is
significantly above the Central Bank's target, it is also
true that this is mainly due to base effects and supplyrelated factors. This implies two things: first, that
these effects are transitory and, second, that
monetary policy can do little to address them. A
similar explanation had been put forward just three
weeks earlier in the Quarterly Report. I therefore
consider that this decision suggests an abrupt
change in narrative, which sends the signal of an
erratic and unpredictable behavior by the Bank. The
fact that no analyst had anticipated a rate increase
also points in that direction. On the other hand, it has
been said that the rate increase could contribute to
anchor inflation expectations. However, this abrupt
change could also have an undesirable and
counterproductive effect on inflation and its
expectations by suggesting that shocks are of a more
permanent nature, which could negatively affect the
price formation process.

10


-----

**ANNEX**

The information in this Annex was prepared for this
meeting by the staff of Banco de México’s
Directorate General of Economic Research and
Directorate General of Central Bank Operations. It
does not necessarily reflect the considerations of the
members of the Governing Board as to the monetary
policy decision.

**A.1. External conditions**

**A.1.1. World economic activity**

Available indicators suggest a rebound in the pace
of recovery of world economic activity during the
second quarter of this year, although heterogeneity
across countries persists, due to differences in
vaccine availability and in stimulus spending. In most
economies, international trade and industrial

production continued to expand, despite some
disruptions to supply chains caused by the shortage
of some inputs. The pace of recovery in the services
sector strengthened as a result of the reopening of
activities (Chart 1). Global inflation continued to
increase, due to pressures on various commodity
prices, base effects, and other cost-related

pressures associated with bottlenecks in production.
In most advanced economies, headline and core
inflation have increased, with the former rising above
its target in some cases. The fact that in the United
States annual CPI inflation reached 5% in May, the
highest figure since September 2008, is noteworthy.
The central banks of major advanced economies left
their monetary stimuli unchanged, although it is
estimated that these could be kept for a shorter
period. Thus, after a period of stability, financial
markets registered some volatility after the Federal
Reserve released its latest monetary policy decision,
reflecting uncertainty about the future evolution of
monetary policy in the United States. Among the
main risks to world economic activity and to the
stability of global international financial markets,
those associated with the pandemic and with higher
levels of inflation hastening the withdrawal of
monetary stimuli stand out.

1 Expressed as a quarterly annualized rate, US seasonally adjusted GDP
grew at a rate of 6.4% during the first quarter of 20201.


**Global: Purchasing Managers’ Index**

**Production Component**

Diffusion Index, s.a.

65

60

55

50

45

40

35 Manufacturing

Manufacturing (excl. China)

30 Services

Services (excl. China)

25 May

20

2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021

s. a. / Seasonally adjusted figures.
Source: Markit.

In the United States, available indicators point to an
accelerated growth of economic activity, after its
GDP expanded at a seasonally adjusted quarterly
rate of 1.6% during the first quarter of 2021 (Chart
2).[1] In particular, consumption and investment are
expected to continue contributing to an expansion
during the second quarter. The continued strength of
private consumption has been associated with
advances in the vaccination process, the easing of
several social distancing measures, and the
significant stimulus programs implemented in that
country. Available figures on international trade
suggest a lower negative impact on growth from net
exports due to the recent recovery in exports.

US industrial production continued growing at a
slightly faster pace, from a seasonally adjusted
monthly rate of 0.1% in April to 0.8% in May. This
recovery reflected an expansion in its main
components. In particular, after having contracted
0.1% in April, manufacturing activity grew at a
monthly rate of 0.9% in May, reflecting mostly a
rebound in automotive production, although it
continues to face a shortage of inputs, particularly of
semiconductors. Although the Purchasing

Managers' Indices (PMIs) of the manufacturing
sector suggest that the recovery of this sector may
continue in the following months, other indicators,
such as the New York Empire State Manufacturing
Index, indicate that the shortage of labor and inputs
may affect its pace of growth.

11

|Chart 1 Global: Purchasing Managers’ Index  Production Component Diffusion Index, s.a.|Col2|
|---|---|
|||
|Manufacturing Manufacturing (excl. China) Services Services (excl. China)|May|


-----

**Chart 2**

**United States: Real GDP and its Components**

Quarterly percentage change and contributions in

percentage points, s. a.


10

8

6

4

2

0

-2

-4

-6

-8

-10

-12


50

45

40

35

30

25

20

15

10

|50|Col2|Col3|Col4|Col5|Col6|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|50 45 40 35 30 25 Private consumption expenditures 20 Residential investment Change in private inventories 15 Net exports Nonresidential investment 10 Government consumption expenditures 5 Total||||||
|0 I II III IV 2016|I II III IV 2017|I II III IV 2018|I II III IV 2019|I II III IV 2020|I II 2021|


Note: The shaded area refers to the Blue Chip forecasts for June 2021.
s. a. / Seasonally adjusted figures.
Source: Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA) and Blue Chip.

The US labor market continued to recover during
May. The non-farm payroll increased by 559,000
jobs in May, with the improvement in the sectors of
leisure and hospitality, educational services,

healthcare and social assistance standing out.
However, employment figures remained 7.6 million
below pre-pandemic levels. In that context, although
the unemployment rate declined from 6.1% in April
to 5.8% in May, initial unemployment insurance
claims rebounded to 412,000 in the week ending
June 12, after having registered 375,000 new claims
during the previous week. It is worth noting that
several surveys on the labor market among firms
have recently reflected difficulties in filling some
vacancies.

In the euro area, after GDP contracted 0.3% at a
seasonally adjusted quarterly rate during the first
quarter of 2021,[2] consumer and business confidence
indicators suggest a recovery in economic activity
during the second quarter, given the gradual
reopening of services and expectations of a faster
vaccination process. As for production,

manufacturing activity has continued to recover,
although automotive production continues to be
affected by the shortage of semiconductors. PMIs for
both the manufacturing and services sectors also
point to a recovery of the economy during the second
quarter of the year. As for the labor market, the
unemployment rate declined from 8.1% in March to
8.0% in April.

2 In annualized terms, euro area GDP registered a quarter-on-quarter
seasonally adjusted variation of -1.3% during the first quarter of 2021.
3 In annualized terms, UK GDP contracted at a quarter-on-quarter
seasonally adjusted rate of -5.9% during the first quarter of 2021.


In the United Kingdom, available indicators suggest
a recovery of economic activity during the second
quarter of 2021, after GDP contracted at a
seasonally adjusted quarterly rate of 1.5% in the
first.[3] This recovery is associated with the rebound in
consumption, as a result of the reopening of stores
deemed non-essential and hospitality services, as
well as with the improvement in household
confidence due to significant advances in the
vaccination process and a decline in the number of
COVID-19 cases during the quarter. Industrial
production decreased in April, mainly reflecting a
reduction in mining and manufacturing production,
with the fall in pharmaceutical and automotive
production standing out. In this environment, the
unemployment rate decreased from 4.9% in
February to 4.7% in April.

In Japan, available indicators suggest that economic
activity recovered during the second quarter of the
year, after having contracted at a seasonally
adjusted quarterly rate of 1.0% during the first
quarter.[4] Consumption of durable goods continued to
expand in April, while spending on non-durable
goods and services deteriorated once more in light
of the announcement of the third COVID-19 state of
emergency. Industrial activity continued to expand,
supported by the demand for machinery and
equipment, thus regaining the level observed at the
end of 2019, despite the fall in automobile production
due to supply shortages. As for the labor market, the
unemployment rate increased from 2.6% in March to
2.8% in April.

In emerging economies, indicators point to a
differentiated performance during the second
quarter, reflecting the rebound in the number of
COVID-19 cases in some regions and the withdrawal
of stimulus in China. In emerging Asian countries,
timely information suggests that economic activity in
China continued to expand, albeit at a more
moderate pace, while in India, activity was severely
affected by the health crisis. In emerging Europe,
available indicators suggest a recovery of economic
activity, while in Latin America several economies
are expected to contract, especially those of
Argentina, Brazil and Colombia, due to slower
progress in containing the COVID-19 pandemic and
in the case of Colombia due to the recent social
turmoil.

4 In annualized terms, Japan GDP grew at a quarter-on-quarter
seasonally adjusted variation of -3.9% during the first quarter of 2021.

12


-----

International commodity prices registered a mixed
behavior since Mexico’s previous monetary policy
decision. On the one hand, oil prices continued to be
driven by optimism regarding the recovery of fuel
demand in view of the resumption of activities in
several economies and by the decision of the
Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries
(OPEC) and other producers to maintain until July
their current plan to gradually increase production.
On the other hand, after having reached relatively
high levels in early May due to the recovery of global
industrial activity and disruptions in the global supply
chains, industrial metal prices exhibited narrow
adjustments. Finally, grain prices declined during the
period as a result of more favorable weather
conditions, especially in the western region of the
United States.

**A.1.2. Monetary policy and international financial**
**markets**

Global inflation continued to increase, reflecting
upward pressures stemming from rises in various
commodity prices, mainly energy commodities,
arithmetic effects associated with a low base of
comparison, and other cost-related pressures
associated with bottlenecks in production. Headline
inflation in some advanced economies, such as the
United States, Canada, the euro area and the United
Kingdom, was around or above their central banks’
targets (Chart 3). The fact that in the United States
annual CPI inflation reached 5% in May, the highest
figure since September 2008, is noteworthy. Core
inflation recently registered increases in most of
these economies, although it remains at low levels.
In most of the main advanced economies, after
having increased slightly during the first half of May,
5-year forward inflation expectations for the following
5 years drawn from financial instruments have
remained relatively stable, although in some cases
additional slight increments have been registered
recently. However, in most economies in this group,
they remain at levels above those observed at the
beginning of the year.


In the main emerging economies, inflation continued
to rise, largely due to the higher commodity prices
and the effects of a low base of comparison, as a
result of which headline inflation remained above its
central banks’ point target or the midpoint of their
target range. In addition, in most of these economies,
core inflation has increased recently, in the
abovementioned economic context.

**Chart 3**

**Selected Advanced Economies:**

**Headline Inflation**

Annual percentage change

5.5

United States CPI

5.0

United States PCE 1/

4.5 Euro area

4.0 United Kingdom

3.5 Japan

3.0 Canada

2.5

2.0

1.5

1.0

0.5

0.0

-0.5

-1.0 MarchApril

-1.5

2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021

1/ The personal consumption expenditure deflator is used.
Source: Bureau of Labor Statistics, Eurostat, Bank of Japan, Statistics
Canada, Office of National Statistics.

The central banks of the major advanced economies
left their reference interest rates unchanged at levels
around zero. Likewise, they continued using their
balance sheets to preserve favorable financing
conditions and to seek the convergence of inflation
to their respective long-term targets. These central
banks reiterated that they will maintain

accommodative monetary policy stances until
inflation reaches their targets in a sustained manner.
However, the recent forecasts of some of these
banks anticipate increases in reference interest rates
earlier than previously anticipated. In turn,

expectations drawn from financial instruments in
some cases incorporate interest rate increases for
the end of 2022 and 2023 (Chart 4).

13


-----

**Chart 4**

**Reference Rates and Implied Trajectories in**

**OIS Curves [1/]**

Percent

3.0% **― US Federal Reserve 2/**

**― Bank of England**
**― Bank of Japan**

2.5% **― Bank of Canada**

**― European Central Bank deposit rate**
**― OIS implicit trajectory 18 Jun 2021**

2.0% **--- OIS implicit trajectory 07 May 2021**

1.5%

1.0%

0.5%

0.0%

-0.5%

End of End of End of End of

-1.0% 2020 2021 2022 2023

2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023

1/ OIS: Fixed floating interest rate swap where the fixed interest rate is
associated to the effective overnight reference rate.
2/ For the observed reference rate of the U.S. the average interest rate of
the target range of the federal funds rate (0.0% - 0.25%) is used.
Source: Banco de México with data from Bloomberg.

Among the recent monetary policy decisions, the
following stand out:

i) In its June meeting, the Federal Reserve (Fed)

left its target range for the federal funds rate
unchanged at 0-0.25% and reiterated that it
would be appropriate to maintain it until labor
market conditions have reached levels consistent
with its maximum employment estimate and
inflation has increased to 2% and is on track to
moderately exceed this target for some time. It
also stated that it will maintain the current pace of
its asset purchase program until substantial
progress has been made towards its maximum
employment and price stability goals. In this
regard, the Chairman of the Fed’s Board of
Governors pointed out that the economy is still far
from making a substantial progress in attaining
these goals, which has been considered as a
necessary condition to announce an adjustment
to its asset purchase program. He added that any
decision to adjust said program will be
announced in advance and that its intention is
that the process is orderly, methodic and
transparent. Additionally, he suggested that the
Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) still
expects the inflation increase to be transitory,
despite the uncertainty regarding the moment
when the temporary inflation pressures will start
moderating. He pointed out that there is a risk that
inflation will be higher and more persistent than
anticipated, and, that in the event that the
trajectory of inflation or long-term inflation
expectations deviate materially and persistently
from the levels consistent with its target, the


central bank will be prepared to adjust its
monetary policy stance. In this context, the
medians of forecasts by the Committee published
in June show the following adjustments: an
upward revision of growth expectations for 2021
and, to a lesser extent, for 2023, as well as a
marginal decrease in the expected

unemployment rate for 2022. Although inflation
expectations for this year were significantly
revised upwards from 2.4 to 3.4%, headline
inflation is foreseen to reach 2.1% in 2022 and
2.2% in 2023, which suggests that the increase in
inflation is anticipated to be transitory. Regarding
the reference rate, the median of forecasts
suggests that it will increase by 50 basis points
during 2023, as compared to previous forecasts
that did not include any increments for that year.
In response, the implied path in financial
instruments for the federal funds rate was
adjusted upwards, particularly for 2022 and 2023,
incorporating the expectation of around three
increases by the end of 2023. In that same
meeting, the Federal Reserve extended its
temporary liquidity lines in US dollars with nine
central banks until December 2021 and increased
the interest rate applied to the banks' reserve
balances and the one used in their repurchase
operations.

ii) In its June meeting, the European Central Bank

maintained its refinancing rate, key deposit facility
rate, and key lending facility rate at 0.0, -0.5 and
-0.25%, respectively. It reiterated that these
interest rates are expected to remain at or below
their current levels until inflation forecasts
converge robustly to a level sufficiently close but
below the 2% inflation target, and that this
convergence is consistently reflected in core
inflation dynamics. It also left its asset purchase
programs unchanged and reiterated that it
expects net purchases under the Pandemic
Emergency Purchase Program (PEPP) to

continue during the next quarter at a significantly
higher pace than in the first months of the year.
In this regard, the president of said central bank
pointed out that any discussion on the termination
of the program would be premature.

iii) In its June meeting, the Bank of Japan left its

short-term policy rate unchanged at -0.1% and its
long-term interest rate (indexed to its 10-year
bond) at around 0%. It also announced the
extension until March 2022 of its purchases of
commercial paper and corporate bonds, as well
as its Special Program to Support Financing in
Response to the Novel Coronavirus (COVID-19).

14


-----

It reiterated that it will continue to support
corporate financing and to maintain stability in the
financial markets through this special program, as
well as through an ample liquidity provision, both
in domestic and foreign currency, and through
purchases of Exchange-traded Funds (ETFs) and
Japan Real Estate Investment Trusts (J-REITs).
Said central bank ratified that, if necessary, it will
not hesitate to take additional easing measures
and that it expects interest rates to remain at or
below their current levels. Said central bank also
considered appropriate to introduce a new fundprovisioning measure, through which it provides
funds to financial institutions for investment or
loans granted to address climate change issues.
It noted that this measure will be probably
launched within 2021 and that its preliminary
outline will be announced in its July meeting.

Since Banco de Mexico’s previous monetary policy
decision, most central banks of the main emerging
economies left their reference interest rates
unchanged. However, some pointed out the need of
assessing the convenience of recalibrating how
expansive their monetary policy should be, while
others tightened their policy stances further. In
particular, in June the central banks of Brazil, Russia,
Hungary and the Czech Republic increased their
interest rates by 75, 50, 30 and 25 basis points,
respectively. In addition, the central banks of this
group of economies continued to implement
measures to provide liquidity and foster the wellfunctioning of financial markets.

In the global environment described above, since
Mexico’s previous monetary policy decision

international financial markets exhibited a stable
behavior during most of the period, in a context in
which the central banks of major advanced
economies maintained accommodative monetary
policies and pointed out that the recent rise in
inflation is partly due to transitory factors, while
lockdown measures have been reduced in several
countries. However, recently, a higher volatility and
a tightening of financial conditions has been
observed, in view of a sooner-than-previouslyexpected withdrawal of the Federal Reserve
monetary stimulus. In this context, stock markets
registered mixed results, after some stock market
indices reached maximum historic levels (Chart 5).
The US dollar strengthened against most advanced
and emerging economies’ currencies. Long-term
government bond interest rates in the main
advanced economies showed decreases during
most of the period, while most short-term interest
rates increased, thus leading to flattening yield


curves. In turn, interest rates in emerging economies
showed mixed adjustments (Chart 6). In this context,
since Mexico's previous monetary policy decision
capital flows to fixed income assets in emerging
economies, mainly of the Asian region and,
particularly, China, registered moderate net inflows,
although there were episodes of capital outflows
from equity assets in some economies.

**Chart 5**

**Change in Selected Financial Indicators from**

**May 7 to June 18, 2021**

Percent; basis points Percentage, basis points


1/ The MSCI Emerging Markets Index consists of 24 countries. 2/ DXY: a
weighted average estimated by the Intercontinental Exchange (ICE) of the
nominal exchange rate of the main six currencies operated globally with the
following weights: EUR 57.6%, JPY: 13.6%, GBP: 11.9%, CAD: 9.1%, SEK:
4.2%, and CHF: 3.6%.3/ J.P. Morgan index is constructed with the weighted
average by the nominal exchange rate of emerging economies’ currencies
with the following weights: TRY: 8.3%, RUB: 8.3%, HUF: 8.3%, ZAR: 8.3%,
BRL: 11.1%, MXN: 11.1%, CLP: 11.1%, CNH: 11.1%, INR: 11.1% and
SGD: 11.1%.
Source: Bloomberg and ICE.

15


15%

10%


75

50


5%


25

0


0%

-5%


-10%


-25

-50


-----

**Chart 6**

**Selected Emerging Economies: Financial**

**Assets Performance from May 10, 2021 to**

**June 18, 2021**

Percent, basis points

**2-year** **10-year**

**Equity**
**Region** **Country** **Currencies** **interest** **interest** **CDS**

**markets**

**rates** **rates**

**Mexico** **-3.22%** **0.91%** **26** **6** **6**

**Brazil** **3.40%** **5.33%** **54** **22** **-5**

**Latin**

**Chile** **-7.72%** **-6.53%** **52** **92** **16**

**America**

**Colombia** **-0.13%** **-4.15%** **18** **0** **10**

**Peru** **-6.10%** **-11.36%** **-28** **66** **9**

**Russia** **1.50%** **2.98%** **92** **8** **-2**

**Poland** **-1.41%** **4.57%** **23** **4** **2**

**Emerging**

**Turkey** **-6.12%** **-5.06%** **33** **-7** **2**

**Europe**

**Czech Republic** **-2.01%** **4.77%** **14** **-14** **1**

**Hungary** **-0.97%** **8.39%** **50** **10** **2**

**China** **-0.82%** **2.95%** **13** **-3** **1**

**Malaysia** **-1.01%** **-0.74%** **-11** **18** **1**

**India** **-1.03%** **6.21%** **39** **2** **-8**

**Asia**

**Philippines** **-1.72%** **8.07%** **-10** **-30** **0**

**Thailand** **-1.68%** **0.82%** **1** **7** **-1**

**Indonesia** **-1.62%** **0.34%** **-26** **20** **0**

**Africa** **South Africa** **-1.70%** **-4.26%** **62** **42** **-9**

Note: Interest rates correspond to swap rates at the specified terms, except Note: Interest rates correspond to government bonds in the specified terms, with the
for Hungary, where government securities with 3-year (instead of 2-year)
maturities where used as a reference. For Colombia and the Philippines, a
2-year swap rate is used.
Source: Bloomberg.

Given the characteristics of the health and economic
crisis, along with the adjustments in the monetary
policy framework of some of the main central banks
in advanced economies, there is still high uncertainty
regarding the evolution of international financial
markets and the risk of new episodes of volatility
during the recovery phase of the pandemic. In this
regard, several risks to the stability of international
financial markets persist. These include the
possibility that the economic recovery in some
advanced economies, supported to a large extent by
substantial fiscal stimuli, or that greater disruptions
in supply chains lead to higher levels of inflation,
hastening the withdrawal of the monetary stimulus,
which could tighten global financial conditions and
generate pressures for emerging markets. Concerns
also persist regarding possible distortions in some
financial assets’ valuations, which could lead to a
sudden correction in their prices. In addition,
vulnerabilities related to the high levels of public and
private debt accumulated in recent years could
intensify.

In addition to the risks to global financial conditions,
emerging economies face an increased absorption
of financial resources by the public sectors of those
advanced economies that have large fiscal stimulus
programs and by China's greater participation in
emerging economies' fixed income assets due to its
inclusion in the main global investment indices.


**A.2. Current situation of the Mexican economy**

**A.2.1. Mexican markets**

Since Banco de México’s previous monetary policy
decision to date, financial asset prices in the country
exhibited a mixed behavior with a negative bias
(Chart 7), in an environment characterized by a
greater sensitivity to financial conditions in the United
States. In this regard, expectations of less
accommodative monetary policies by advanced
economies continued to gain strength as a result of
a rebound in both their inflation rates and inflation
expectations.

Regarding the Mexican peso, it fluctuated in a range
between 19.70 and 20.66 pesos per dollar, ending
the period with a depreciation of 3.22% (Chart 8).
This occurred in a context in which both spot- and
forward-trading conditions improved slightly.

On the other hand, on June 16 Banco de México
announced jointly with the US Federal Reserve the
extension of the swap line until December 31, 2021
for an amount of 60 billion dollars.

**Chart 7**

**Mexican Markets’ Performance**

Percent, MXN/USD and index


8.0

7.0


37,000

32,000


57,000

52,000


6.0

5.0


47,000

42,000


4.0


26.0

25.0

24.0

23.0

22.0

21.0

20.0

19.0

18.0


M-bond


4.0

3.5

3.0

2.5

2.0

1.5

1.0

0.5

0.0

Inflation-indexed bonds


Source: Prepared by Banco de México.


Range in year Range since last monetary policy decision May-10-21 Jun-18-21


16


-----

26.00
25.50
25.00
24.50
24.00
23.50
23.00
22.50
22.00
21.50
21.00
20.50
20.00
19.50
19.00
18.50
18.00
17.50
17.00


**Chart 8**

**Mexican Peso Exchange Rate with Moving**

**Averages**
MXN/USD

Mexican peso

100-day moving average

50-day moving average

J    F   M    A    M    J    J    A    S    O    N    D    J    F   M    A M    J

2020 2021


Source: Prepared by Banco de México.

Interest rates of government securities exhibited a
mixed behavior (Chart 9), with a flattening dynamic
reflected in increases of up to 35 basis points in the
short-term part of the yield curve, and decreases of
up to 37 basis points in longer-duration instruments.
The yield curve for real rate instruments exhibited a
positive dynamic, with decreases of between 28 and
68 basis points in the short-term segment. In this
context, breakeven inflation and inflation risk premia
implicit in spreads between nominal and real rates of
market instruments showed mixed adjustments with
respect to the March monetary policy decision (Chart
10). These adjustments occurred in an environment
in which trading conditions improved during the
period between Mexico’s monetary policy decisions.

**Chart 9**

**Nominal Yield Curve of Government Securities**

Percent, basis points

8.00 55

7.50 45

7.00 6 35

#¡REF!

6.50 25

6.00 15

5.50 5

5.00 -5

4.50 -15

4.00 -25

3.50 -35

May-10th 2021 June-18th 2021 Change (May-10th 2021 to June-18th 2021)

Trading range over the period

Source: PIP.


**Chart 10**

**Breakeven Inflation and Inflation Risk Implicit in**

**Government Securities’ Interest Rate**

Basis points

500

475

450

425

400

375

350

325

300

275 3-year10-year

250 20-year

30-year

225 3-year average

10-year average

200 20-year average

175 30-year average

150

J        M        S        J        M        S        J        M

2019                  2020                 2021

Source: PIP.

Regarding expectations for the trajectory of the
monetary policy reference rate, information implied
by the Interbank Equilibrium Interest Rate (TIIE, for
its Spanish acronym) assigns an 88% probability to
the reference rate remaining unchanged in June’s
decision (Chart 11). In a related manner, the median
of the consensus of forecasters surveyed by
Citibanamex anticipates the reference interest rate
to be at 4.00% in the next monetary policy decision.
For the end of 2021, market variables anticipate a
target rate of 4.61%, while the median of the
aforementioned survey expects it to be 4.00%.

**Chart 11**

**Banxico’s Overnight Interbank Rate Implied in**

**TIIE IRS Curve**

Percent

8.50
8.25
8.00
7.75
7.50
7.25
7.00
6.75
6.50
6.25
6.00
5.75 Banxico overnight rate
5.50 (reference rate)
5.25
5.00 Latest figure
4.75 (06/18/2021)
4.50
4.25 Last monetary policy
4.00 decision (05/13/2021)
3.75
3.50

J   M M   S   N   F   M   J   O   D   M   J   A   N

2019             2020                 2021

Source: Prepared by Banco de México with Bloomberg data.


-----

**A.2.2. Economic activity in Mexico**

During the first quarter of 2021, the recovery of
economic activity slowed down (Chart 12), although
in March it registered a significant rebound, mainly
driven by the evolution of tertiary activities in
response to the loosening of restrictions to contain
the pandemic. Available indicators suggest a
moderation of the recovery in April. During the rest
of the year, economic activity is expected to resume
its recovery path.

As for external demand, in April automotive exports
partially recovered from the decline registered in
February and March, while the rest of manufacturing
exports remained at high levels (Chart 13). By
destination, exports to the United States showed a
loss of dynamism in April, while those to the rest of
the world rebounded, reversing the decline observed
in March.[5]

**Chart 12**

**Gross Domestic Product**


**Chart 13**

**Total Manufacturing Exports**

Indexes 2013 = 100, s. a.


180

160

140

120

100

80

60

40

20

0


Quarterly percentage change, s. a.


16

12

8

4

0


-4

-8

-12

-16


-20 Q-I

I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV I

2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021

s. a. / Seasonally adjusted figures.
Source: Mexico’s System of National Accounts (SCNM, for its Spanish
acronym), INEGI.

5 Refers to the value of merchandise exports in current US dollars. This
value differs from that reported for goods exports by Mexico’s System of


J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A

2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021

s. a. / Seasonally adjusted series and trend series based on data in nominal
US dollars. The former is represented by a solid line and the latter by a
dotted line.
Source: Prepared by Banco de México with data from the Tax
Administration Service (SAT, for its Spanish acronym), the Ministry of the
Economy (SE, for its Spanish acronym), Banco de México, the National
Institute of Statistics and Geography (INEGI, for its Spanish acronym).
Mexico’s Merchandise Trade Balance, and the National System of
Statistical and Geographical Information (SNIEG, for its Spanish acronym),
Information of national interest.

According to its monthly indicator, in March private
consumption reactivated after having decelerated in
previous months, although it remained below the
level reported in February 2020. Consumption of
goods, both imported and national, reversed the
decline of the previous month, while consumption of
services rebounded, although it remains at low
levels. In March, gross fixed investment continued to
show a gradual recovery, although it remained below
its pre-pandemic level. Within it, the machinery and
equipment component maintained its recovery pace,
while construction slowed down.

As for production, in March tertiary activities
recorded a significant rebound, generalized across
all sectors (Chart 14). Among the services that
performed better that month were temporary
accommodation and food and beverage preparation
services; transportation and mass media information
services; wholesale commerce; leisure and other
services; and financial and real estate services. In
April, industrial activity contracted as a result of a
loss of dynamism in construction and the impact on
manufacturing caused by the shortage of certain
inputs, especially of semiconductors in the

automotive industry. At the same time, although
mining grew at the margin, it remained at low levels
(Chart 15).

National Accounts (SCNM, for its acronym in Spanish), given that the latter
represents the value-added measured in constant pesos.


18


-----

**Chart 14**

**Global Indicator of Economic Activity**

Indexes 2013 = 100, s. a.


120

115

110

105

100

95

90 Total IGAE 1/

85

Industrial production 2/

80

Services IGAE 1/

75

Agricultural and livestock

70 products IGAE 1/

65 March

April

60

J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A

2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021


140

130

120

110

100

90

80

70

60

50

40

30

20


labor costs in the manufacturing sector remained
above the levels reported prior to the pandemic
(Chart 18).

**Chart 16**

**Output Gap Estimates [1/]**

**Excluding Oil Industry [4/ ]**

Potential output percentages, s. a.

8

4

0

-4

-8

-12

-16

-20 Global Economic Activity Indicator 2/

Gross Domestic Product 2/

-24 95% confidence interval 3/

Q-I

March

-28

J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M

2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021

s. a. / Calculations based on seasonally adjusted figures.
1/ Output gap estimated with a tail-corrected Hodrick-Prescott filter; see
Banco de México (2009), “Inflation Report, April-June 2009”, p.74.
2/ GDP timely figures as of Q1 2021, and IGAE figures as of March 2021,
in line with said timely figure.
3/ Output gap confidence interval calculated with a method of unobserved
components.
4/ Excludes both oil and gas extraction, support services for mining, and
petroleum and coal products’ manufacturing.
Source: Prepared by Banco de México with INEGI data.

**Chart 17**

**National and Urban Unemployment Rates**

Percent, s. a.

8.5

National unemployment rate

8.0

7.5 Urban unemployment rate

7.0

6.5

6.0

5.5

5.0

4.5

4.0

3.5

3.0

April

2.5

J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A

2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021

s. a. / Seasonally adjusted series and trend series. The former is
represented by a solid line and the latter by a dotted line.
Source: Prepared by Banco de México with data from ENOE, ETOE (from
April to June 2020), and ENOE new edition (ENOE[N]) from July to date.

19


s. a. / Seasonally adjusted and trend series. The former is represented by
a solid line and the latter by a dotted line.
1/ Figures to March 2021
2/ Figures to April 2021 of the Monthly Indicator of Industrial Activity.
Source: Mexico’s System of National Accounts (SCNM, for its Spanish
acronym), INEGI.

**Chart 15**

**Industrial Activity [1/]**

Indexes 2013 = 100, s. a.

130

120

110

100

90

80 Total

Mining (22.3%)

70 Manufacturing (49.7%)

Construction (23.3%)

60

Utilities (4.7%)

April

50

J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A

2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021

s. a. / Seasonally adjusted and trend series. The former is represented by
a solid line and the latter by a dotted line.
1/ Figures in parenthesis correspond to their share in the total in 2013.
Source: Mexico’s System of National Accounts (SCNM, for its Spanish
acronym), INEGI.

Regarding the economy's cyclical position, slack
conditions for the economy as a whole remained
significantly ample in the first quarter of 2021 (Chart
16), with sharp differences across sectors. In April,
although the labor market remained affected, various
indicators of said market continued showing a
gradual improvement. In particular, although the
national and urban unemployment rates increased
(Chart 17), this occurred in a context of higher labor
participation and higher levels of employment. In
turn, in May, the number of new IMSS-insured jobs
continued to recover, although it remained around
500 thousand below its pre-pandemic levels,
according to figures without seasonal adjustment.
Finally, despite the decline in March and in April, unit


-----

**Chart 18**

**Productivity and Unit Labor Costs in the**

**Manufacturing Sector [1/]**

Indexes 2013 = 100, s. a.


170

Unit labor costs

160

Productivity

150

140

130

120

110

100

90

April

80

J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J A

2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021


s. a. / Seasonally adjusted and trend series. The former is represented by
a solid line and the latter by a dotted line.
1/ Productivity based on hours worked.
Source: Prepared by with seasonally adjusted data of the Monthly
Manufacturing Industry Survey and industrial activity indicators of Mexico’s
System of National Accounts (Sistema de Cuentas Nacionales de México,
SCNM), INEGI.

In April 2021, domestic financing to firms continued
to contract in real terms at an annual rate. This has
been partly the result of a reduction in bank lending
to both smaller-size firms –a segment that has
decreased since the first quarter of 2019– and largesize firms –a segment that continues to show a lower
demand for bank loans compared to the levels
observed at the beginning of the pandemic–.
Lending conditions for companies in general
continued to be tight compared to those at the
beginning of the pandemic. During the April-May
period, corporate debt issuance by firms recovered,
after having remained stagnant during the first
quarter of the year. As for credit to households, the
housing portfolio continued to show positive real
annual variations, in line with its high demand,
although its growth moderated in the first four
months of 2021. At the same time, banks' performing
consumer loan portfolio continued to decrease at a
real annual rate in all segments, in a context in which
lending conditions for households remained tight.

Interest rates of bank credit to firms have generally
followed the dynamic of the bank funding rate.
Intermediation margins continued above pre
pandemic levels. In turn, mortgage interest rates
remained at levels around their historical lows.
Meanwhile, in February, credit card interest rates
continued the downward trend followed since
October of last year. However, intermediation
margins have increased, given the larger reductions
to the reference rate. Regarding portfolio quality, in


April corporate loan delinquency rates remained
relatively stable and at low levels. Mortgage loan
delinquency rates did not register significant
changes after the moderate upward trend observed
since November 2020, and also remained at low
levels. Lastly, although consumer loan delinquency
rates have decreased at the margin, they remain at
high levels.

**A.2.3. Development of inflation and inflation**
**outlook**

Between April and the first fortnight of June 2021,
annual headline inflation shifted from 6.08% to
6.02% (Chart 19 and Tabla 1). Although non-core
inflation contributed 40 basis points to the downside,
this effect was almost completely offset by the
upward incidence of 34 basis points on core inflation.
The observed reduction in non-core inflation was
mainly due to the fact that the arithmetic effect
derived from the significant decline in gasoline prices
in April 2020 continued to reverse. In turn, the impact
of the pandemic on supply chains and on productive
processes of various goods and services caused
additional shocks on core inflation.

**Chart 19**

**Consumer Price Index**

Annual percentage change

13

12 CPI

11 Core

10

Non-core

9

8

7

6

5

4

3

2

1

0

-1

-2

-3 F1 June

J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M

2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021

Source: Banco de México and INEGI.

Annual core inflation increased from 4.13% to 4.58%
between April and the first fortnight of June, with
increments in inflation of both merchandise and
services. In the case of merchandise, its annual
inflation rose from 5.59% to 5.90% in the
aforementioned period (Chart 20). Within it, annual
inflation of food merchandise increased from 5.88 to
5.94%, and that of non-food merchandise, from 5.28
to 5.87% (Chart 21). Regarding the latter, the higher
annual inflation of apparel, footwear and accessories
was particularly noteworthy, which was associated
with a base effect due to the price reductions
registered by this item during the previous year. In

20


-----

general, non-food merchandise inflation continues to
face cost-related pressures, such as increases in
commodity and input prices in general, production
chains bottlenecks, and fluctuations in the exchange
rate. Annual inflation of services increased from 2.53
to 3.11% in the referred period. In this regard, the
increase from 3.55 to 4.58% in the annual price
variation of services other than education and
housing stood out, which resulted largely from the
higher price increases in food, tourism and
entertainment services. This contrasts with the low
levels of annual inflation of housing, which went from
1.73 to 1.94%, as well as in education, which shifted
from 1.12 to 1.14%.

**Chart 20**

**Merchandise and Services Core Price Sub-index**

Annual percentage change

7

Merchandise

6 Services

5

4

3

2

1

F1 June

0

J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M

2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021

Source: Banco de México and INEGI.

**Chart 21**

**Merchandise Core Price Sub-index**

Annual percentage change

8

7

6

5

4

3

2

1

Food, beverages and tobacco Non-food merchandise F1 June

0

J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M

2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021


Annual non-core inflation decreased from 12.34 to
10.61% between April and the first fortnight of June
2021 (Chart 22 and Tabla 1). This result was mainly
associated with the reduction from 28.02 to 18.54%
in annual energy inflation. This, in turn, was the result
of lower annual variations in gasoline prices, which
went from 34.94 to 18.43% during this period,
reflecting the fading of the arithmetic effect of the
significant decreases in their prices in April of last
year. On the other hand, annual inflation of
agricultural and livestock products increased from
4.08 to 7.22% during the same period, driven by the
increase from -0.83 to 2.30% in the annual inflation
of fruits and vegetables and from 8.20 to 11.48% in
inflation of livestock products.

**Chart 22**

**Non-core Price Sub-index**

Annual percentage change

25

20

15

10

5

0

Non-core

-5 Agricultural and livestock products

Energy and government-authorized prices

-10

-15 F1 June

J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M

2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021


Source: Banco de México and INEGI.

As for inflation expectations drawn from Banco de
México’s Survey among Private Sector Forecasters,
between April and May, the median for headline
inflation for the end of 2021 increased from 4.56 to
5.00%, while that corresponding to core inflation
went from 3.74 to 3.91%. In turn, the medians for the
end of 2022 were adjusted from 3.60 to 3.61% for
headline inflation, and from 3.51 to 3.60% for core
inflation. The medians of headline and core inflation
expectations for the medium and long terms
remained around 3.50%. Finally, the compensation
for inflation and inflation risk estimated with market
instruments registered some volatility. In particular,
although it had declined after the last monetary
policy decision, it has rebounded significantly since
the first week of June.

21


Source: Banco de México and INEGI.


-----

After incorporating the recent behavior of inflation,
the revised expected trajectories for headline and
core inflation for the next quarters are above those
published in the last Quarterly Report. Thus,
headline inflation is now expected to converge to the
3% target during the third quarter of 2022. These
forecasts are subject to risks. On the upside: i)
external inflationary pressures; ii) cost-related
pressures or reallocation of spending; iii) core
inflation persistence; iv) exchange rate depreciation;


and v) that the drought exerts pressure on
agricultural and livestock product prices. On the
downside: i) effects stemming from the negative
output gap; ii) greater social distancing measures;
and iii) exchange rate appreciation. The balance of
risks that might affect updating the anticipated path
for inflation within the forecast horizon is biased to
the upside.


**Tabla 1**

**Consumer Price Index and Components**

Annual percentage change

**1st fortnight**

**Item** **April 2021** **May 2021**
**June 2021**

**CPI** **6.08** **5.89** **6.02**

**SubyacenteCore** **4.13** **4.37** **4.58**

**Merchandise** **5.59** **5.76** **5.90**

Food, beverages and tobacco 5.88 5.49 5.94

Non-food merchandise 5.28 6.05 5.87

**Services** **2.53** **2.84** **3.11**

Housing 1.73 1.86 1.94

Education (tuitions) 1.12 1.12 1.14

Other services 3.55 4.08 4.58

**No SubyacenteNon-core** **12.34** **10.76** **10.61**

**Agricultural and livestock products** **4.08** **4.67** **7.22**

Fruits and vegetablesFruits abd vegetables -0.83 -3.63 2.30

Livestock productsLivestock 8.20 12.23 11.48

**Energy and government-authorized prices Energéticos y Tarifas Aut. por Gobierno** **19.30** **15.97** **13.36**

Energy productsEnergy 28.02 22.96 18.54

Government-authorized pricesTarifas Autorizadas por Gobierno 2.21 2.25 2.74

Source:INEGI.

22


-----

-----

-----

