-----

-----

**FOREWARNING**
This document is provided for the reader’s convenience
only. The translation from the official Spanish version was
made by Banco de México’s staff. Discrepancies may arise
between the original document in Spanish and its English
translation. For this reason, the original Spanish version is
the only official document.


**1. PLACE, DATE, AND PARTICIPANTS**

**1.1 Place:** Meeting held by virtual means.

**1.2. Date of Governing Board meeting:** February
10, 2021.

**1.3. Participants:**
Alejandro Díaz de León-Carrillo, Governor.
Galia Borja-Gómez, Deputy Governor.
Irene Espinosa-Cantellano, Deputy Governor.
Gerardo Esquivel-Hernández, Deputy Governor.
Jonathan Ernest Heath-Constable, Deputy
Governor.
Arturo Herrera-Gutiérrez, Secretary of Finance and
Public Credit.
Gabriel Yorio-González, Undersecretary of Finance
and Public Credit.
Elías Villanueva-Ochoa, Secretary of the Governing
Board.

Prior to this meeting, preliminary work by Banco de
México’s staff analyzing the economic and financial
environment as well as the developments in inflation
and the determinants and outlook for inflation, was
conducted and presented to the Governing Board
(see Annex).

**2. ANALYSIS AND RATIONALE BEHIND THE**
**GOVERNING BOARD’S VOTING**

**_International environment_**

**Most members mentioned that global economic**
**activity continued to recover at a more moderate**
**and heterogeneous rate across countries and**
**sectors. Some** members stated that the global
economy’s dynamism is reflected in the recovery of
international trade and industrial production. **One**
member noted that the rate of recovery has been
greater than anticipated by most analysts. **Another**
member pointed out that the economic recession in
2020 is the most severe in recent history. He/she
added that social distancing measures led to
changes in consumption patterns, labor relations,
production processes, supply chains and human
capital formation. He/she emphasized that fiscal and


monetary authorities have taken measures to
preserve economic stability. One member stated that
the performance of the economies is associated with
the severity of the effects from the pandemic and with
the differences in the relief programs. In this regard,
he/she noted that the countries that received more
support in 2020 registered smaller contractions than
originally estimated.

**Most members stated that the global economy is**
**expected to continue recovering in 2021 in view**
**of** **the** **foreseen** **progress** **in** **vaccination**
**strategies and of the fiscal and monetary stimuli.**
**Some members considered that differences in these**
factors could lead to a heterogeneous recovery
across countries and regions. **Most members**
**underlined the improvement in the global growth**
**forecasts for 2021. Some** members indicated that
IMF projections point to a 5.5% expansion for this
year. In this regard, **one member noted that within**
advanced economies only the United States would
manage to offset in 2021 the fall registered in 2020.
He/she added that, within emerging economies,
estimates of a fast recovery for Asia contrast with
those for Latin America, which is expected to recover
at a slower rate.

**Most members highlighted the risks for global**
**economic growth associated with the evolution**
**of the pandemic and the measures to contain it,**
**in particular, the recent implementation of new**
**mobility restrictions in various countries. One**
member considered that this has exerted greater
pressures on vaccine production and distribution and
on relief measures for households and firms. In this
context, **another member considered that the**
aforementioned countries will continue to show
economic weakness during the first quarter of the
year. He/she added as risks: i) the significant
increase in government and corporate debt; ii) an
increase in bankruptcies of firms affected by the
pandemic; iii) the imbalances in stock markets; and
iv) the intensification of geopolitical and social
conflicts. He/she considered that, given the high level
of uncertainty, the balance of risks for global growth
remains biased to the downside.

**Most members stated that inflation in advanced**
**economies remains below their central banks’**
**targets. One** member noted that in some of these
economies inflation has accelerated. **Some**
members pointed out that in advanced economies
inflation is anticipated to remain at low levels,
although one member added that in 2021 and 2022
it is expected to begin converging to its target. In the
case of the United States, **some members**

1


-----

mentioned that, in view of the fiscal and monetary
stimulus programs, inflation expectations have been
revised upwards. One member highlighted that these
are at levels above those registered a year ago.
**Another member mentioned the heterogeneous**
behavior of inflation, where in early February the
expected 5-year average inflation in five years in the
United States exceeded 2.3%, while, in contrast, in
the euro area and Japan it registers 1.34 and -0.13%,
respectively. Some members noted that in emerging
economies inflation has exhibited a heterogeneous
behavior, although one member highlighted that it is
at relatively low levels. Another member pointed out
that in some of these economies upward pressures
persist due to the higher food prices, the supply
shock and foreign exchange depreciation. **One**
member mentioned that, in emerging economies,
inflation rates are estimated to be below their historic
average figures. **On the other hand, most**
**members mentioned that commodity prices rose.**
**Some members underlined that this was due to the**
increase in oil prices, which responded to an
improvement in the growth outlook. **One member**
added that inventory figures for US crude oil also
contributed to the aforementioned.

**All members mentioned that the central banks of**
**advanced economies reiterated their intention to**
**maintain** **accommodative** **monetary** **policy**
**stances for an extended period. One** member
pointed out that the federal funds rate is anticipated
to remain unchanged in 2021 and 2022. He/she
added that the new monetary strategy of the Federal
Reserve will allow inflation to be above 2% for a
certain time and to maintain low or negative real
interest rates for a longer period. As for emerging
economies, he/she mentioned that their respective
central banks continued to maintain accommodative
policy stances, with a negative ex-ante real interest
rate in most cases. He/she indicated that most
central banks of emerging economies are expected
to maintain their reference rates unchanged during
2021.

**Most members highlighted the expectation that**
**fiscal stimulus in advanced economies is**
**extended. Some members recalled the case of the**
United States. **One member pointed out that the**
results of the electoral process in the United States
have favored this expectation for that country.

**Most members agreed that global financial**
**markets have exhibited a positive behavior**
**mainly in view of expectations of a large fiscal**
**stimulus package in the United States. Some**
members noted that the mitigation of political factors


also contributed to the above. In this regard, **one**
member mentioned that this evolution was affected
by the final stage of the electoral process in the
United States. and by the agreement on the United
Kingdom’s exit from the European Union. **Some**
members added the progress in the vaccination
process in different countries. In this context, **one**
member mentioned that market optimism has
contributed to the decline in credit risk premia.
**Another member considered that the rise in virus**
infections and the challenges related to the
vaccination process have contributed to episodes of
volatility.

**Most members highlighted the increase in risk**
**appetite among investors. Some members pointed**
out that the main stock indices registered gains, that
corporate bond spreads decreased, and that
government securities’ interest rates increased
moderately, especially longer-term ones. **One**
member mentioned that the US dollar fluctuated in a
narrow range and that portfolio flows concentrated in
the Asian region. **Another member added that**
emerging economies’ currencies appreciated and
that, looking ahead, financial markets are expected
to continue exhibiting positive behavior given the
progress in the vaccination process, the reopening of
economic activities, and the continuation of fiscal and
monetary stimuli.

**One** member noted, from a medium-term
perspective, that since the beginning of the pandemic
capital flows to emerging economies as well as the
terms and conditions of access to markets have been
influenced by: i) the favorable trend of global risk
appetite; ii) liquidity conditions and the evolution of
the yield curve in the US market; and iii) the recent
measures to integrate China’s financial sector to
international markets. Regarding the second factor,
he/she stated that international markets have
benefitted from the Federal Reserve’s support
measures, which granted ample liquidity, leading to
a marked reduction in interest rates. However,
he/she added that longer-term rates have rebounded
in view of the outlook for greater fiscal stimuli. As for
the third factor, he/she pointed out that China’s
inclusion in global fixed income indices, along with
interest rates above those in other economies and a
lower foreign exchange risk, have contributed to a
significant recomposition of capital flows to that
economy. He/she stated that the above poses
challenges to emerging economies, given that global
financial conditions operate as an additional
restriction on the domestic adjustment of these
economies, which also face multiple

2


-----

pandemic-related challenges and a limited margin of
maneuver for policy implementation.

**Some** members considered that international
financial markets are subject to different risks,
especially the abovementioned related to global
activity. One member added that they remain fragile
and subject to a correction or even to possible capital
outflows from emerging economies.

**_Economic activity in Mexico_**

**All members highlighted that timely figures**
**indicate that GDP fell 8.3% in annual terms in**
**2020. One** member pointed out that this result
implied a better performance than what had been
expected by most analysts in mid-2020. **Another**
member emphasized that the annual contraction of
GDP in 2020 is the most severe in decades. **Most**
**members mentioned that the economic recovery**
**continued during the fourth quarter of 2020,**
**although at a lower rate than in the third. Some**
members stated that it has been heterogeneous, with
differences in the recovery rates of domestic demand
as compared to those of external demand. **One**
member added that available information suggests
that activity will have shown a decline in early 2021
and that this situation is consistent with the recent
intensification of the pandemic.

**Regarding demand, all members emphasized**
**that the recovery has been driven mostly by the**
**external sector. Most members highlighted the**
**differentiated** **performance** **of** **imports** **and**
**exports, highlighting the positive performance of**
**the latter, particularly manufacturing exports.**
**Some members mentioned that in December these**
grew at a seasonally adjusted annual rate of 8.84%.
**One member noted that the aforementioned**
differentiated performance led to a significant trade
surplus.

**All members highlighted that investment remains**
**weak. Most members underlined that it is at**
**levels below those registered prior to the**
**pandemic. One member pointed out that it has been**
the weakest item of aggregate demand. **Another**
member pointed out that in November it contracted
11.35% in annual terms. **One member noted that**
most of its components remain close to 15% below
the levels prior the pandemic, except for residential
housing construction. **Another member underlined**
that private investment has fallen 25% since 2018,
while public investment has contracted 54% since
2009.


**Most members highlighted that consumption has**
**been recovering gradually, although still lagging**
**considerably with respect to pre-pandemic**
**levels. Some** members added that its sluggish
recovery is still influenced by the unfavorable
conditions in the labor market. One member pointed
out the weakness of consumption despite the high
level of remittances. **Another member stated that**
consumption components have followed a
heterogeneous behavior. He/she mentioned that
consumption of non-durable goods has recovered at
a favorable rate, while consumption of services and
durable goods remains depressed. **One member**
mentioned that consumption can be expected to lose
dynamism in December 2020 and January 2021 and
that it may even decline.

**Regarding supply, most members highlighted**
**the heterogeneous recovery of the different**
**sectors. One member mentioned that, at a sectoral**
level, the primary sector exhibited a favorable
performance in 2020, by growing 2% in annual terms,
while the secondary sector was the one that fell the
most, followed by the tertiary sector. However,
he/she mentioned that secondary activities have
recovered faster than tertiary ones. Another member
stated that, after contracting markedly in April,
industrial production has been recovering, and as of
November has accumulated six months with positive
monthly variations, registering an annual contraction
of 3.25% in said month. He/she added that in
November manufacturing, construction and services
registered annual contractions of 1.16, 7.97 and
4.49%, respectively. He/she emphasized that
services that require physical presence were the
most affected. He/she pointed out that, based on
information as of November, only 12.1% of
productive subsectors have recovered or exceeded
the level of activity registered prior to the pandemic,
while 64.4% of them contracted up to 5% and 23.5%
registered a contraction larger than 5%. **One**
member considered that available information
suggests a new weakening of industrial activity and
services, which reinforces expectations of a slow and
heterogeneous recovery.

**As for the labor market, most members**
**acknowledged that recently its recovery lost**
**dynamism and that an environment of weakness**
**persists. Some** members highlighted that labor
participation, unemployment and underemployment
rates remain deteriorated. **One member mentioned**
that at the end of 2020 there were 19 million
individuals in need of a full-time job, 2.1 million of
which corresponded to open unemployment, 9.4
million were in disguised unemployment, and 7.5

3


-----

million were underemployed. He/she added that,
although the extended unemployment rate has
decreased significantly since April, it was 17.9% in
December, a level above those registered in previous
crises. He/she underlined that the pandemic has
intensified the precarious situation of the labor
market, mainly affecting low-wage earners, women
and young people. He/she mentioned that these
figures point to a significant decline in households’
disposable income, a determining factor in the
difficulty for regaining their consumption levels.
**Another member mentioned that, between February**
and April of 2020, the total employment rate
decreased by 12.5 million jobs. He/she added that,
although it increased by 9.7 million between May and
October, it fell once again by 130,000 jobs between
November and December. Some members pointed
out the impact on formal employment. One member
stated that, in seasonally adjusted terms, at the end
of 2020 IMSS-insured jobs were 786,693 below
those registered in February. **Another member**
argued that, while formal jobs susceptible to social
interaction continue to be highly affected, those that
are more related to external demand have exceeded
their pre-pandemic levels.

**The majority of members noted that the**
**economic recovery will take place at a moderate**
**pace. One member pointed out that this is partly due**
to the new restrictions on mobility. Another member
considered that, given expectations of greater fiscal
stimuli in the United States, external demand is
expected to continue being a significant driver of
Mexico’s economic recovery. **One member stated**
that the recovery will be heterogeneous, with a strong
external sector but with consumption and investment
below pre-pandemic levels. He/she highlighted that
public investment and consumption will be the
components the least capable of supporting the
recovery due to the fiscal restrictions they face.
He/she mentioned that, considering the comparison
base effect, growth expectations for 2021 are
relatively low and suggest a weak recovery of
domestic demand, given expectations that external
demand will continue to exhibit dynamism. He/she
warned about the possibility of observing negative
growth rates once again during the first quarter of the
year due to the return to the red phase of the
lockdown in many states. He/she highlighted that,
even in an optimistic scenario of 6% growth at the
end of 2021, GDP would be 3.0% below its level of
2019.

**Most members pointed out that productive**
**activity continues to operate under ample slack**
**conditions, although some members stated that the**


latter have been reducing. One member added that
the speed at which the output gap has been reducing
appears to have decreased. Some members noted
that although available information suggests a
greater pace of recovery in 2021, ample slack
conditions are anticipated throughout the time frame
in which monetary policy operates.

**The majority of members agreed that an**
**uncertain environment with downward risks to**
**economic activity persists, due mainly to the**
**evolution of the pandemic. One member stated**
that the number of monthly infections and deaths
associated with the pandemic reached a maximum
level in January and that there are no signs that this
pattern will decrease soon. He/she highlighted that it
would take time to achieve the necessary percentage
of vaccination coverage required to return to
normality. He/she added that, given the scarcity of
vaccines and the logistical problems associated with
their distribution, in the best-case scenario the impact
of vaccination would be noticeable towards the end
of the year, which could lead to irreversible damage
for many firms. **Another** member underlined the
importance of considering the possible impact of the
pandemic on the productive apparatus in order to be
able to estimate the effects on potential growth. One
member highlighted as risks to growth: i) the negative
effects on the inputs supply for production; ii) the
volatility of financial markets; iii) the deterioration of
the credit portfolio quality; iv) lower public revenues
that may affect the sovereign risk outlook and the
conditions of access to financial markets; and v)
more elements of uncertainty affecting investment.
**Another member considered that the balance of**
risks for economic activity has improved at the
margin, although it remains biased to the downside.

**_Inflation in Mexico_**

**Most members mentioned that annual headline**
**inflation decreased from 4.09% in October 2020,**
**its highest level in that year, to 3.54% in January**
**2021. Some members stated that the inflation figure**
of 3.15% registered at the end of 2020 was favorable.
**One member mentioned that this represented**
positive behavior as compared to the forecast for the
end of the year that was available some months ago.
He/she added that services and energy prices
contributed significantly to the positive behavior of
headline inflation at the end of 2020. **Another**
member pointed out that inflation has been
marginally above the central bank’s point target. One
member mentioned that inflation figures of the last
months reflect the different pressures and volatility to

4


-----

which inflation has been subject and that said
pressures have been greater within its components.

**The majority of members mentioned that the rise**
**in non-core inflation in January contributed to**
**the** **aforementioned** **increase** **in** **headline**
**inflation. They highlighted the increase in the**
**annual rate of change of energy prices,**
**particularly those of gasoline and LP gas. One**
member pointed out that energy prices were affected
by their international references. However, he/she
added that the Ministry of Finance (SHCP)
announced the implementation of stimuli to contain
the increase in gasoline prices. **Another member**
underlined the decrease in the annual rate of change
of agricultural and livestock products’ prices, mainly
attributed to the greater reductions in fruit and
vegetable prices.

**Most members stated that the pandemic has**
**implied considerable changes in relative prices,**
**exerting upward pressures on merchandise**
**inflation and downward pressures on services**
**inflation. One member mentioned that this change**
in relative prices occurred in an environment of a
significant widening of slack conditions and
exchange rate adjustment at the beginning of the
pandemic. He/she also noted that the gap between
merchandise and services inflation reflects the
nature of the shocks the economy has been subject
to.

**The majority of members mentioned that core**
**inflation increased between December and**
**January. One member stated that the core**
component overall exhibited favorable behavior at
the beginning of the year and that its monthly
increase in January was in line with its historical
average, although its annual comparison continues
to be affected by the increases during the past year
associated with the pandemic. **Another member**
noted that slack conditions have influenced inflation
downwards, mainly in those components that are
more sensitive to the economy’s cyclical position.
Thus, supercore inflation has decreased. He/she
added that the exchange rate adjustment, which was
considerable during the initial phase of the pandemic,
contributed to an increase in the items of core
inflation that are more exposed to exchange rate
fluctuations.

**Some** members underlined that the declines in
services prices have moderated. **One member**
pointed out that an important deceleration is
observed in the prices of services related with arts,
entertainment, recreation, education and tourism
activities. **Some members highlighted the recent**


decreases in the inflation of merchandise prices,
particularly food merchandise. In this regard, **one**
member considered that there are signs pointing to
the stabilization of such prices, which registered
increases close to 7% during the second half of 2020,
but are now starting to reverse such trend. He/she
added that this is partly due to the dissipation of the
excise tax (IEPS, for its acronym in Spanish) on
some high-calorie and alcoholic beverages, as well
as on tobacco. **Some** members stated that supply
and demand shocks stemming from the pandemic
have started to fade. **One member noted that the**
effect of the Buen Fin sales campaign on non-food
merchandise has apparently come to an end, which
confirms its transitory nature.

**Most members highlighted that medium- and**
**long-term inflation expectations remain stable,**
**although above 3%.** **Some** members pointed out
that those for the end of 2021 increased slightly. As
for inflation expectations drawn from market
instruments, **one** member mentioned that the
average of 1-to-10-year expectations is at levels
close to the 3% target. He/she added that such levels
had not been observed since 2013. **Another**
member noted that breakeven inflation and inflation
risk premia implicit in the spreads between nominal
and real market instrument rates has remained
stable. He/she pointed out that the 3-year breakeven
inflation rate is below its historical average. In this
context, **some members considered that inflation**
expectations remain anchored.

**All members mentioned that a transitory increase**
**of headline inflation during the second quarter of**
**the year, associated with the arithmetic effects of**
**the reduction of energy prices last year, is**
**expected to take place. They pointed out that**
**headline and core inflation are anticipated to**
**converge to 3% within the time frame in which**
**monetary policy operates. Some members added**
that core inflation is expected to be around 3% as of
the second half of this year. One member highlighted
that this component would continue to be affected in
the short term by the recomposition of relative prices
within it. Regarding the non-core component, some
members mentioned that its recent increases are
expected to fade. **One member stated that these**
increases are not anticipated to generate
second-round effects. **Another member mentioned**
that although an increase in energy prices was
observed in January, the federal government’s price
policy for these goods will contribute to keep inflation
under control in the following months. One member
noted that the future evolution of core inflation will
respond mainly to the economic cycle conditions.

5


-----

However, he/she considered that non-core inflation
will remain, as always, subject to considerable
fluctuations.

As for upward risks to inflation, **some** members
pointed out the possibility of greater increases in the
international prices of some products, including
energy goods. However, they stated that there are
mitigating factors such as the domestic policy for
gasoline prices. Some members mentioned the risks
of various cost-related pressures for firms. **One**
member highlighted possible episodes of foreign
exchange depreciation. He/she also warned about
the risk of core inflation pressures generated by the
recomposition of spending towards merchandise.
**Another** member added that, since mid-2018, and
despite the ample amount of slack in the economy,
core inflation has exhibited a strong resistance to
decline and that it is too early to assume that the
gradual reversion of changes in the relative prices of
merchandises and services will necessarily lead to
lower inflationary pressures.

As for downward risks to inflation, **some** members
mentioned the possibility of a decline in prices due to
the depth and persistence of slack in the economy,
as well as a foreign exchange rate appreciation. One
member added that said appreciation might be due
to a greater risk appetite by investors or to an
improvement in the perception of Mexico’s fiscal
position. Another member highlighted the effects of
greater social distancing measures and lower
inflationary pressures worldwide. **Some** members
considered that the balance of risks for the projected
trajectory of inflation remains uncertain. **One**
member stated that said balance has remained
stable, despite the increase of inflation in January.

**_Macrofinancial environment_**

**Some members noted that domestic financial**
markets performed favorably, sustaining, and in
some cases, extending the gains registered since
May 2020. **One member stated that this has been**
supported by sound macroeconomic fundamentals.
**Another member considered that domestic financial**
markets exhibited a mixed performance, with
moderate adjustments and trading conditions that
remain deteriorated.

**The majority of members mentioned that the**
**Mexican** **peso** **exhibited** **relatively** **stable**
**behavior.** **One member mentioned that analysts**
expect it to remain at a level of around 20 pesos per
US dollar this year and the next. Regarding the stock
market, **another member noted that its index has**
increased since the last monetary policy decision.


**One member mentioned that so far this year it has**
remained practically unchanged. As for interest rates
on government securities, some members noted that
they have decreased. One member highlighted that
the largest declines have been in medium-term rates
and that the short end of the yield curve has flattened.

**Most members highlighted that the sovereign**
**risk premium has continued to decline. Some**
members added that it is at levels similar to
pre-pandemic levels. **One member considered that**
the decline in global risk aversion has contributed to
the aforementioned. However, he/she stated that
rating agencies have warned about the increase in
idiosyncratic risks. Another member mentioned that
foreign capital inflows to government bonds have
fluctuated, but have remained at an adequate level,
in a context of a lower need for external savings given
the current account surplus. **One member pointed**
out that there has been an increase in the percentage
of holdings of Mexico's sovereign debt in most of the
global funds that invest in the country. **Another**
member considered that although government
securities’ outflows have moderated, they ended the
year at historically high levels of nearly 19 billion US
dollars. He/she added that risks for financial markets
persist and that new episodes of volatility stemming
from trade, geopolitical and financial factors that
could affect the exchange rate cannot be ruled out.
**One member noted that, in addition to the influence**
of the US yield curve as the risk-free curve, financial
conditions of other economies, especially China, are
now added as an alternative destination for capital
flows. **Another member stated that the balance of**
risks for financial markets has remained stable.

Regarding public finances, **some members agreed**
that their situation constitutes a risk factor. **One**
member pointed out that some indicators do not
adequately reflect their risks. He/she added that the
fiscal balance could deteriorate due to: i) lower
economic activity; ii) greater spending pressures
associated with the prolongation of the pandemic; iii)
additional requirements to capitalize Pemex; and iv)
sovereign rating downgrades, all in face of the
depletion of contingency funds. Nevertheless, some
members considered that Mexico's fiscal policy,
unlike other economies, has maintained a
manageable debt level, which is a positive element
for macroeconomic stability. One member noted that
the fiscal position and the favorable performance of
inflation in the last two years reveal the authorities'
commitment to preserve economic fundamentals.
He/she noted that Mexico’s fiscal position has been
favored in relative terms due to the levels of
indebtedness of most countries in 2020, in contrast

6


-----

with those observed in the country. He/she
mentioned that according to structural indicators of
public finances, such as the budgetary balance and
the public debt-to-GDP ratio, Mexico will emerge
from the pandemic in a better condition than other
emerging economies, and even better than countries
with higher credit ratings. However, another member
argued that while efforts to have a responsible fiscal
balance are valuable, it would be desirable to
observe, within the limits of fiscal responsibility, a
budgetary reallocation that would allow for meeting
the contingent needs.

**Most members mentioned that financing to the**
**private sector continued to decline. One member**
noted that this was due to less debt issuance and
lower bank lending. He/she added that delinquency
rates increased, mainly of consumer and business
loans, although they remain at low levels. **Another**
member stated that as of December 2020, consumer
financing contracted by -8.1% in annual terms while
corporate financing did so by -4.3%. He/she
considered it worrisome that credit to SMEs remains
stagnant without showing signs of recovery at the
margin. He/she pointed out that this could be due to
supply factors and to credit terms that apparently
continue to be unattractive. He/she mentioned that
although development banks have implemented
guarantee programs to support credit to firms, a
considerable amount of these stimuli have remained
unallocated. **One member stated that, according to**
Banco de México’s Survey on General Conditions
and Standards in the Banking Credit Market (EnBan,
for its acronym in Spanish), credit approval
expectations for the first quarter of 2021 foresee a
tightening. However, he/she mentioned that interest
rates associated with bank credit have followed the
behavior of the bank funding rate, which influences
the credit conditions for households and firms.
He/she added that domestic sources of financial
resources remained at high levels during the fourth
quarter of 2020. **Another member highlighted the**
predominance of domestic sources of financing over
external ones and the increase in financing to the
public sector.

**One member underlined the need for a firm**
macroeconomic strategy that generates confidence,
promotes an orderly adjustment of the national
economy to the shocks that have affected it, and
fosters the proper functioning of domestic financial
markets and of the financial system. **Another**
member noted that the sluggish behavior of private
investment observed since 2018 mainly responds to
institutional and structural factors. He/she
considered that economic reactivation necessarily


requires actions in the field of the rule of law, legal
certainty, security and the fight against corruption
and impunity. He/she highlighted three events that
have affected investor’s confidence: i) the initiative to
modify Banco de México’s Law. In this regard, he/she
mentioned that although the new measures
announced aim to solve the problems referred to in
this initiative, its risks may not dissipate while its
discussion in the legislative branch continues; ii) the
preferential initiative on the Electricity Sector Law,
which modifies the current contract terms and
cancels the transition to clean energies; and iii) the
suspension of the highway project tenders currently
underway.

**_Monetary policy_**

**Considering that incoming information allows for**
**adjusting the reference rate, while maintaining**
**inflation forecasts in line with the trajectory**
**converging towards the central bank's target, all**
**members agreed to lower the target for the**
**overnight interbank interest rate by 25 basis**
**points to a level of 4.00%. Looking ahead, the**
**majority of members pointed out that monetary**
**policy implementation will depend on the**
**evolution of the factors that have an incidence on**
**headline and core inflation, on their foreseen**
**trajectories, and on their expectations.**

**One** **member** argued that, considering the
magnitude of the supply, demand and financial
shocks related to the pandemic, monetary policy in
emerging economies, such as Mexico's, should
contribute to maintain inflation at low levels around
its target, promote the proper functioning of financial
markets and financial system stability, and contribute
to a sustained economic recovery. He/she pointed
out that in order to achieve this, it is important that
the behavior of interest rates along the yield curve
leads to an orderly adjustment in the different
expenditure items, in domestic financial markets, and
in external capital flows. He/she stated that such
adjustment must consider the relevant external
financial conditions and the behavior of medium- and
long-term domestic risk premia. He/she emphasized
that for emerging economies, such as Mexico's,
which need to complement their domestic savings
with external sources of financing, it is important to
maintain a stable macroeconomic environment in
order to attract and retain capital, as well as to have
the necessary financial conditions for an orderly
adjustment of the economy.

He/she considered that in the context of shocks
associated with the pandemic, exchange rate
depreciation, fiscal pressures and uncertainty

7


-----

regarding sovereign credit ratings, one of the
greatest challenges for monetary policy has been to
allow for an adjustment of relative prices, avoiding a
deterioration of inflation expectations and the price
formation process, as well as second-round effects,
in order to maintain a sustained low and stable
inflation and reduce inflationary risk premia. He/she
pointed out the importance of facilitating a foreign
exchange adjustment so that, after dampening the
significant financial shock, it remained orderly, and
would also lead to a partial reversion of the initial
impact, thus contributing to an adjustment of the
economy under better conditions. He/she argued that
this strategy has allowed for lower interest rates
along the entire yield curve and highlighted that
reductions in long-term interest rates in Mexico
compare favorably with those of other emerging
economies. Finally, he/she pointed out that risks for
inflation, economic activity and financial markets
pose major challenges for monetary policy and the
economy in general.

**Another** **member mentioned that, based on**
available information, the determinants of price
increases in the country are in line with the orderly
and sustained convergence of inflation to its target.
He/she added that medium- and long-term inflation
expectations from Banco de México's latest survey
do not indicate an upward trajectory, while breakeven
inflation and inflation risk implicit in market
instruments have remained stable, which indicates
that inflation expectations remain well-anchored.
He/she pointed out that the pause that took place
allowed for confirming the fading of inflationary
pressures that were present in the middle of last year
as a result of supply-, demand- and financial-related
shocks. He/she pointed out that information available
in January 2021 as well as the future outlook do not
suggest an increasing price dynamic that would lead
to a breach of the price stability mandate. He/she
stated that, therefore, on this occasion, there is a
specific window of opportunity, within the time frame
in which monetary policy operates, that allows for
reducing the intrinsic costs in the financial system
and in economic activity that arise from maintaining
a restrictive monetary policy stance in an economic
scenario with ample slack conditions.

**One member pointed out that the evolution of**
inflation and its expectations, as well as an uncertain
balance of risks, impose challenges for estimating
the future trajectory of inflation and for monetary
policy implementation, and that for this reason it is
crucial to follow a risk management approach that
favors prudence. He/she recalled that the pause was
extended in December to confirm whether inflation,


mainly core inflation, had started following a
downward trend. In this regard, he/she considered
that given that the recent increase in inflation is due
to the non-core subindex, that a more moderate
recovery is expected in the first half of the year, that
the balance of risks for activity continues to be biased
to the downside and that the exchange rate remains
relatively stable, there is some margin of maneuver
to lower the rate without compromising the
convergence of inflation to the target. However,
he/she noted that significant risks persist, such as the
vulnerability of public finances and possible episodes
of volatility, which could affect the peso exchange
rate and have an impact on inflation. Regarding the
exchange rate, he/she considered that factors such
as the sovereign rating downgrade, the electoral
process in June and domestic public policies that
generate uncertainty could exert exchange rate
pressures and impose greater stress on the
monetary policy stance.

He/she pointed out that the limits of monetary policy
must be acknowledged because, although an
accommodative policy stance can help to reactivate
the economy, it is not enough by itself. He/she stated
that under the current circumstances, it is difficult to
assume that an additional monetary policy easing
would result in a significant boost to economic
activity. In this regard, he/she recalled that between
2016 and 2018 the reference rate increased by 500
basis points to a level of 8.25% and it was at that
point when gross private investment reached its
peak, while from that time up to now it has contracted
25% in real terms. He/she added that monetary
policy’s room for maneuver to boost consumption is
limited in the absence of fiscal support to avoid the
closing of companies, job losses and the consequent
decrease in credit to households and firms,
especially SMEs, due to the increase in risk
perception of financial institutions. The monetary
policy implemented by Banco de México, both
through the reference rate and the measures to
provide liquidity and facilitate credit lending, has
contributed to confront the shocks derived from the
pandemic within the scope of its competence.

Finally, he/she emphasized that the present
monetary policy decision does not compromise the
downward trajectory of inflation and pointed out that
in the current environment of high uncertainty, this
decision does not constitute a guide for future
actions. In his/her opinion, the most effective tool to
facilitate the orderly adjustment of the economy to
real shocks is to underpin public confidence in future
monetary policy decisions maintaining price stability
as their priority.

8


-----

**Another member considered that the reduction in**
the reference rate can contribute to strengthen the
economic recovery without jeopardizing the inflation
target. He/she added that this reduction should not
be interpreted as the end of monetary easing, since
several indicators suggest that such easing is still
insufficient. He/she pointed out that Mexico is one of
the few economies in the world with a positive
ex-ante real interest rate. He/she highlighted that in
most central banks in both advanced and emerging
economies lowered their reference rates during 2020
significantly, reaching, in many cases, negative real
rates. He/she pointed out that while the ex-ante real
interest rate in Chile is around -2.5% and in Colombia
it is -1%, in Mexico it is between 0.75% and over 1%,
depending on the measure used to calculate
expected inflation. He/she also mentioned that the
components of aggregate demand that usually
depend on the level of interest rates are those that
currently exhibit the worst performance. He/she
highlighted that i) light vehicle sales contracted 20%
in annual terms; ii) credit card purchases remain 10%
below their expected level; iii) credit to SMEs
contracted 8% in real annual terms; and iv)
investment in November 2020 was in real terms 12%
lower than during the same period of 2019. In this
regard, he/she considered that the need for further
monetary easing is evidenced by the difference in the
recovery rates of domestic demand in relation to
external demand. He/she mentioned that domestic
demand remains weak, while external demand has
recovered rapidly and that this difference is due to
the fact that the former is directly affected by
domestic monetary policy, which still remains
restrictive in relation to the economic conditions,
while the latter is benefited by the fiscal and
monetary stimuli in other economies. He/she
emphasized that the ex-ante real interest rate is
important for investment and consumption decisions.
He/she argued that during a recession, if this rate
does not decrease sufficiently to stimulate aggregate
demand, there is a risk of deepening and prolonging
a fragile economic situation with the consequent
economic and social costs. Finally, he/she
considered that the Governing Board must remain
attentive to a new opportunity to continue the
monetary easing process.

**One member pointed out that further monetary**
easing is still needed to support the economic
recovery. He/she noted that given the lack of fiscal
support, the recessionary situation and the
anticipated slow recovery, monetary easing should
continue although he/she acknowledged that
monetary policy is not the ideal instrument to drive
the recovery. He/she noted that the absolute and


relative monetary policy stances still allow for some
room to lower the reference rate. He/she stated that
the highly accommodative monetary policy
worldwide, lower risk aversion and the low level of
the neutral short-term interest rate favor low
domestic rates. He/she pointed out that the fiscal
stance does not represent a risk for price stability,
since maintaining a conservative stance on public
prices even serves to relieve pressures on inflation.
He/she mentioned that although the fiscal stance has
not been counter-cyclical, there will not be excessive
indebtedness as in other countries, which will
contribute to relieve pressures on the exchange rate
and promote the sound development of financial
markets.

He/she considered that the benefits of a more
accommodative stance are increasingly marginal
and that this could have undesirable consequences
for financial stability. He/she added that one
constraint to credit growth is its weak demand for
investment projects in the face of factors unrelated to
monetary policy, such as the economic slack and the
environment of uncertainty. He/she pointed out that
an excessively loose stance reduces the incentive to
save, the availability of funds for investment and the
profitability of the banking system, which may lead to
a relaxation of credit standards. He/she mentioned
that lowering the reference rate may distort the risk
calibration implicit in the prices of firms' financial
assets by artificially increasing the valuation of those
that are not profitable. He/she also expressed
concern that the reduction in inflation has mostly
been due to the non-core component, rather than the
core component, despite the ample amount of slack
in the economy. He/she pointed out that an increase
in average wages is anticipated, this in the context of
a reduction in corporate profits, and that inflation
expectations are above target, which reflects the risk
of them unanchoring. He/she emphasized that in
view of the foreseen temporary increase in the
trajectory of inflation in the coming months, caution is
required when assessing the convenience of
increasing the pace of monetary easing. He/she
stated that unfortunately the opportunity to intensify
the accommodative policy stance in November and
December was missed, and that there is a last
window of opportunity to implement a greater
monetary policy loosening aimed at mitigating the
effects of the economic recession, before facing a
period that promises to be difficult. He/she
considered that, over the next few months, actions
must be taken cautiously, given that under the
current conditions, monetary policy may be limited
once more, with significant risks for the unanchoring
of inflation expectations and for the central banks

9


-----

credibility. In this context, he/she pointed out that a
pause may become more necessary as time passes
by and that this decision will be the result of a careful
reflection, before the inflation bubble that is
anticipated for the second quarter arises, and in a
scenario in which a lower persistence in inflation
compared to the projected trajectory is not observed.
He/she added that there is now a window of
opportunity for a further monetary easing, which will
help to mitigate the effects of the recession, before
facing a period that will be difficult.

**3. MONETARY POLICY DECISION**

The risks for inflation, economic activity and financial
markets pose major challenges for monetary policy
and for the economy. In this regard, it is necessary to
enable an orderly adjustment that allows for a
change in relative prices, without affecting the price
formation process and inflation expectations.
Considering that incoming information allows for a
monetary policy adjustment, while maintaining
inflation forecasts in line with the converging
trajectory to the 3% target, with the presence of all its
members, the Governing Board decided
unanimously to lower the target for the overnight
interbank interest rate by 25 basis points to a level of


4.00%. Looking ahead, monetary policy
implementation will depend on the evolution of the
factors that have an incidence on headline and core
inflation, on their foreseen trajectories within the
forecast horizon, and on their expectations.

The Governing Board will take the necessary actions
based on incoming information in order for the policy
rate to be consistent with the orderly and sustained
convergence of headline inflation to the 3% target
within the time frame in which monetary policy
operates. It is necessary to safeguard the institutional
framework, strengthen the macroeconomic
fundamentals and adopt the necessary actions on
both monetary and fiscal policy fronts, to enable a
better adjustment of domestic financial markets and
of the economy as a whole.

**4. VOTING**

Alejandro Díaz de León-Carrillo, Galia Borja-Gómez,
Irene Espinosa-Cantellano, Gerardo
Esquivel-Hernández and Jonathan Ernest
Heath-Constable voted in favor of lowering the target
for the overnight interbank interest rate by 25 basis
points to 4.00%.

10


-----

**ANNEX**

The information in this Annex was prepared for this
meeting by the staff of Banco de México’s General
Directorate of Economic Research and General
Directorate of Central Bank Operations. It does not
necessarily reflect the considerations of the
members of the Governing Board as to the monetary
policy decision.

**A.1. External conditions**

**A.1.1. World economic activity**

Available information for the fourth quarter of 2020
suggests that world economic activity continued to
recover, albeit at a more moderate pace than in the
third and with heterogeneity across countries and
sectors. In several countries, economic recovery has
been affected by the resurgence of COVID-19 cases
and the imposition of new lockdown measures, which
have mainly affected the services sector. In contrast,
international trade and global industrial activity
continued to recover. Leading and higher frequency
indicators suggest that in certain countries, economic
activity may continue to remain weak at the
beginning of this year (Chart 1).

Inflation worldwide has reflected the economic
effects generated by the pandemic and the measures
adopted to contain it. In advanced economies,
inflation remains below their respective central
banks’ targets, while in emerging countries it has
shown a more heterogeneous behavior. In this
environment, the authorities have maintained and, in
some cases, even increased or extended, their fiscal
and monetary stimulus measures to mitigate the
adverse effects of the pandemic. Likewise, central
banks reiterated their intention to maintain
accommodative monetary policy stances for an
extended period. The above factors, along with
conditions of ample liquidity stemming from highly
accommodative monetary policies, continued to
contribute to the favorable performance of financial
markets, albeit with some episodes of volatility.

1 In seasonally adjusted annualized quarterly terms, US GDP
grew 33.4% during the third quarter of the year and 4% during
the fourth.


**Chart 1**

**Global: Purchasing Managers’ Index (PMI)**

**Production Component**

Diffusion index, s. a.

60

55

50

45

40

35

Manufacturing

30 Manufacturing (excl. China)

Services

Services (excl. China)

25

December

January

20

2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021

s. a. / Seasonally adjusted figures.
Source: Markit.

In the United States, economic activity continued to
recover during the fourth quarter of 2020, although at
a more moderate pace than in the third, with the
seasonally adjusted quarterly growth rate decreasing
from 7.5% to 1% (Chart 2).[1] Growth during the fourth
quarter reflected mainly the continued rebound of
both business and residential investment, as well as
of inventory accumulation. The expansion of private
consumption decelerated, which may be associated
with the resurgence of COVID-19 cases and the
negative impact of the expiration of some
government support packages on disposable
personal income. Despite the recovery registered
during the second half of 2020, GDP still remains
2.5% below the levels observed prior to the
pandemic.

The pace of expansion of US industrial production
accelerated in December, by growing at a seasonally
adjusted monthly rate of 1.6%, reflecting largely the
growth in electricity and gas generation caused by a
rebound in the demand for heating. Mining continued
to be driven by the increased pace of oil and gas
drilling and extraction, while manufacturing activity
continued to recover gradually. In this context, the
Purchasing Managers’ Index of the manufacturing
sector (PMI) continued to increase in January,
suggesting that this sector would continue growing at
the beginning of 2021.

11


-----

**United States: Real GDP and its Components**

Quarterly percentage change and

contributions in percentage points, s. a.

10

8

6

4

2

0

-2 Private consumption expenditures

Residential investment

-4 Change in private inventories

-6 Net exports

Nonresidential investment

-8 Government consumption expenditures

-10 Total

-12 0

I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV

2016 2017 2018 2019 2020

s. a. / Seasonally adjusted figures.
Source: Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA).

The US labor market recovered at the beginning of
2021, although at a moderate pace. In particular, the
non-farm payroll increased by 49,000 jobs in
January, after registering a fall of 227,000 jobs in
December. This weak recovery of employment was
the consequence of falls in some sectors, such as
transportation and warehousing, manufacturing,
construction, retail sales and accommodation and
food services, given that other activities, such as
professional, financial and retail trade services,
continued to exhibit dynamism in terms of job
creation. The unemployment rate decreased from
6.7% in December to 6.3% in January, due partly to
the lower labor participation rate. As for initial
unemployment insurance claims, after having
increased since the end of November to a level of
927,000 new claims in the week ending on January
9, they decreased once again to 779,000 new claims
in the week ending on January 30.

At the end of December 2020, a new relief package
for an amount of USD 935 billion was approved in the
United States to support its economic recovery. In
January 2021, the new administration also
announced the proposal of a new fiscal stimulus
package for USD 1.9 trillion, which, if approved,
would extend the duration of supplemental
unemployment benefits, increase the amount of
direct payments, and allocate more resources for
fighting the pandemic, among other measures.

2 In seasonally adjusted annualized terms, euro area GDP grew
2.8% during the fourth quarter and 59.9% during the third.

3 In seasonally adjusted annualized terms, UK GDP grew 81.1%
during the third quarter of the year.


In the euro area, economic activity contracted at a
seasonally adjusted quarterly rate of 0.7%, after
having grown 12.4% during the third.[2] A
heterogeneous behavior across euro area countries
and sectors was observed, reflecting differences in
the magnitude of the resurgence of COVID-19
infections and in the containment measures
implemented. As for the labor market, the
unemployment rate remained unchanged at 8.3%
between November and December. The latest
indicators, such as those of consumer confidence
and PMIs, suggest that social distancing measures
will continue to affect economic activity at the
beginning of 2021.

In the United Kingdom, after GDP having grown at a
seasonally adjusted quarterly rate of 16% during the
third quarter of 2020, [3] timely indicators point to a
weakening of economic activity during the fourth
quarter. This weakening would reflect a moderation
in business investment and, to a lower extent, of
public spending, as well as the effects on private
consumption associated with new lockdown
measures in some regions of the country. As for the
labor market, the unemployment rate increased from
4.9% in August-October to 5.0% in SeptemberNovember. In addition, indicators such as the PMI
and others related to mobility suggest a greater
weakening of economic activity at the beginning of
this year. Worth mentioning is the preliminary EU-UK
Trade and Cooperation Agreement (TCA) signed on
December 24, 2020. Despite this agreement, a
memorandum of agreement between both parties
over missing aspects, particularly those regarding
financial services, remains to be reached.

In Japan, available indicators to the fourth quarter
suggest that economic activity moderated after
having expanded at a seasonally adjusted quarterly
rate of 5.3% in the third quarter.[4] Some indicators of
consumption deteriorated starting on December due
to the suspension of tourism subsidy programs and
the reestablishment of new restrictions on
businesses in response to the rise in COVID-19
cases. In contrast, exports and investment
recovered. As for the labor market, the
unemployment rate remained unchanged at 2.9%
between November and December. The state of
emergency announced at the beginning of 2021 is
expected to intensify the weakness of the Japanese
economy during the first quarter of 2021. In this

4 In seasonally adjusted annualized terms, Japan GDP grew
22.9% during the third quarter of the year.

12

|Chart 2 United States: Real GDP and its Components Quarterly percentage change and contributions in percentage points, s. a.|Col2|Col3|Col4|Col5|
|---|---|---|---|---|
|Private consumption expenditures Residential investment Change in private inventories Net exports Nonresidential investment Government consumption expenditures Total|||||
|I II III IV 2016|I II III IV 2017|I II III IV 2018|I II III IV 2019|I II III IV 2020|


-----

regard, PMIs decreased in January, remaining at
contractionary levels.

In emerging economies, available indicators to the
fourth quarter of 2020 suggest that this group of
countries also continued to recover, albeit at a more
moderate and heterogeneous pace across countries
and sectors. In China, GDP accelerated its rate of
growth, from an annual rate of 4.9% during the third
quarter to 6.5% during the fourth. The favorable
performance of that economy has contributed to a
rebound in other Asian emerging economies. In
contrast, the pace of recovery of Latin American
economies moderated, partly reflecting the
reestablishment of mobility restrictions implemented
to face resurgence of COVID-19 infections.

Since México’s previous monetary policy decision,
international commodity prices have shown
increases in general, although some of them
moderate. In particular, oil prices were driven by
Saudi Arabia’s decision to implement an additional
cut in its oil production in February and March 2021,
as well as the recent fall in US crude oil inventories
and the optimism led by expectations of a new fiscal
stimulus package in the United States. Grain prices
have been driven by lower crop yields in the United
States due to the changing climate conditions that
have affected harvest lands. Finally, the increase in
industrial metal prices has moderated due to a lower
dynamism of world economic activity associated with
the reestablishment of lockdown measures in several
countries.

**A.1.2. Monetary policy and international financial**
**markets**

Inflation worldwide continues to be subject to the
economic effects stemming from the pandemic and
the measures implemented to contain it. During the
fourth quarter of 2020, headline inflation in some of
the major advanced economies showed some
stabilization, reflecting the effect of subsidies and tax
cuts that were implemented in some countries, as
well as the persistent weakness of services prices
(Chart 3). Inflation in these economies remains below
their respective central banks’ targets. After having
decreased as a result of the health crisis, inflation
expectations for these economies drawn from
financial instruments have shown a slight recovery
overall, reaching levels above or around those
registered at the beginning of 2020, except for Japan.


**Chart 3**

**Selected Advanced Economies: Headline**

**Inflation**

Annual percentage change

3.5

United States

3.0 Euro area 1/

Japan

2.5 Canada

United Kingdom

2.0

1.5

1.0

0.5

0.0

-0.5

December

-1.0 January

January

-1.5
2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021

1/ Data of January is an estimate.
Source: Bureau of Labor Statistics, Eurostat, Bank of Japan, Statistics
Canada, Office of National Statistics.

While headline inflation remains below pre-pandemic
levels in most emerging economies, it showed a
heterogeneous behavior during the fourth quarter of
2020, with increases and decreases registered in a
similar number of economies. For instance, in some
countries such as Colombia, Hungary and Poland
downward pressures stemming from the pandemic
continued to affect the prices of certain goods and
services. In contrast, in other countries, including
Brazil, Russia and Turkey, inflation has risen due
largely to the increase in food prices, supply shocks,
and the effects of the depreciation of their currencies.

In this environment, the central banks of major
advanced economies maintained their reference
interest rates at historically low levels and continued
to use their balance sheets to preserve favorable
financing conditions and thus support the provision
of credit, promote economic activity, and ensure the
convergence of inflation to their respective long- term
targets. They also reiterated their intention to
maintain accommodative monetary policy stances
for an extended period until inflation reaches their
targets in a sustained manner. In this context,
expectations drawn from market instruments
continue to anticipate that these central banks will
maintain highly accommodative monetary policy
stances (Chart 4).

13


-----

**Chart 4**

**Reference Rates and Implied Trajectories in**

**OIS Curves[1/]**

Percent

2.5% **― US Federal Reserve 2/**

**― Bank of England**
**― Bank of Japan**

2.0% **― Bank of Canada**

**― European Central Bank deposit rate**
**― OIS implicit trajectory 05 Feb 2021**

1.5% **--- OIS implicit trajectory 11 Dec 2020**

1.0%

0.5%

0.0%

-0.5%

End of End of End of

-1.0% 2019 2020 2021

2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022

1/ OIS: Fixed floating interest rate swap where the fixed interest rate is
associated to the effective overnight reference rate.
2/ For the observed reference rate of the U.S. the average interest rate of
the target range of the federal funds target range (0.0% - 0.25%) is used.
Source: Banco de México with data from Bloomberg.

Among the recent monetary policy decisions, the
following stand out:

i) In its January meeting, the Federal Reserve left
unchanged its range for the federal funds rate at 00.25% and reiterated that it will be appropriate to
maintain this range until labor market conditions have
reached levels consistent with its maximum
employment estimate and inflation has increased to 2%
and is on track to moderately exceed this target for
some time. It also stated that it will maintain the current
pace of its asset purchase program at least until
substantial progress has been made in terms of its
maximum employment and price stability objectives. In
this regard, the Federal Reserve Chairman pointed out
in a press conference that it is still early to discuss the
date when the Fed will reduce its asset purchase
program. In this context, with data to February, the
trajectory implied from federal fund futures does not
reflect adjustments to the reference rate between 2021
and 2023.

ii) In its January meeting, the European Central Bank
reaffirmed its highly accommodative monetary policy
stance and maintained its refinancing rate, key deposit
facility rate and key lending facility rate at 0.0, -0.5 and
-0.25%, respectively. It reiterated that these interest
rates are expected to remain at or below their current
levels until inflation forecasts converge robustly to a
level sufficiently close but below the 2% inflation target,
and that this convergence has been consistently
reflected in core inflation dynamics. It also maintained
its asset purchase programs unchanged and pointed
out that, if financial conditions remain favorable, it might
not be necessary to fully use the total amount of its
pandemic emergency purchase program (PEPP)
(€1,850 billion) and that said amount may be


recalibrated to help offset the negative impact of the
pandemic on the trajectory of inflation.

iii) In its January meeting, the Bank of Japan left its shortterm policy interest rate unchanged at      -0.1% and
its long-term interest rate (indexed to its 10-year bond)
at around 0%. It also extended by one year the
deadlines for loan disbursements under the FundProvisioning Measure to Stimulate Bank Lending and
the Fund Provisioning Measure to Support
Strengthening the Foundations for Economic Growth.
As for the revision of its monetary policy framework, the
Governor of that institution reiterated that, although
such central bank considers that the yield curve control
has worked properly and does not require adjustments,
its operations are being reviewed in order to achieve a
more effective and rapid monetary easing.

iv) In its February meeting, the Bank of England kept its
reference interest rate unchanged at 0.10%, the
amount of its asset purchase at £875 billion, and the
stock of sterling non-financial investment-grade

corporate bond purchases at £20 billion. In the minutes
of said meeting, the Monetary Policy Committee
considered that although it does not want to send a
signal about an intention to establish a negative interest
rate sometime in the future, it would be appropriate to
start preparations in the financial system to have the
capacity to operate in an environment of negative
interest rates in the eventuality that this measure is
adopted by that central bank. It also pointed out once
again that it has no intention to tighten its monetary
policy stance at least until there is clear evidence that
significant progress is being made in eliminating the
excess slack in the use of productive capacity and
achieving a 2% inflation target in a sustainable manner.

Since Banco de México’s previous monetary policy
decision, all central banks of the main emerging
economies left their reference interest rates
unchanged, except for Turkey, which increased it.
Likewise, in general, these central banks decided to
maintain measures to provide credit, supply liquidity
and foster the well-functioning of financial markets.

In the context of world economic activity described
above, international financial markets overall
performed favorably, associated with high liquidity
conditions stemming from the accommodative
monetary policy stances implemented in systemically
important economies, the global progress in the
production and application of vaccines against
COVID-19, the conclusion of the US election
process, the approval of a fiscal stimulus package in
the United Sates at the end of 2020, the expectation
of an approval of a significant package of additional
fiscal stimuli proposed by the new US administration,
and the signing of a trade agreement between the
United Kingdom and the European Union at the end
of 2020. However, during the period, there were

14


-----

some episodes of greater volatility and lower risk
appetite due to the increase in the number of COVID19 infections in several countries, the emergence of
strains that are more virulent, the announcement of
new mobility restrictions, and some delays in the
production and distribution of vaccines worldwide. In
this environment, financial assets of advanced
economies registered positive adjustments during
the period. On the one hand, most of the main stock
indices registered gains, while the US dollar had
limited adjustments in foreign exchange markets. On
the other hand, interest rates on long-term
government bonds exhibited moderate increases,
with the case of the United States standing out (Chart
5). As for emerging economies, they registered net
capital inflows, both to fixed-income and equity
assets, although with some volatility. The stock
markets of these economies continued having gains
at the end of 2020, although some falls were
registered in January, while their currencies
registered mixed and differentiated adjustments by
region (Chart 6).

Looking ahead, risks to world economic growth and
to the stability of international financial markets
persist. These risks are associated with the evolution
of the pandemic; delays in the production and
distribution of vaccines; the high levels of public and
private borrowing; problems of business insolvency
and bankruptcies; possible distortions in the
valuation of some financial assets; a worsening of
geopolitical and social conflicts in different regions of
the world; the effects of environmental degradation;
the sufficiency of fiscal stimuli; and the effects on
potential GDP in some economies.


**Chart 5**

**Change in Selected Financial Indicators from**
**December 11, 2020 to February 5, 2021**

Percent, basis points


25%

20%


50


15%

10%


40

30


5%

0%


20

10


0

-10


-5%

-10%


-20

|<-- Stock markets EM 1/ Nikkei (Japan) DAX (Germany) FTSE MIB (Italy) S&P 500 (U.S.) Eurostoxx (Europe) Shanghai (China) CAC 40 (France) IBEX (Spain) FTSE-100 (UK)|<-- Currencies GBP AUD NZD CNY EM Currencies 3/ DXY 2/ CAD EUR CHF JPY|2-year government bond yield --> Spain United Kingdom France Germany Italy Japan United States Canada|10-year government bonds yield --> United Kingdom Canada United States Germany France Spain Japan Italy|
|---|---|---|---|


1/ The MSCI Emerging Markets Index consists of 24 countries. 2/ DXY: a
weighted average estimated by the Intercontinental Exchange (ICE) of the
nominal exchange rate of the main six currencies operated globally with the
following weights: EUR 57.6%, JPY: 13.6%, GBP: 11.9%, CAD: 9.1%, SEK:
4.2%, and CHF: 3.6%. 3/ J.P. Morgan index is constructed with the weighted
average by the nominal exchange rate of emerging economies’ currencies
with the following weights: TRY: 8.3%, RUB: 8.3%, HUF: 8.3%, ZAR: 8.3%,
BRL: 11.1%, MXN: 11.1%, CLP: 11.1%, CNH: 11.1%, INR: 11.1% and
SGD: 11.1%.
Source: Bloomberg and ICE.

**Chart 6**

**Emerging Economies: Financial Assets**
**Performance from December 11, 2020**

Percent, basis points g p


**Equity**
**Region** **Country** **Currencies**
**markets**


**Interest**
**rates 2Y**


**Interest**
**CDS**
**rates 10Y**


**Mexico** **-0.30%** **1.22%** **-18** **-13** **-11**


**Latin**
**America**


**Brazil** **-6.78%** **3.97%** **80** **34** **-5**

**Chile** **-0.38%** **9.55%** **18** **23** **-4**

**Colombia** **-3.25%** **-0.52%** **-42** **4** **4**


**Russia** **-1.89%** **4.96%** **19** **9** **6**


**Emerging**
**Europe**

**Asia**


**Poland** **-1.40%** **3.36%** **8** **21** **-8**

**Turkey** **9.51%** **12.03%** **4** **-22** **-97**

**Czech Republic** **1.74%** **10.03%** **26** **29** **-1**


**India** **0.93%** **11.39%** **65** **67** **1**

**Philippines** **0.05%** **-3.06%** **-2** **25** **1**


**Hungary** **-1.82%** **7.62%** **14** **33** **-1**

**China** **1.40%** **5.53%** **-15** **2** **0**


**Malaysia** **-0.42%** **-6.60%** **-3** **-7** **-1**


**Thailand** **0.00%** **2.28%** **6** **14** **0**


**Indonesia** **0.55%** **4.56%** **48** **8** **6**

**Africa** **South Africa** **1.43%** **9.54%** **12** **-10** **1**


Note: Interest rates correspond to swap rates of two and ten years, except
for Indonesia, Turkey, Colombia and Mexico, where government securities
with said terms are used as a reference.
Source: Bloomberg.

15


-----

**A.2. Current situation of the Mexican economy**

**A.2.1. Mexican markets**

Since Banco de México’s previous monetary policy
decision to date, the prices of financial assets in
Mexico traded in a narrow range (Chart **7).This**
occurred in an environment in which there are still
concerns at the global level regarding the increase in
COVID-19 cases, the rate of vaccine production,
distribution and application, and in which
expectations of developed economies’ central banks
maintaining an accommodative monetary policy
stance for an extended period persist.

The Mexican peso fluctuated in a range between
19.60 and 20.60 pesos per dollar, ending the period
with a depreciation of 0.60% (Chart 8). This occurred
in a context in which both spot and forward trading
conditions deteriorated with respect to the period of
the previous monetary policy decision, although they
improved relative to the levels observed in March
2020.

**Chart 7**

**Mexican Markets’ Performance**

Percent, MXN/USD and index


2020 2021

Source: Prepared by Banco de México.

Interest rates of government securities exhibited
reductions in all terms, the most notable of which
were in the short- and medium-term part of the yield
curve (Chart 9). As a result, the 3 year – 30 year
spread increased by 22 basis points. The yield curve
of real rate instruments exhibited a similar dynamic,
albeit one of a greater magnitude than that observed
in nominal rates. In this context, breakeven inflation
and inflation risk premia implicit in the spreads
between nominal and real market instruments have
registered important increases since December’s
monetary policy decision (Chart 10). Such
adjustments took place in an environment where
trading conditions improved with respect to those
observed in the period of the previous monetary
policy decision.


**Chart 8**

**Mexican Peso Exchange Rate**
**with Moving Averages**

MXN/USD


25.50
25.00
24.50
24.00
23.50
23.00
22.50
22.00
21.50
21.00
20.50
20.00
19.50
19.00
18.50
18.00
17.50
17.00


10.0

9.0

8.0

7.0

6.0

5.0

4.0


26.0

25.0

24.0

23.0

22.0

21.0

20.0

19.0

18.0


48,000

46,000

44,000

42,000

40,000

38,000

36,000

34,000

32,000


M Bond


4.5

4.0

3.5

3.0

2.5

2.0

1.5

1.0

0.5

0.0

Inflation indexed bonds


Range in year Range since last monetary policy decision Dec-11-20 Feb-04-21

Source: Prepared by Banco de México.


**Chart 9**

**Nominal Yield Curve of Government Securities**

Percent, basis points

7.50 0

7.00 -10

6.50

-20

6.00

-30

5.50

-40

5.00

4.50 -50

4.00 -60

Dec-11th 2020 Feb-4th 2021 Change (Dec-11th 2020 to Feb-4th 2021)

Source: PIP.


Range in year Range since last monetary policy decision Dec-11-20 Feb-04-21


16


-----

**Chart 10**

**Breakeven Inflation and Inflation Risk Implicit in**
**Government Securities’ Interest Rate Curves**

Basis points

500

475

450

425

400

375

350

325

300

3Y

275 10Y

250 30Y

225 3Y average

10Y average

200

30Y average

175

150

J         M        S        J        M         S        J

2019                             2020        2021

Source: PIP.

As to expectations regarding the trajectory of the
monetary policy rate, information implied by the
Interbank Equilibrium Interest Rate swaps curve
(TIIE, for its Spanish acronym) discounts with a 64%
probability that the target rate will decrease by 25
basis points for the monetary policy decision of
February (Chart 11). In a related manner, the
consensus of forecasters surveyed by Citibanamex
expect the reference interest rate to lie at 4.00%. For
the end of 2021, market variables anticipate a level
of 3.80% for the target rate, while the median of the
aforementioned survey among forecasters lies at
3.75%.

5 Refers to the value of merchandise exports in current US
dollars. This value differs from that reported for goods exports by
Mexico’s System of National Accounts (SCNM, for its Spanish


**Chart 11**

**Banxico’s Overnight Interbank Rate Implied in**
**TIIE IRS Curve**

Percent

8.50
8.25
8.00
7.75
7.50
7.25
7.00
6.75
6.50
6.25
6.00
5.75
5.50
5.25 Banxico overnight rate
5.00 (reference rate)
4.75 Latest figure (04/02/2021)
4.50
4.25
4.00 Previous monetary policy
3.75 decision (17/12/2020)
3.50

J   M M   S   N   F   M   J   O   D   M   J   A   N

2019                   2020                  2021

Source: Prepared by Banco de México with Bloomberg data.

**A.2.2. Economic activity in Mexico**

According to Mexico’s GDP flash estimate published
by INEGI, during the fourth quarter of 2020,
economic activity continued to recover, although at a
more moderate rate than in the third quarter and
remaining below pre-pandemic levels (Chart 12).
Economic activity is estimated to have weakened at
the end of 2020, due to the intensification of the
pandemic and of new restrictions on production and
mobility implemented by different states in order to
deal with it.

As for external demand, after having recovered
considerably during the third quarter, during the
October-December period exports continued to
perform favorably, registering at the end of 2020
figures above those of February. This recovery
derived from the dynamism of both automotive
exports and the rest of manufacturing exports, mainly
to the United States (Chart 13).[5]

acronym), given that the latter represents the value added,
measured in constant pesos.

17


-----

16

12

8

4

0


-4

-8

-12

-16

-20


**Chart 12**

**Gross Domestic Product**

Quarterly percentage change, s. a.

Q-IV 1/
I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV
2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020


s. a. / Seasonally adjusted figures.
1/ Data for the fourth quarter 2020 refers to the quarterly GDP flash
estimate published by INEGI.
Source: Mexico’s System of National Accounts (SCNM, for its Spanish
acronym), INEGI.

**Chart 13**

**Total Manufacturing Exports**


during the second half of 2020, while during the same
period light vehicle sales exhibited a lack of
dynamism. In November, gross fixed investment
continued to slowly recover, although still remaining
significantly below the levels reported at the
beginning of 2020. Within this indicator, both
investment in construction and spending on
machinery and equipment continued to gradually
recover.

As for production, in November 2020 productive
activity continued to follow a moderate recovery,
although at a slower rate and still remaining below
pre-pandemic levels (Chart 14). In particular, tertiary
activities continued to gradually improve, albeit
heterogeneously across its sectors. Increases in
transportation services and mass media information;
in trade; and in temporary accommodation and in
food and beverage services stood out. In contrast,
educational, health care and professional, corporate
and business support services decreased. The
performance of industrial activity was associated with
the moderate recovery of construction, while the
growth rate of mining and, mainly, manufacturing,
decelerated considerably (Chart 15).

**Chart 14**

**Economic Activity Indicators**


Indexes 2013 = 100, s. a.


150

140

130

120

110

100

90

80

70

60


Indexes 2013 = 100, s. a.


December

50

J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O
2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020

s. a. / Seasonally adjusted series and trend series based on data in nominal
US dollars. The former is represented by a solid line and the latter by a
dotted line.
Source: Prepared by Banco de México with data from the Tax
Administration Service (SAT, for its Spanish acronym), the Ministry of the
Economy (SE, for its Spanish acronym), Banco de México, the National
Institute of Statistics and Geography (INEGI, for its Spanish acronym).
Mexico’s Merchandise Trade Balance, and the National System of
Statistical and Geographical Information (SNIEG, for its Spanish acronym).

According to its monthly indicator, private
consumption continued to recover gradually in
November 2020. Within its components, the item of
imported goods and services rebounded
significantly, while that of domestic goods and
services continued to recover slowly. Timely
indicators suggest that this indicator weakened by
the end of 2020 and in early 2021. In particular, in
December and January, sales reported by the
National Association of Self-Service and Department
Stores (ANTAD, for its Spanish acronym) contracted
significantly, reversing most of the recovery observed


120

115

110

105

100

95

90

85

80

75


s. a. / Seasonally adjusted and trend series. The former is represented by a
solid line and the latter by a dotted line.
Source: Mexico’s System of National Accounts (SCNM, for its Spanish
acronym), INEGI.

18


70

J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O N
2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020


140

130

120

110

100

90

80

70

60

50

40


-----

**Chart 15**

**Industrial Activity Indicators [1/]**

Indexes 2013 = 100, s. a.

130

120

110

100

90

80 Total

Mining (22.3%)

70 Manufacturing (49.7%)

Construction (23.3%)

60

Utilities (4.7%)
November

50

J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O N
2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020

s. a. / Seasonally adjusted and trend series. The former is represented by a
solid line and the latter by a dotted line.
1/ Figures in parenthesis correspond to their share in the total in 2013.
Source: Mexico’s System of National Accounts (SCNM, for its Spanish
acronym), INEGI.

As to the economy’s cyclical position, slack
conditions narrowed gradually in October and
November, and they are anticipated to have shown a
slight reversal in December, remaining considerably
wide (Chart 16). In November and December,
different labor market indicators stalled the moderate
recovery observed during the previous months.
Although both national and urban unemployment
rates continued to decline (Chart 17), they did so in
a context in which labor participation and employed
population decreased for two consecutive months. In
addition, the population out of the labor force that is
available for work increased. The creation of IMSSinsured jobs continued to gradually recover,
registering in late 2020 levels significantly below
those of February, in seasonally adjusted terms.
Finally, in November unit labor costs in the
manufacturing sector were slightly above the level
registered prior to the health emergency (Chart 18).


**Chart 16**

**Output Gap Estimates [1/]**

**Excluding Oil Industry [4/ ]**

Potential output percentages, s. a.

8

4

0

-4

-8

-12

-16

Global Economic Activity Indicator (IGAE) 2/

-20 Gross Domestic Product 2/

-24 95% Confidence interval 3/

Q-IV

December

-28

J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M SD
2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020

s. a. / Calculations based on seasonally adjusted figures.
1/ Output gap estimated with a tail-corrected Hodrick-Prescott filter; see
Banco de México (2009), “Inflation Report, April-June 2009”, pág.74.
2/ GDP flash estimate figure as of the fourth quarter of 2020; IGAE figures
as of December 2020; consistent with the flash estimate.
3/ Output gap confidence interval calculated with a method of unobserved
components.
4/ Excludes both oil and gas extraction, support services for mining, and
petroleum and coal products’ manufacturing.
Source: Prepared by Banco de México with INEGI data.

**Chart 17**

**National Unemployment Rate**

Percent of EAP, n. s. a.

6.0

5.5

5.0

4.5

4.0

3.5

3.0

December

2.5
J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O D
2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020

n. s. a. / Not seasonally adjusted (original series).
EAP/ Economically active population.
Source: Prepared by Banco de México with data from ENOE, ETOE (from
April to June 2020), and ENOE new edition (ENOE[N]) from July to date.

19


-----

**Chart 18**

**Productivity and Unit Labor Cost in the**
**Manufacturing Sector [1/]**

Indexes 2013 = 100, s. a.

170

Unit labor costs

160

Productivity

150

140

130

120

110

100

90

November

80

J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J ON
2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020

s. a. / Seasonally adjusted and trend series. The former is represented by a
solid line and the latter by a dotted line.
1/ Productivity based on hours worked.
Source: Prepared by Banco de México with seasonally adjusted data of teh
Montly Manufacturing Industry Survey and industrial activity indicators of
Mexico’s System of National Accounts (Sistema de Cuentas Nacionales de
_México,SCNM, INEGI._

In December 2020, domestic financing to firms
contracted at an annual rate for the seventh
consecutive month, extending the loss of dynamism
that had been observed since May 2020. This was
mainly due to a reduction in bank lending both to
smaller firms –segment that decreased in annual
terms since the first quarter of 2019–, and to large
firms –segment that during the fourth quarter of the
year continued to show weakness in its demand for
this type of financing vis-à-vis pre-pandemic levels–.
Similarly, lending conditions remain tight for the two
segments of firms as compared to the beginning of
the pandemic. At the same time, corporate debt
issuance by issuing firms has decreased since
October, after the greater dynamism observed during
the third quarter. As to credit to households, for the
second consecutive quarter the housing portfolio
continued to rebound, due to an increase in
mortgage lending. Performing bank credit portfolio
for consumption continued contracting in all
segments, except for payroll loans, in a context in
which credit granting conditions to households
remain generally tight. Interest rates of bank credit to
firms have generally followed the dynamics of the
bank funding rate. Similarly, while the margins of
intermediation remain at levels above those
observed prior to the pandemic, at the margin these
have shown an incipient trend to decrease. In
November, interest rates of mortgages continued
following the downward trend observed during 2020,
while those of credit cards remained stable in
October, just as it had been the case throughout the
year. As to portfolio quality, corporate and mortgage


loan delinquency rates showed an incipient increase,
despite remaining at low levels, while those for
consumption remained at high levels and increased
for the third consecutive month, after having declined
during the previous months.

**A.2.3. Development of inflation and inflation**
**outlook**

Between November 2020 and January 2021, annual
headline inflation went from 3.33 to 3.54%. This
result is explained by an increase of close to 12 basis
points in the contribution of the core component and
of nearly 8 basis points in the contribution of the noncore index (Chart 19 and Table 1).

**Chart 19**

**Consumer Price Index**

Annual percentage change

13

12 CPI

11 Core

10

Non-core

9

8

7

6

5

4

3

2

1

0

-1

-2

-3 January

J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J
2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021

Source: Prepared by Banco de México and INEGI data.

Core inflation continued to be affected by the shocks
stemming from the COVID-19 pandemic and which
have been reflected in an adjustment in relative
prices, with upward pressures on merchandise
inflation and downward pressures on services
inflation. Specifically, between November 2020 and
January 2021, annual core inflation increased from
3.66 to 3.84%. Within it, annual inflation of
merchandise prices rose from 4.99 to 5.41% (Chart
20), driven by the behavior of annual non-food
merchandise inflation. During the reference period,
the latter went from 3.06 to 4.37%, although in
November it exhibited volatility associated to the El
_Buen Fin sales campaign. In contrast, annual_
inflation of food merchandise decreased from 6.79 to
6.36% between November 2020 and January 2021,
partly as a result of the fading out of the effects of the
increase in the excise tax (IEPS, for its Spanish
acronym) on cigarettes and sugary drinks at the
beginning of 2020 (Chart 21). Annual inflation of
services has generally followed a downward trend,
by registering levels of 2.22 and 2.13% during the

20

|Chart 19 Consumer Price Index Annual percentage change|Col2|Col3|Col4|
|---|---|---|---|
|CPI||||
|||||
|Core||||
|Non-core||||
|||||
|||||
|||||
|||||
|||||
|||||
|||||
|||||
|||||
|||||
|||||
|||||


-----

referred period, in response to the effects of the
measures adopted to contain the COVID-19
pandemic and to the related decline in the demand
for many of these services, such as housing,
education, food, and tourism.

**Chart 20**

**Merchandise and Services Core Price Sub-index**

Annual percentage change

7

Merchandise

6 Services

5

4

3

2

1

January

0

J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J
2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021

Source: Banco de México and INEGI.

**Chart 21**

**Merchandise Core Price Sub-index**

Annual percentage change

8

7

6

5

4

3

2

1

Food, beverages and tobacco Non-food merchandise January

0

J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J
2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021

Source: Prepared by Banco de México with INEGI data.

Annual non-core inflation rose from 2.33 to 2.63%
between November 2020 and January 2021 (Chart
22 and Table 1). This mainly reflected the higher
annual changes in energy prices, from -3.05 to
2.66% during this period, and which offset the
observed fall in inflation of fruits and vegetables.


**Chart 22**

**Non-core Price Sub-index**

Annual percentage change

20

15

10

5

0

-5 Non-core

Agricultural and livestock products

Energy and government-authorized prices

-10

-15 January

J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J
2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021

Source: Prepared by Banco de México with INEGI data.

As for inflation expectations drawn from Banco de
México’s Survey of Private Sector Forecasters,
between December and January, the medians for
headline and core inflation for the end of 2021
increased from 3.60 to 3.66%, and from 3.50 to
3.57%, respectively. The medians for headline and
core inflation for the medium and long terms
remained around 3.50%. Finally, breakeven inflation
and inflation risk increased since the previous
monetary policy decision.

Regarding the expected trajectory of headline
inflation, increases in headline inflation are
anticipated during the second quarter of the year,
mainly associated with the arithmetic effects of the
fall in energy prices of last year, and a downward
trajectory starting in the second half of the year.
Similarly, core inflation is expected to be around 3%
as of the third quarter of this year. These forecasts
are subject to short- and medium-term risks. To the
downside: i) a greater-than-expected effect due to
the negative output gap or to greater social
distancing measures; ii) lower inflationary pressures
worldwide; and iii) foreign exchange appreciation. To
the upside: i) core inflation pressures generated by
the recomposition of spending; ii) episodes of foreign
exchange depreciation; and iii) various cost-related
pressures for firms. The balance of risks for the
projected trajectory of inflation is uncertain.

21


-----

**Table 1**

**Consumer Price Index and Components**

Annual percentage change

**Item** **November 2020** **December 2020** **January 2021**

**CPI** **3.33** **3.15** **3.54**

**Core** **3.66** **3.80** **3.84**

**Merchandise** **4.99** **5.52** **5.41**
Food, beverages and tobacco 6.79 6.80 6.36
Non-food merchandise 3.06 4.14 4.37

**Services** **2.22** **1.95** **2.13**
Housing 2.09 2.00 1.94
Education (tuitions) 2.11 2.11 1.59
Other services 2.37 1.87 2.42

**Non-core** **2.33** **1.18** **2.63**

**Agricultural and livestock products** **7.20** **3.96** **2.64**

Fruits and vegetables 9.50 0.10 -3.89

Livestock products 5.32 7.20 8.42

**Energy and government-authorized prices** **-1.13** **-0.81** **2.62**

Energy products -3.05 -2.53 2.66

Government-authorized prices 3.46 3.31 2.54

Source:INEGI.

22


-----

-----

-----

