-----

-----

**FOREWARNING**
This document is provided for the reader’s convenience
only. The translation from the official Spanish version was
made by Banco de México’s staff. Discrepancies may arise
between the original document in Spanish and its English
translation. For this reason, the original Spanish version is
the only official document.


**1. PLACE, DATE, AND PARTICIPANTS**

**1.1. Place: Meeting held by virtual means.**

**1.2. Date of Governing Board meeting: August 11,**
2021.

**1.3. Participants:**

Alejandro Díaz de León, Governor.
Galia Borja, Deputy Governor.
Irene Espinosa, Deputy Governor.
Gerardo Esquivel, Deputy Governor.
Jonathan Heath, Deputy Governor.
Rogelio Ramírez, Secretary of Finance and Public
Credit.
Gabriel Yorio, Undersecretary of Finance and Public
Credit.
Elías Villanueva, Secretary of the Governing Board.

Prior to this meeting, preliminary work by Banco de
México’s staff analyzing the economic and financial
environment as well as the developments in inflation
and the determinants and outlook for inflation, was
conducted and presented to the Governing Board
(see Annex).

**2. ANALYSIS AND RATIONALE BEHIND THE**
**GOVERNING BOARD’S VOTING**

**_International environment_**

**All members mentioned that global economic**
**activity continued to recover, and the majority**
**pointed out the heterogeneity across countries,**
**associated** **with** **vaccine** **availability,** **the**

**evolution** **of** **the** **pandemic,** **and** **stimulus**

**spending. One** member stated that leading
indicators suggest a moderation of the growth rate.
He/she considered that the recovery should be taken
with caution and added that the IMF announced a
Special Drawing Rights (SDR) allocation of USD 650
billion to member states. **Another** member

underlined that the recovery is still incomplete,


indicating that employment figures remain, overall,
below pre-pandemic levels.

**Some members mentioned that the global economy**
is expected to grow in 2021 at the highest rate in the
last five decades. They underlined that growth
expectations for advanced economies have adjusted
upwards while, in the case of emerging economies,
they have been adjusted downwards, as a result of
differences in the evolution of the pandemic and in
the available space to provide stimulus spending.
**One member highlighted the large fiscal stimulus**
approved in the United States. Among risks to the
**global economy, most members pointed out**
**those associated with the spread of the Delta**
**variant.** **One member mentioned that less developed**
economies, or more labor-intensive ones, are still the
most vulnerable. Among short-term risks, he/she
mentioned a possible abrupt termination of the
monetary stimuli because of persistent inflation
increases and the subsequent tightening in

international financial conditions, in addition to credit
risks derived from high levels of government and
corporate indebtedness.

**All members mentioned that global inflation**
**continued** **increasing,** **and** **most** **members**

**highlighted that, in various economies, inflation**
**is already above the targets of their respective**
**central banks. Some members stressed that, in the**
United States, annual inflation is above 5%. **One**
member stated that inflation expectations for this
economy have increased and that the 10-year
breakeven inflation rate exceeds the 2% target.

**Among the factors that are affecting global**
**inflation,** **most** **members** **emphasized** **the**

**pressures on commodity prices, the shortage of**
**inputs, logistical problems and the temporary**
**mismatch between supply and demand which**
**has affected production chains. Some** members
added also the reactivation of the world economy and
stimulus spending. **One member mentioned labor**
market distortions and **another one climate-related**
factors, such as droughts. **Some** members

highlighted that international organizations, central
banks, and analysts agree that the factors that are
affecting inflation are of a transitory nature. **One**
member stated that medium- and long-term inflation
expectations remain anchored, which implies that
pressures are anticipated to be transitory. **Another**
member added as evidence that inflationary
pressures are transitory, the fact that labor market

1


-----

dynamics remain below pre-pandemic levels and the
fall in the labor participation rate. He/she considered
that the factors that exert pressure on inflation cannot
operate indefinitely and stand in contrast with
structural inflation determinants, such as

globalization and technological change. He/she
added that most monetary authorities at the
international level have opted for communicating the
nature of inflationary pressures and their monetary
policy outlook, to contribute to the formation of
expectations conducive to the gradual convergence
of inflation during the following year. **One member**
argued that, insofar as the process of economic
normalization progresses, an increase in the global
production of materials and inputs, a reestablishment
of global value chains, and a decline in price
pressures is anticipated. **Another** member pointed
out that the global economy shifted from a sudden
closure of activities, which caused businesses to
reduce production capacity, to a scenario of vigorous
spending expansion, with an irregular recovery and
with significant disruptions in production. He/she
underlined the recent slowdown in industrial
production, especially in the manufacturing sectors
that have very extended supply chains, which has
propitiated multiple bottlenecks in production and
adverse effects on prices. He/she added that the
disruptions caused by the pandemic differ greatly
from those observed in other crises, making it more
difficult to identify their short- and medium-term
effects. He/she mentioned that projections for
economic activity, inflation and delinquency rates
have not captured the effects of the pandemic and
the challenges of the current juncture adequately.

**Most members highlighted that central banks in**
**advanced economies maintained their monetary**
**stimulus.** **Some** members stated that

accommodative policy stances reflect the fact that
these institutions consider pressures on prices to be
transitory in nature. **Most members emphasized**
**that** **the** **Federal** **Reserve** **maintains** **an**

**accommodative policy stance, but with the**
**possibility of decreasing its asset purchases in**
**the near future. One** member highlighted that this
institution announced that it would maintain its
stimulus until greater progress is made in achieving
its mandates. He/she added that, in view of the
various statements of its members, and given an
environment of high uncertainty, financial markets
anticipate that the Federal Reserve will announce a
decrease in its asset purchase program this year and


that it will begin increasing interest rates in 2022 and
2023. **Another member highlighted the strong**
decline in expectations for the federal funds rate for
the end of 2024, which has affected long-term rates
in advanced economies. He/she delved into the fact
that the effective, sustained, and coherent

communication strategy followed by the Federal
Reserve has contributed to the assimilation of its new
monetary policy strategy’s highly accommodative
tone by market participants, allowing news about the
asset purchase program to have a limited impact on
financial markets. **Some members noted the**
importance of monitoring the Federal Reserve’s
decisions. **One member emphasized that it is**
necessary to adequately anticipate the evolution of
the balance between the Fed’s goal of not inhibiting
the recovery of the economy and of the labor market,
and the need to respond to inflationary pressures
unseen in decades, along with the difficulties in
managing its balance sheet, which could affect the
early withdrawal of its monetary stimulus. **Some**
members added that the European Central Bank
announced a symmetric inflation target, indicating
that it could remain above 2% for some time. **One**
member pointed out that this new monetary policy
paradigm adopted by both the Federal Reserve and
the European Central Bank will allow interest rates in
advanced economies to remain at low levels for a
longer period. Another member stated that, despite
the central banks’ commitment in advanced
economies, except Canada, to maintain

accommodative monetary policy stances for a long
period, the higher levels of inflation have raised
concerns among analysts regarding the possibility
that they would transition to a tighter policy stance
earlier than expected. **Some members pointed out**
that those advanced economies that previously and
during the pandemic registered inflation levels below
their central banks’ targets, have more room for
maneuver and more time to begin withdrawing their
stimuli. One member pointed out that, in the United
States, this responds to structural factors, including
demographic ones, which have contributed to reduce
inflation, potential growth and the neutral interest
rate, allowing for more patience in withdrawing the
monetary stimulus. He/she added that in that
economy, the atypically high levels of economic
growth are also expected to be transitory, which has
kept real interest rates at low and even negative
levels throughout the entire yield curve. **Another**
member argued that economies that registered
inflation levels consistently above their targets during

2


-----

the health crisis, face greater restrictions and must
act rapidly and decisively to attain the convergence
of inflation to its target and to preserve their
credibility. **One member mentioned that this**
environment of gradual adjustment, and of a
heterogeneous economic recovery with higher
inflationary pressures, implies considerable

challenges and risks that reduce the room for
maneuver of fiscal and monetary policies in emerging
economies. He/she pointed out that it is necessary to
enable an orderly adjustment and to avoid both
contaminating the price formation process as well as
abrupt adjustments in portfolios and capital outflows.

**Some** members pointed out that several central
banks of emerging economies have reduced their
monetary stimulus. One member highlighted that the
monetary authorities of these economies have
modified their narrative, acknowledging that

inflationary pressures could be more severe and less
transitory than anticipated, and that some authorities
have even acted, or expect to do so, in order to avoid
an impact on the price formation process. **Another**
member stated that most central banks in emerging
economies maintain highly accommodative policy
stances and negative real interest rates. He/she
mentioned that, although in most of these economies
limited increases in interest rates are expected in the
next 12 months, for most of them those adjustments
will not substantially modify their accommodative
policy stances. He/she added that, in 13 out of 16
emerging economies analyzed, interest rates for the
next 12 months are expected to be equal or below
the current interest rate level in Mexico, and that only
Brazil and Russia, which face idiosyncratic problems,
have interest rates higher than in Mexico. **One**
member underlined that in a broad sample of
emerging economies, Mexico maintains one of the
greatest deviations in headline and core inflation with
respect to its target.

**As for international financial markets, most**
**members mentioned that the yield curves of**
**government securities flattened, particularly in**
**the United States. Some members pointed out that**
the main stock indices registered increases and that,
in some cases, they reached historic highs. **One**
member stated that the US dollar appreciated
slightly. He/she noted that financial markets in
emerging economies registered adjustments with a
negative bias, capital flows to equity assets were
moderate and mixed, and fixed income assets
registered moderate inflows, mainly to China. He/she
added that the preference for China’s assets will
continue posing a major challenge for the rest of


emerging economies. Another member pointed out
that for these economies the global environment
implies taking advantage of the benefits of the
dynamism of external demand, as well as facing the
challenges of greater global inflationary pressures, of
possible volatility episodes, and tighter financial
conditions. He/she added that this is accompanied by
idiosyncratic risks in these economies, which have
increased after the pandemic. He/she stated that all
of the above represents a challenge to attract and
retain capital, as well as to enable an orderly
adjustment of the exchange rate market and the yield
curve. He/she underlined that it is essential for these
economies to maintain a solid macroeconomic policy
stance and for monetary policy to contribute to keep
inflation around its target and to contain risk premia
increases in the yield curve.

**_Economic activity in Mexico_**

**All members highlighted that the recovery of the**
**Mexican economy continued during the second**
**quarter. One member pointed out that this has been**
driven by the services sector as the vaccination
process has progressed. The majority pointed out
**that** **the** **recovery** **remains** **weak** **and**

**heterogeneous across sectors. One member said**
that the health crisis is once again complicated and
highlighted that the latest data suggests a slowdown
in June. **Another member added that the economy**
is 2.4% below its pre-pandemic levels.

**On the demand side, the majority agreed that**
**consumption continued to recover moderately.**
**One member** noted a certain improvement in
consumer confidence and the favorable behavior of
remittances. **Another member said that there is a**
significant lag in the consumption of domestic
services. **Most** **members** **highlighted** **the**

**weakness of investment during the second**
**quarter,** although **one member considered that it**
continued to recover moderately. **Another member**
pointed out that, in May, fixed investment was 15%
below the highest level reached in previous years.
**Regarding the external sector, most members**
**highlighted the slowdown in exports, particularly**
**manufacturing exports. One member attributed**
this to problems related to the supply of key inputs,
such as semiconductors. **Another member noted**
that manufacturing exports registered a slight
increase with respect to the previous quarter, as a
result of price increases. **One member stated that**
manufacturing exports are expected to continue
benefiting from the recovery of external demand.

3


-----

**On the supply side, most members highlighted**
**the heterogeneity across sectors, reflected in a**
**reactivation of tertiary activities and a weakness**
**of secondary activities.** In this regard, **some**
members pointed out that industrial production was
affected negatively by the shortage of several inputs,
mainly in sectors integrated into global chains. One
member underlined the good performance of
accommodation and transportation services.

**Most members agreed that the labor market**
**continues to recover. However, they considered**
**that** **the** **employment** **reactivation** **is** **still**

**incomplete and that the labor market faces**
**significant challenges. One member noted that the**
total number of unemployed, underemployed and
inactive people as a percentage of the potential
Economically Active Population (PEA, for its Spanish
acronym) is 26.3%, a level comparable to that
observed during the 2009 financial crisis. **Another**
member added that, in June, the labor market
registered the same alternative open unemployment
rate level than in May, which is above pre-pandemic
levels. **One** member pointed out that the

underemployment rate is over 12%, almost twice the
level recorded in normal times. **Another member**
mentioned that as of June, formal and informal
employment was 700 thousand people below, and
IMSS-insured workers were 400 thousand people
below, their pre-pandemic levels. **One member**
emphasized that the extent of the unemployment gap
is still considerable, so it is important to keep in mind
that labor market recovery could take longer in view
of an eventual increase in infections. Some members
added that gender-disaggregated data reinforce the
view of an uneven recovery.

**All members agreed that slack conditions are**
**anticipated. In this regard, most of them**
**highlighted the marked differences across**
**sectors. Some members mentioned that, given the**
progress in economic activity, slack conditions
continued tightening during the second quarter.
**Some members underlined that they still remain**
ample. **One member stated that the output gap**
remains at 4%. He/she added that the economic
recovery is still incomplete, which is evident when
observing levels of slack in different sectors of the
Global Economic Activity Indicator (IGAE, for its
Spanish acronym). **Some members highlighted the**
difficulty of estimating slack in light of the adverse
effects on productive capacity. **One member**
considered that slack is not likely to be as ample
because business closures and operating

restrictions imply a lower potential production
capacity.


**Most members highlighted that the economic**
**recovery is expected to continue for the rest of**
**the year. One** member underlined that, given the
advance in the vaccination process and the boost
from external demand, growth forecasts for 2021 are
expected to increase. Another member pointed out
that consumer confidence, the wage bill, light vehicle
sales, and sales reported by the National Retailers
Association of Mexico (ANTAD, for its Spanish
acronym) have started to decelerate, which could
indicate a moderation in growth in the second half of
2021. He/she stated that the impact of disruptions on
the industrial sector could affect GDP by more than
one percentage point if these problems persist until
the end of the year. One member emphasized that it
is necessary to be attentive of the recovery
maintaining its pace beyond the rebound effect,
given that during June economic activity may have
decelerated significantly. He/she added that the
number of infections has increased and, although it
is unlikely that social mobility will be restricted again,
the reopening process may take longer.

**_Inflation in Mexico_**

**All members agreed that global inflation and the**
**effects on supply chains and production**
**processes of various goods and services have**
**exerted pressure on headline and core inflation.**
**Some** members highlighted the inflationary

pressures coming from the United States. **One**
member highlighted that while inflation has followed
the upward trajectory of global inflation, it appears to
have a more pronounced and generalized dynamic.
He/she added that some analyses show how, since
the beginning of the pandemic, the global factor’s
incidence on core inflation has been negative, while
the incidence of the idiosyncratic component has
been positive. **Another member highlighted the**
recent increase in the prices of intermediate inputs
for secondary sector activities. One member stated
that, during 2021, the aforementioned effects and the
lack of flexibility in production have predominated,
which has reduced the resilience and capacity of
supply to absorb a higher demand without exerting
pressure on prices. He/she added that the current
environment has been conducive for inflation to
register multiple shocks. **Another member stated**
that the contribution of import prices seems to explain
to a greater extent the variation in core inflation and
that given Mexico’s economic integration with the
rest of the world, global inflation could be a limiting
factor for the behavior of domestic inflation,
especially if its main trade partner is registering high
levels of inflation. **Some members mentioned that**
inflation has also increased due to changes in

4


-----

household consumption patterns and that, after
having declined significantly in 2020, some prices are
in a process of recovery in tandem with the gradual
reopening. One member added that some CPI items
have been affected by multifactor issues related with
weather conditions and external factors.

**The majority mentioned that in July annual**
**headline inflation was 5.81%, while core inflation**
**was 4.66%. They pointed out that inflation has**
**remained above the central bank's target for**
**several months.** In this context, **some members**
warned that inflation is at historically high levels.
**Some** members highlighted that, in the last six
months, more than 50% of the CPI components have
registered seasonally adjusted annualized monthly
variations higher than 4%. **Some members pointed**
out the reduction in headline inflation in July versus
previous months. One member stated that this result
was due to a lower incidence of non-core inflation,
which was partially offset by a higher incidence of
core inflation. **Another member mentioned that the**
new shocks have shaped inflation dynamics,
offsetting the reductions stemming from arithmetic
effects. He/she also noted that slack has had a
diminishing effect in containing inflation.

**Regarding core inflation, most members pointed**
**out that it shows an upward trend due to a**
**recovery in the demand for services and to**
**additional pressures on merchandise. Some**
members highlighted that more than 50% of core
inflation’s components have registered variations
higher than 4% in the last three months. **One**
member stated that, according to an analysis of the
inflationary process, pressures on the core

component have tended to intensify, even after
discounting the base effect. He/she stated that the
moving averages of merchandise inflation are above
6%, despite a relatively benign environment in the
currency market. **Another** member underlined that
the above has taken place especially in the prices of
said sub-index that are more susceptible to
exchange rate pressures and to increases in energy
prices. He/she highlighted that core inflation rates for
May, June and July were the highest for similar
months since 1999. He/she also added that the
annualized monthly rates of inflation of food
merchandise have registered levels around 10% in
each of the three months. One member noted that,
in July, more than 70% of the prices of the
merchandise basket registered variations higher
than 4%. Some members indicated that the non-core
component decreased, supported by the decline in
energy prices, which was partially offset by the higher
variations of agricultural and livestock product prices.


**Most members pointed out that expectations for**
**headline and core inflation for the end of 2021**
**rose again and highlighted their increase for**
**2022. Some members pointed out that medium-term**
expectations were revised upwards. **Others stated**
that they remain anchored. **One member indicated**
that the latter are relatively contained at levels above
the target and that this outlook is conditional on
expectations of increases in the reference rate, which
is foreseen to reach 5% by the end of 2021 and 5.4%
by the end of 2022. He/she also noted that business
prospects point to input supply problems and to an
increase in inflation expectations for the next 12
months. Another member warned that the increase
in short- and medium-term expectations entails the
risk of contagion to longer-term expectations and of
them becoming unanchored. He/she expressed
his/her concern of core inflation expectations
continuing to deteriorate and being above the upper
limit of the variability range. He/she added that
nowadays there is a greater probability of headline
inflation reaching levels higher than 6% and core
inflation reaching levels above 5% by the end of the
year. He/she highlighted that the mean and median
of core inflation expectations remain above 3.5%
until 2023. **One member noted that medium- and**
long-term inflation expectations remain well

anchored and that those derived from market
instruments for the 6 to 10-year average are below
3%. **Another member added that so far this year**
there have been two major adjustments in these
expectations, the first, in March, as a consequence
of the increase in observed inflation, and the second,
in June, after the monetary policy decision. **One**
member stated that these expectations have
increased less than in previous episodes of supply
shocks. Another member highlighted the increase in
compensation for expected inflation and inflation risk.
He/she added that long-term expectations have
remained anchored for some time at levels above the
target. He/she said that they have remained stable
during episodes of severe shocks. He/she

considered that the resilience of these expectations
is the result of Banco de México’s credibility, as it has
firmly and consistently stated that it will take the
actions available to achieve the convergence of
inflation to the target. One member stated that shortterm expectations have been increasing since the
previous monetary policy decision.

**Most members noted that the revised forecasts**
**for the expected trajectories of headline and core**
**inflation are higher than those published in the**
**latest Quarterly Report. Some members added that**
convergence to the target is now expected to be
achieved in the first quarter of 2023. **One member**

5


-----

mentioned that the inflation trajectory had been
revised upwards in the June decision, and that from
his/her view, he/she remained skeptical that said
convergence would be reached in the period
proposed on that occasion. At present, in the face of
additional shocks with levels of inflation, unseen in
many years, the forecasts have been revised
upwards and its convergence within the forecast
horizon has been postponed. **Another member**
noted that the most recent adjustment in the
forecasts with respect to estimates published in the
Quarterly Report January-March 2021, presents
increases of 90 basis points for headline inflation in
the fourth quarter of 2021 and the second quarter of
2022, and of 30 basis points in the fourth quarter of
2022. He/she added that the core inflation forecast
increased by 110 basis points in the fourth quarter of
2021 and the second quarter of 2022, and by 10
basis points in the fourth quarter of 2022. He/she also
noted that these forecasts assume less

accommodative monetary conditions over the
forecast horizon.

**The majority of members pointed out that**
**pressures on inflation are associated with**
**shocks that are expected to be transitory.**
**Nevertheless, the majority mentioned the risk**
**that the price formation process is affected. One**
member considered that we can face shocks that
might lead to knock-on effects with continuous
pressures on prices of indefinite duration. Although
these can be assimilated, we have to remain
attentive so that they do not contaminate the
formation of prices. He/she stated that the adjective
“transitory” sends a diffuse message about the
expected trajectory of inflation. He/she pointed out
that recent supply shocks, such as the lack of
production inputs, could last longer than anticipated
and that there are pressures associated with the
reopening process, such as the increase in services
prices. He/she warned that such shocks seem to
have generalized effects, rather than on a few goods.
**Another member highlighted that several items have**
been affected by the pandemic and by factors
associated with the current juncture, and considered
that such effects will be transitory despite the
uncertainty about their duration. One member stated
that the higher levels of inflation are explained by
three transitory phenomena that should not be a
cause of concern: i) the reversion of prices to their
former trend due to the reopening of activities, which
explains why high inflation rates are temporarily
being registered; ii) global shocks leading to
increases in international prices of commodities and
various industrial inputs, which have had an atypical
impact on a few products that have a significant


influence on inflation; and iii) the change in
household consumption patterns and readjustments
in relative prices. He/she added that, in some cases,
price increases will reverse as normalization
continues, while in others they will remain in place,
although their effect will tend to fade gradually
because they are one-time increases.

Among upward risks to inflation, **some members**
highlighted external inflationary pressures, especially
from the United States. **One member stated that**
these pressures are expected to continue to affect
headline and core inflation in the second half of the
year. **Some members mentioned additional cost-**
related pressures. **One member added the risks of**
core inflation’s high persistence, a depreciation of the
peso, and increases in agricultural and livestock
product prices. He/she mentioned that, as long as the
pandemic does not fade, it is foreseeable that further
impacts on prices will be observed. He/she added
that, although rains have reduced pressures on
agricultural and livestock product prices, the United
States is facing a severe drought, which could affect
prices in Mexico. **Another member noted that**
commodity prices have shown greater stability, and
thus the risk of greater inflationary pressures from
this source has been mitigated. He/she pointed out
that the exchange rate has remained stable and is
not under pressure from deteriorating external
accounts or public finances, while energy prices have
reached stability and gas prices have even
decreased. He/she indicated that the economy
continues exhibiting ample levels of slack, so no
demand pressures are anticipated. He/she added
that no additional risks to inflation are foreseen
beyond those that have already materialized. Some
members mentioned as downward risks the effects
stemming from the negative output gap, additional
social distancing, and an appreciation of the peso.
**Most members considered the balance of risks to**
**inflation within the forecast horizon to be biased**
**to the upside.**

**_Macrofinancial environment_**

**Most members highlighted the stability of the**
**peso exchange rate and its better performance**
**compared to other emerging-market currencies.**
**One** member pointed out that open emerging
economies are very sensitive to both global
inflationary pressures and monetary and financial
conditions in advanced economies, particularly in the
United States. He/she stated that the baseline
scenario incorporated by financial markets considers
global effects on inflation, and patience in the
response of the central banks of advanced

6


-----

economies. He/she pointed out that for emergingmarket economies such as Mexico, this implies first
of all facing global inflationary pressures, and
afterwards the tightening of global financial

conditions, although there is still the risk of said
adjustment occurring beforehand. Another member
considered that the good performance of the
Mexican peso was due to progress in the vaccination
process, to an improvement in growth expectations,
and to sound macroeconomic fundamentals. **Some**
members noted the increase in interest rates,
particularly for the shorter terms. One member added
that, in line with the appreciation of the peso,
Mexico's default premia improved. He/she

mentioned that after the last monetary policy
decision, one-year interest rates increased by as
much as 75 basis points, well above the increase in
the reference rate. He/she added that, in contrast to
advanced economies, the long end of the yield curve
also increased, and that the 10-year bond reached
levels more than 30 basis points higher because of
the market’s overreaction to the decision. **Another**
member noted that the eventual process of monetary
normalization at a global level could have

implications for the exchange rate and for capital
flows, which could present greater outflows than
those observed at this point. Some members pointed
out that the stock market registered gains.

**One member emphasized that a rating agency**
downgraded Pemex's credit rating once again,
leaving it with a negative outlook. He/she added that
according to the rating agency, despite the Federal
Government's support, liquidity risk persists given
the considerable requirements that the company will
face due to its debt maturities, and highlighted the
possible operational losses it would suffer due to the
expansion of its refining capacity. He/she considered
that the above shows the deterioration of its financial
situation and represents a risk for public finances and
the government securities market.

**The majority of members noted that private**
**sector** **financing** **continued** **to** **perform**

**unfavorably, and mentioned the fall in lending to**
**firms. Some members noted that this was due to a**
tightening in banks' lending standards. One member
added that it also responds to lower debt issuance.
**Another member mentioned that credit to Small- and**
Medium-sized Enterprises (SMEs) contracted and
showed no signs of improvement. **Some members**
observed that consumer credit continued to decline
and that mortgage lending has grown at a more
moderate pace. **One** member noted that, in some
sectors, credit has fallen by more than 20% as
compared to pre-pandemic levels and that a


contraction is observed, even in sectors that did not
experience a recession. **Another member pointed**
out that, in the second quarter, total sources of
financing declined for the first time since the
beginning of the pandemic, after having reached high
and increasing annual flows. He/she added that this
is explained by the fall in domestic sources of
financing. One member stated that this is a matter of
concern, given the relevance of credit for the
recovery, and that it would be desirable to avoid a
premature and counterproductive tightening of
financial conditions in the face of the fragile recovery.

**_Monetary policy_**

**Most members of Banco de México’s Governing**
**Board pointed out that, due to the variety,**
**magnitude, and the extended horizon over which**
**the shocks have affected inflation, they may pose**
**a risk to the price formation process. For this**
**reason, most members deemed necessary to**
**strengthen the monetary policy stance by**
**increasing the target for the overnight interbank**
**interest rate by 25 basis points to 4.50%, in order**
**to avoid adverse effects on inflation expectations**
**and enable an orderly adjustment of relative**
**prices. Most members highlighted that, in the**
**next monetary policy decisions, the Governing**
**Board will assess the factors that have an**
**incidence on inflation, on its foreseen trajectory**
**within** **the** **forecast** **horizon,** **and** **on** **its**

**expectations. This, in order for the policy rate to**
**be consistent with the orderly and sustained**
**convergence of headline inflation to the 3%**
**target, within the time frame in which monetary**
**policy operates, and enable an adequate**
**adjustment of the economy and financial**
**markets.**

**One member noted that, in view of the unexpected**
monetary policy decision of June, there was a
significant adjustment to the level of the reference
rate for the end of the year anticipated by both
markets and analysts. He/she expressed his/her
view that this is not consistent with Banco de
México’s forecasts, nor with the communication
released regarding the strengthening of monetary
policy that the majority of the Governing Board opted
for in the previous decision. He/she argued that
bringing the policy rate closer to the levels expected
by analysts and markets may imply tightening
financial conditions more than required. He/she
noted that, although such an increase would appear
to leave the rate at its neutral level, there is currently
no certainty that this level has changed due to the
pandemic. He/she added that the lower end of the

7


-----

estimated range for the neutral rate may suggest to
stop the rate increases before the levels that markets
are expecting for the end of the year are reached.
He/she pointed out that validating an upward cycle
would aim at containing inflationary pressures on
sources that are not necessarily monetary, so its
success would require the contraction of prices
whose inflation is already within the target or that are
undergoing a recovery process. He/she considered
that Banco de México's best contribution is keeping
inflation expectations anchored, and for that purpose,
the reference rate, which is the ideal instrument, is
not the only instrument. It also has its

communication, which must play a key role in times
of uncertainty, when a timely, gradual and prudent
monetary policy stance must be maintained. He/she
stated that it continues to be relevant to point out that
the decrease in inflation might synchronize with the
horizon in which monetary policy operates, causing
the mechanism of incidence of the policy stance to
operate precisely at the moment when it would be
least useful. He/she argued that, looking ahead,
Banco de México must remain attentive to the
evolution of commodity prices, the announcement of
reductions in the Fed’s asset purchases, and to
market trading conditions.

**Another** **member stated that, given the broad**
consensus about the transitory nature of the rise in
inflation, keeping the reference rate unchanged
would not jeopardize the convergence process.
He/she pointed out that the central bank's decisions
and communication affect the beliefs about the
evolution of inflation, and unexpected decisions
affect their expectations. He/she argued that the
origin of observed inflation should be explained,
reiterating its transitory nature, which would give a
signal of tranquility. He/she highlighted that this
policy would be similar to that used by other central
banks and to the one used by Banco de México when
facing the supply shocks of 2012. He/she added that
a pause would allow to continue granting stimulus to
economic activity. He/she indicated that it is not
advisable for central banks to respond to supply
shocks as they cannot affect them directly. He/she
pointed out that an increase in the reference rate has
a generalized and negative impact on investment,
consumption, employment, credit, and public

finances. He/she mentioned that, prior to the
consolidation of the anchoring of expectations, it was
logical to respond to supply shocks. However, Banco
de México’s actions allowed an anchoring of
expectations and since the episode of 2012, it was
no longer necessary to increase the rate because the
control of inflation and its expectations was achieved
with effective and consistent communication. In the


episode of 2017, gasoline prices increased sharply,
in a context of exchange rate depreciation and
deteriorated external and fiscal accounts. He/she
highlighted that the change in pricing policy worked
as a coordination mechanism, which affected
expectations. He/she added that in the current
scenario, gasoline prices and the exchange rate
remain stable, there is fiscal discipline and a trade
surplus, and long-term inflation expectations remain
anchored. He/she noted that the current conditions
are more similar to those of 2012 than to those of
2017, and that the policy response should also be
similar to the former. In his/her opinion it is not
convenient to bring forward what could be interpreted
as a cycle of normalization. He/she mentioned that
the Fed is expected to begin the normalization
process of its reference rate around mid-2023 and,
thus, closing the relative position and bringing the
local interest rate into neutral territory prematurely
may have an impact on future macroeconomic and
financial stability.

**One member pointed out that with an inflation gap of**
three percentage points, if the reference rate is not
increased, there would be no convergence in the
foreseen horizon. He/she pointed out that progress
in economic activity suggests the presence of a less
amount of slack, which opens the possibility of
strengthening the monetary policy stance without
widening slack conditions. Also, given that the
problem of measuring economic indicators persists,
the output gap could be smaller than estimated,
which reinforces the proposal of increasing the
monetary policy reference rate. He/she explained
that a reference rate of 4.50% is still an expansionary
policy stance and lays below headline and core
inflation figures. He/she considered that, at these
levels, the ex-post real rate will remain negative until
2022 and that the ex-ante rate would remain at very
low levels. He/she noted that monetary policy cannot
affect supply shocks directly, but that actions should
be taken against inflationary shocks regardless of
their nature, in order to avoid second-round effects.
A preventive adjustment reinforces the expectation
that such effects will not be allowed. He/she
expressed that one of the main transmission
channels is the expectations channel, and that an
image of complacency should be avoided. He/she
argued that the success of the inflation-targeting
regime resides in central banks not sacrificing the
inflationary objective to achieve short-term growth
targets. He/she highlighted that an interest rate
trajectory that minimizes inflation and output gaps
should be chosen. He/she pointed out that an optimal
trajectory revolves around expectations that

monetary policy will keep inflation stable and close to

8


-----

its target in the long term. He/she emphasized that
overreactions in markets should be avoided, given
that they may anticipate aggressive increases. Thus,
it should be emphasized that inflation forecasts show
a delay in the convergence to the target, which
indicates that an additional strengthening of the
monetary policy stance is needed, but does not
necessarily imply an accelerated cycle of interest
rate increases. He/she added that Banco de México
must effectively communicate its reaction function
and that its forward guidance should have clarity
regarding three aspects of the interest rate’s
trajectory: its directionality, the magnitude of possible
adjustments, and the timing of their implementation.
He/she pointed out that, given the slack conditions,
the inflationary outlook and the transitory shocks, it
would appear that the new monetary policy stance
may be sufficient for the time being and that further
rate adjustments will depend exclusively on incoming
data.

**Another member argued that, given the complex**
environment, it is essential for Banco de México to
act in a timely and decisive manner to reaffirm its
commitment to its primary mandate. He/she stated
that, failure to do so would require sharper
adjustments in the future, with greater costs in terms
of output and employment. He/she recalled that,
although inflationary pressures are mostly, although
not exclusively, explained by supply shocks, for
which monetary policy has a limited scope of action,
it is essential to strengthen the expectations channel,
in order to avoid second-round effects, contamination
of the price formation process, and to prevent an
impact on the anchoring of expectations. He/she
emphasized that the monetary policy action adopted,
both in terms of magnitude and operating channel,
does not seek to solve the effects of supply shocks,
but is rather a fundamental signal that reinforces the
commitment of convergence to the target. He/she
warned that this is the central element in an inflationforecast targeting regime, and that renouncing to this
commitment means losing sense of the central
bank’s mandate. He/she highlighted that, given the
still weak performance of the labor market,
investment and domestic financing, and given the
effects of the pandemic on inequality, Banco de
México’s role in achieving price stability is of vital
importance to avoid worsening the situation of the
most vulnerable part of the population, which suffers
the effects of high inflation to a greater extent.

**One** **member considered it essential for Banco de**
México to show and reinforce its commitment to its
constitutional mandate to protect the purchasing
power of the national currency. He/she pointed out


that this is particularly important when considering
the significant upward revisions to headline and core
inflation forecasts, and that the outlook for economic
activity reveals a faster growth rate and is likely to be
revised upwards. He/she highlighted that since the
target for the interbank interest rate has been used
as the monetary policy instrument, it has been below
core inflation on only three occasions: i) in 2009
during the global financial crisis, when core inflation
was following a rapid downward trajectory; ii) in 2014
when core inflation was close to the target; and iii)
from March to July 2021, when core inflation followed
an upward trend for more than five months, deviating
considerably from the target. He/she stated that
maintaining a distinctly accommodative monetary
policy stance and tolerating high inflation levels well
above the target, could lead to a de-anchoring of
price formation, erode Banco de México’s credibility,
and exert pressure on inflationary risk premia, thus
increasing the financial cost of all economic agents,
to the detriment of a sustained recovery. He/she
argued that, although the shocks that have affected
inflation are expected to be transitory, considering
the simultaneity, magnitude and the extended
horizon over which the shocks have affected
headline and core inflation, as well as the high levels
they have reached, there is a risk that the price
formation process is affected. For that reason, it is
essential to strengthen the monetary policy stance to
keep medium and long-term inflation expectations
anchored and enable a decreasing trend of inflation
towards its target.

**Some members pointed out that Banco de México's**
decision to publish inflation forecasts improves its
communication channel. **One member added that**
this is an exercise of transparency and accountability
that puts the Central Bank at the forefront of
communication.

**3. MONETARY POLICY DECISION**

Although the shocks that have increased inflation are
expected to be transitory, due to their variety,
magnitude, and the extended horizon over which
they have affected it, they may pose risks to the price
formation process. For this reason, it was deemed
necessary to strengthen the monetary policy stance
in order to avoid adverse effects on inflation
expectations and enable an orderly adjustment of
relative prices and the convergence of inflation to the
3% target. The Governing Board decided to increase

9


-----

the target for the overnight interbank interest rate by
25 basis points to 4.50%.

For the next monetary policy decisions, the
Governing Board will assess the factors that have an
incidence on inflation, on its foreseen trajectory
within the forecast horizon, and on its expectations.
This, in order for the policy rate to be consistent with
the orderly and sustained convergence of headline
inflation to the 3% target within the time frame in
which monetary policy operates, and enable an
adequate adjustment of the economy and financial
markets.

**4. VOTING**

Alejandro Díaz de León, Irene Espinosa, and
Jonathan Heath voted in favor of increasing the
target for the overnight interbank interest rate by 25
basis points to 4.50%. Galia Borja and Gerardo
Esquivel voted in favor of leaving the target for the
overnight interbank interest rate unchanged at
4.25%.

**5. DISSENTING OPINIONS / VOTES**

**Vote. Galia Borja**

In the present conditions, I believe that increasing the
target for the overnight interbank interest rate would
validate interest rate expectations for the end of the
year, associated with a controversial communication
in June’s decision. In my opinion, validating said
expectations does not clarify the meaning of
strengthening the monetary policy stance, could
lead to a dynamic inconsistency in future decisions,
and may imply a greater-than-necessary tightening
of local financial conditions. In my opinion, inflation is
being affected mainly by global inflation, as well as
by distortions generated by the pandemic, such as
bottlenecks, changes in consumption patterns, the


recovery of prices, and multifactor elements related
to weather conditions. Although there is little certainty
as to how long these factors will last due to the
unprecedented situation we are facing, I still believe
these will be transitory in nature. In an environment
of high uncertainty, opting for a policy stance based
on gradual decisions allows to establish a better
communication and avoids mistaking a
strengthening with a cycle of interest rate increases,
given that the end of this strengthening may coincide
with a tightening of international financial and
monetary conditions, in which it will probably be
necessary to have more room for the use of
monetary policy.

**Vote. Gerardo Esquivel**

There is broad consensus regarding the
predominantly transitory nature of worldwide
inflationary pressures. For this reason, and because
an interest rate increase would have no effect on
inflation stemming from supply shocks, I believe that
maintaining the reference rate does not jeopardize
the convergence of inflation to its target. On the
contrary, raising it again could send the wrong signal
that the current inflation is of a more permanent
nature, which in turn could affect short- and mediumterm expectations, as well as the price formation
process. It should be kept in mind that the central
bank's decisions and communication constitute a
signal that affects economic agents' expectations. In
this regard, I believe that, in the current context, the
appropriate policy is to maintain the reference rate
and explain with greater detail the origin and causes
of observed inflation, reiterating its transitory nature.
A strategy based on a careful and coherent
communication is being used by other central banks
in the present situation and was successfully used by
Banco de México in 2012 in the face of similar supply
shocks.

10


-----

**ANNEX**

The information in this Annex was prepared for this
meeting by the staff of Banco de México’s Directorate
General of Economic Research and Directorate
General of Central Bank Operations. It does not
necessarily reflect the considerations of the

members of the Governing Board as to the monetary
policy decision.

**A.1. External conditions**

**A.1.1. World economic activity**

Global economic activity continued to recover during
the second quarter of the year, with heterogeneity
across countries, depending on vaccine availability,
the evolution of the pandemic, and stimulus
spending. Industrial production worldwide has shown
less dynamism due to bottlenecks that have affected
global supply chains, while the services sector has
moderated its pace of recovery (Chart 1). Global
inflation continued to increase significantly, due to
pressures on commodity prices, base effects, and
multiple bottlenecks in production. In most of the
main advanced and emerging economies, inflation
was above their central banks’ targets.

In this environment, the central banks of the main
advanced economies have maintained their

monetary stimuli, although, in some cases,

downward adjustments in the pace of asset
purchases were announced and discussions

regarding the eventual withdrawal of monetary
stimuli continued, so their reduction is expected. The
central banks of various emerging economies
reduced their monetary stimulus. Financial markets
registered certain stability, although a moderate
increase in volatility was observed, particularly in
fixed-income markets, due to concerns about the
rapid spread of the Delta variant of the SARS-CoV-2
virus.

Among key global risks are those associated with the
pandemic and inflationary pressures, as well as with
monetary and financial conditions. In particular, the
spread of the Delta variant or of new strains, in
conjunction with the slow progress in the vaccination
process in some countries, could delay global
economic recovery. Moreover, a more persistent
behavior of inflation at high levels could lead to a
faster tightening of monetary policy.

1 Expressed as a quarterly annualized rate, US seasonally adjusted GDP
grew at a rate of 6.3% during the first quarter of 20201 and of 6.5%% in
the second.

|Chart 1 Global: Purchasing Managers’ Index  Production Component Diffusion Index, s.a.|Col2|
|---|---|
|||
|Manufacturing Manufacturing (excl. China) Services Services (excl. China)|July|


s. a. / Seasonally adjusted figures.
Source: IHS Markit.

In the United States, GDP maintained its pace of
growth, from a seasonally adjusted quarterly growth
of 1.5% during the first quarter of 2021 to 1.6% during
the second (Chart 2).[1] The dynamism of private
consumption and business investment, both driven
by the reopening of commercial establishments,
government support, and increased consumer and
business confidence, contributed to said increase. In
contrast, residential investment contracted and net
exports continued contributing negatively to growth.
It is worth noting that the US Senate recently passed
an Infrastructure Investment and Jobs Act amounting
to around USD 1.2 trillion over the next eight years,
and there are also discussions on a budget proposal
of around USD 3.5 trillion for social programs and
climate change. If the Infrastructure Investment and
Jobs Act is ratified by the House of Representatives
and the budget proposal for social program spending
is ratified by Congress, these packages could
significantly contribute to US economic growth over
the next years.

US industrial production moderated its expansion.
After having grown at a seasonally adjusted monthly
growth rate of 0.7% in May, it grew 0.4% in June. This
was due to a 0.1% contraction in manufacturing
activity in June, as a result of the fall in production of
automobiles and auto parts due to a shortage of
semiconductors. The Purchasing Managers' Index
(PMI) of the manufacturing sector suggests that the
sector could continue recovering in the next months,
although at a moderate pace.

11


65

60

55

50

45

40

35

30

25

20


**Global: Purchasing Managers’ Index**

**Production Component**

Diffusion Index, s.a.

Manufacturing
Manufacturing (excl. China)

Services

Services (excl. China)

2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021


-----

**United States: Real GDP and its Components**

Quarterly percentage rate and contributions in

percentage points, s.a.

10

8

6

4

2

0

-2 Private consumption expenditures

Residential investment

-4 Change in private inventories

-6 Net exports

Nonresidential investment

-8 Government consumption expenditures

-10 Total

-12 0

I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV I II

2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021

s. a. / Seasonally adjusted figures.
Source: Bureau of Economic Activity (BEA).

The US labor market continued to recover during
June and July. The non-farm payroll increased by
940,000 jobs on average during said period, a
greater pace than that of 487,000 jobs registered, on
average, between January and May. Significant
progress was observed in the sectors related to
accommodation and food services, art entertainment
and recreation, educational services, professional,
scientific and technical services, retail trade, and
other services. However, the level of employment
was still 5.7 million below its pre-pandemic levels. In
addition, the vacancy rate remained at a high level
given the slow pace of re-entry into the labor force.
The unemployment rate decreased from 5.8% in May
to 5.4% in July.

In the euro area, following the recovery of most of the
region's economies, economic activity rebounded,
expanding at a seasonally adjusted quarterly rate of
2.0% during the second quarter of 2021, after having
contracted 0.3% during the first quarter.[2] Consumer
spending recovered, supported by an improved labor
market outlook, the high levels of consumer
confidence, government support programs, progress
in the vaccination process, and the reopening of
economic activities. Business investment has been
recovering, driven by a more optimistic environment
and the expansion of domestic and external demand.
The unemployment rate decreased from 8.0% in May
to 7.7% in June. PMIs suggest that economic activity

2 In annualized terms, euro area GDP registered a quarter-on-quarter
seasonally adjusted variation of -1.3% during the first quarter of 2021 and
of 8.3% in the second.
3 In annualized terms, UK GDP contracted at a quarter-on-quarter
seasonally adjusted rate of -6.2% during the first quarter of 2021 and of
20.8% during the second


will continue to recover at a gradual pace during the
third quarter.

In the United Kingdom, available indicators suggest
that economic activity rebounded during the second
quarter of 2021, after having fallen at a seasonally
adjusted quarterly rate of 1.6% during the previous
quarter.[3] This was the result of a strong increase in
services, mainly those associated with

accommodation and food services as a result of
lower mobility restrictions. In this environment, the
unemployment rate remained at 4.8% between April
and May. PMIs for both the manufacturing and
service sectors suggest that the UK economy will
continue to recover, albeit at a moderate pace during
the third quarter.

In Japan, available information suggests that, after
having contracted at a seasonally adjusted quarterly
rate of 1.0% during the first quarter of the year,
economic activity remained weak during the second
quarter.[4] This result is attributed to the decline in
consumption, particularly of services, in light of the
COVID-19 state of emergency declared during the
period in some regions of the country. In contrast,
other indicators, such as that of domestic orders for
capital goods, suggest that investment has been
recovering. Additionally, net exports of goods
rebounded during the second quarter, supported by
exports of semiconductor manufacturing machinery
to other Asian economies. Industrial activity
weakened, mostly reflecting supply bottlenecks and
shortages of certain inputs worldwide. The

unemployment rate decreased from 3.0% in May to
2.9% in June. PMIs indicate that manufacturing
activity would grow at a moderate pace during the
third quarter, while the services sector would
continue to deteriorate, in line with the extension of
the state of emergency in some regions.

In the major emerging economies, available
indicators point to, in general, a weakening of
economic activity during the second quarter of 2021,
albeit with a heterogeneous behavior across
countries, mainly depending on the evolution of the
pandemic and the exposure of each country to the
disruptions in global supply chains. In emerging
Asian countries, economic activity has weakened
due to the shortage of industrial inputs, the gradual
withdrawal of some economic stimulus measures,

4 In annualized terms, Japan GDP grew at a quarter-on-quarter
seasonally adjusted variation of -3.9% during the second quarter of 2021.

12

|Chart 2 United States: Real GDP and its Components Quarterly percentage rate and contributions in percentage points, s.a.|Col2|Col3|Col4|Col5|Col6|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|Private consumption expenditures Residential investment Change in private inventories Net exports Nonresidential investment Government consumption expenditures Total||||||
|0 I II III IV 2016|I II III IV 2017|I II III IV 2018|I II III IV 2019|I II III IV 2020|I II 2021|


-----

and restrictions on mobility in countries such as India
to contain the new wave of infections. In Latin
America, indicators point to a deterioration of
economic activity in most economies due to the
upsurge in the number of infections. In emerging
Europe, available indicators overall suggest a
moderation in GDP growth, after the rebound
registered during the first quarter.

International commodity prices exhibited a mixed
behavior since Mexico’s previous monetary policy
decision. In particular, during the first weeks of July,
oil prices continued to be driven by the gradual
recovery of global demand, due to the normalization
of activities in a greater number of economies.
However, later on they fell following the agreement
between the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting
Countries (OPEC) and other producers to increase
oil production and due to the risk to global economic
recovery posed by the upsurge in the number of
contagions worldwide. The prices of natural and LP
gas continued to increase during the period. This is
explained by both a greater demand, in line with the
global economic recovery, and supply-related
problems associated with low inventory levels, the
shutdown of gas extraction plants and gas pipelines
in certain regions, and low exports of some of the
main gas producers, among which Russia stands
out. As for industrial metal prices, most of them
increased, particularly during the second half of July,
due to supply restrictions associated with disruptions
in global supply chains. Nevertheless, in some
cases, such as iron, prices have decreased recently
due to a moderation in growth of industrial production
worldwide. Finally, grain prices were subject to high
volatility as a result of the uncertainty about weather
conditions in the main producing countries and signs
of a lower global demand.

**A.1.2. Monetary policy and international financial**
**markets**

Global inflation continued to increase significantly,
pressured by commodity prices, particularly those of
energy products, and by other factors, such as the
arithmetic effects stemming from a low base of
comparison, and the persistence of multiple
bottlenecks in production. Thus, headline inflation in
the main advanced economies continued to rise,
particularly in the United States, lying above their
respective central banks’ targets, except for Japan
(Chart 3). In those economies, inflation has been
influenced by structural factors, such as

demographics, which have kept inflation and its
expectations below their targets for prolonged
periods. In light of the above, there is high uncertainty


regarding the persistence of inflation in advanced
economies, including a possibly heterogeneous
evolution depending on differences in the speed of
recovery of economic activity across countries. In this
context, short-term inflation expectations drawn from
surveys for this group of economies followed an
upward trend. Likewise, expectations drawn for
financial instruments for longer terms recently
increased, after having remained relatively stable in
previous months.

In the main emerging economies, headline inflation
was, in many cases, above their central banks’
targets. Core inflation has continued to increase in a
context of a gradual recovery of demand and
disruptions in global supply chains. Emerging
economies that are more commercially integrated
with those advanced economies that have recovered
more rapidly and have registered larger increases in
inflation face significant risks as there is the
possibility that said increases turn out to be larger
and more persistent than anticipated.

**Chart 3**

**Selected Advance Economies:**

**Headline Inflation**

Annual percentage change

6.0 United States PCE 1/
5.5 United States CPI
5.0 Japan
4.5

Euro area 2/

4.0

United Kingdom

3.5
3.0 Canada
2.5
2.0
1.5
1.0
0.5
0.0

-0.5
-1.0
-1.5

June

-2.0 July
-2.5 July
-3.0

2005 2009 2013 2017 2021

1/ The personal consumption expenditure deflator is used.
2/ Preliminary figure for July.
Source: Bureau of Economic Analysis, Eurostat, Bank of Japan, Statistics
Canada, Office of National Statistics.

In this environment, the central banks of the major
advanced economies left their reference interest
rates unchanged at levels around zero. Most of them
continued using their balance sheets to preserve
favorable financing conditions and enable the
convergence of inflation to their respective long-term
targets, although some of them have already
announced downward adjustments to the pace of
their asset purchases. In particular, the Bank of
Canada announced a second cut in its Asset
Purchase Program (APP), from CAD 3 billion per
week to CAD 2 billion, while the Reserve Bank of

13


-----

New Zealand announced the termination of its APP.
Most central banks of this group of economies also
reiterated that they will be patient in withdrawing their
accommodative monetary policy stances until
inflation reaches their targets in a sustained manner,
indicating that the recent increase in inflation is
expected to be transitory. Despite the

aforementioned, it is already foreseen that, in view of
the economic recovery and the risk of higher levels
of inflation, some central banks will reduce their
monetary stimulus. Some institutions, like the US
Federal Reserve (Fed), anticipate an increase in
reference interest rates earlier than previously
expected and have started to discuss an eventual
reduction of their asset purchases. In this context,
expectations drawn from financial instruments
incorporate interest rate increases by mid-2022 and
during 2023 for some of the main advanced
economies (Chart 4).

**Chart 4**

**Reference Rates and Implied Trajectories in OIS**

**Curves[1/]**

Percent


3.0%

2.5%

2.0%

1.5%

1.0%

0.5%

0.0%

-0.5%


**― US Federal Reserve 2/**
**― Bank of England**
**― Bank of Japan**
**― Bank of Canada**

**― European Central Bank deposit rate**
**― OIS implicit trajectory Aug.6, 2021**
**--- OIS implicit trajectory Jun 18, 2021**

|Col1|Col2|Col3|Col4|Col5|Col6|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|||||||
|||||||
|||||||
|||||||
|||||||
|||||||
|||||||


End of
2022


End of
2020


End of
2021


-1.0% 2020

2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023


End of
2023


1/ OIS: Fixed floating interest rate swap where the fixed interest rate is
associated to the effective overnight reference rate.
2/ For the observed reference rate of the U.S. the average interest rate of
the target range of the federal funds rate (0.0% - 0.25%) is used.
Source: Banco de México with data from Bloomberg.

Among the recent monetary policy decisions, the
following stand out:

i) In its July meeting, the Federal Reserve left its target

range for the federal funds rate unchanged at 0-0.25%
and mentioned that it would be appropriate to maintain
it until labor market conditions have reached levels
consistent with its maximum employment estimate and
inflation has increased to 2% and is on track to
moderately exceed this target for some time. It also
reiterated that it will maintain the current pace of its
asset purchase program until substantial progress has
been made towards its maximum employment and
price stability goals. In this regard, it also stated that the
economy has made progress towards these goals and
that the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) will


continue to evaluate this progress in its next meetings.
The Fed’s Chairman expressed that the FOMC
discussed how it could adjust the pace and composition
of its asset purchases once economic conditions so
warrant and pointed out that it will give advance notice
of any adjustment to this program. He mentioned that
there is a possibility that inflation turns out to be higher
and more persistent than expected and that, in the
event that the path of inflation or long-term inflation
expectations deviate materially and persistently from
levels consistent with its objective, the Fed will be
prepared to adjust its monetary policy stance. In this
context, the trajectory implied by financial instruments
for the federal funds rate incorporates expectations of
2-3 increases by the end of 2023.

ii) At the beginning of July, the European Central Bank

announced the adoption of a new monetary policy
strategy that considers, among other elements: (i) a
symmetric inflation target of 2% in the medium term; (ii)
the possibility of requiring strong and persistent
measures, as well as a transitory period in which
inflation moderately exceeds its target, in episodes
where the reference rate has been constrained by an
effective lower limit; iii) that the Harmonized Index of
Consumer Prices (HICP) remains an appropriate
measure for assessing progress vis-à-vis the inflation
target, although it recommended the gradual inclusion
of owner-occupied housing costs in future inflation
measures; iv) adjustments to its communication
strategy and tools; and, v) the approval of an action
plan to include climate change considerations into its
monetary policy framework. This central bank noted
that, looking ahead, it will periodically evaluate its
monetary policy strategy, expecting to carry out a next
assessment in 2025. In its most recent monetary policy
meeting, it left its refinancing rate, key deposit facility
rate and key lending facility rate unchanged at 0.0, -0.5
and -0.25%, respectively, and reiterated that asset
purchases under the Pandemic Emergency Purchase
Program (PEPP) will continue during the third quarter
of 2021 at a significantly higher pace than in the first
few months of the year. However, it adjusted its forward
guidance on interest rates to reflect its new monetary
policy strategy, noting that the Executive Board expects
interest rates to remain at current or lower levels until
inflation reaches 2% well before the end of its forecast
horizon and in a sustained manner during the rest of it,
and until it considers that progress in core inflation is
sufficiently advanced to be consistent with the
stabilization of inflation at 2% in the medium term,
which could imply a transitory period in which inflation
lays moderately above target.


iii) In its June meeting, the Bank of Japan left its short-term

policy rate unchanged at -0.1% and its long-term
interest rate (indexed to its 10-year bond) at around
0%, as well as its asset purchase program. Said central
bank ratified that, if necessary, it will not hesitate to take
additional easing measures and that it expects interest
rates to remain at or even below their current levels. In
addition, it disclosed the preliminary outline of a new

14


-----

measure announced in its June meeting to provide
funds to financial institutions, which seeks to support
efforts to address issues associated with climate
change.

iv) In its latest meetings, the Bank of England left its
reference interest rate at 0.10% and its asset purchase
program unchanged. In its August meeting it noted that,
should the economy evolve in line with its central
forecasts, a modest tightening of monetary policy over
the forecast period would likely be necessary in order
to be consistent with meeting the 2% inflation target on
a sustainable basis over the medium term, which is
anticipated to occur in the third quarter of 2022.
Regarding its current asset purchase program, this
central bank indicated that it expects it to conclude by
the end of 2021, as previously mentioned. In addition,
the Monetary Policy Committee is planning to suspend
reinvestment of maturities when the reference rate
reaches the 0.5% level and to begin selling assets once
the reference rate reaches 1%, and subject to the
economic conditions.


The monetary authorities of emerging economies,
particularly those with close commercial links with the
advanced economies that have recovered more
rapidly, face additional challenges and have less
room to maneuver regarding monetary policy
implementation. In addition to domestic and
idiosyncratic factors, such as increases in demand
and currency depreciation, pressures from a higher
and more persistent global inflation pose a risk to the
price formation process in this group of economies.
In an environment in which, unlike that of the major
advanced economies, inflation and its expectations
in emerging economies have not remained below
their central banks' targets for prolonged periods,
some central banks of this group of economies have
reduced their monetary stimuli. In particular, the
central banks of Russia, Hungary, Brazil, and the
Czech Republic announced additional interest rate
increases, while those of Mexico and Chile raised
their rates for the first time since the beginning of the
pandemic.

In the global context described above, and since
Mexico’s previous monetary policy decision,

international financial markets exhibited limited
adjustments (Chart 5), although episodes of greater
volatility associated with, among other factors,
concerns regarding the spread of new variants of the
SARS-CoV-2 virus and several technical factors,
were observed. In this context, the stock markets of
most of the major advanced economies showed
gains and some even reached historical highs driven
by favorable corporate results, while emerging
economy markets overall registered adjustments in a
narrow range with a negative bias (Chart 6). In


particular, Asian stock exchanges registered losses
during the period, given expectations of a tighter
regulation of China’s technological sector, among
other factors. In foreign exchange markets, the US
dollar strengthened against most advanced

economies' currencies during most of the period,
although this trend has moderated in recent weeks.
Emerging market currencies mostly registered a bias
towards depreciation. In the main advanced
economies, interest rates on long-term government
securities decreased, although some increases have
been recently observed. In this environment, since
Mexico's previous monetary policy decision,

moderate net capital inflows in emerging economies,
mainly of the Asian region and, particularly, China,
were registered.

**Chart 5**

**Change in Selected Financial Indicators from**

**June 18 to August 6, 2021**

Percent; basis points


1/ The MSCI Emerging Markets Index consists of 24 countries. 2/ DXY: a
weighted average estimated by the Intercontinental Exchange (ICE) of the
nominal exchange rate of the main six currencies operated globally with the
following weights: EUR 57.6%, JPY: 13.6%, GBP: 11.9%, CAD: 9.1%, SEK:
4.2%, and CHF: 3.6%. 3/ J.P. Morgan index is constructed with the weighted
average by the nominal exchange rate of emerging economies’ currencies
with the following weights: TRY: 8.3%, RUB: 8.3%, HUF: 8.3%, ZAR: 8.3%,
BRL: 11.1%, MXN: 11.1%, CLP: 11.1%, CNH: 11.1%, INR: 11.1% and
SGD: 11.1%.
Source: Bloomberg and ICE.

15


15%

10%


75

50


5%


25

0


0%

-5%


-10%


-25

-50


-----

**Chart 6**

**Selected Emerging Economies: Financial Assets**

**Performance from June 2021**

Percentage, basis points

**Equity** **Interest** **Interest**
**Region** **Country** **Currencies** **CDS**

**markets** **rates 2Y** **rates 10Y**

**Mexico** **2.38%** **1.59%** **53** **14** **-3**

**Brazil** **-4.31%** **-4.99%** **151** **63** **17**

**Latin**

**Chile** **-5.32%** **-0.28%** **91** **71** **5**

**America**

**Colombia** **-5.28%** **-1.59%** **-41** **0** **6**

**Peru** **-3.58%** **-6.96%** **52** **57** **-1**

**Russia** **-0.34%** **0.15%** **13** **-17** **-2**

**Poland** **-2.15%** **3.59%** **5** **3** **0**

**Emerging**

**Turkey** **1.37%** **3.10%** **25** **-13** **8**

**Europe**

**Czech Republic** **-0.80%** **6.70%** **29** **2** **-4**

**Hungary** **-1.62%** **3.10%** **11** **-7** **-7**

**China** **-0.18%** **-0.98%** **-26** **-24** **2**

**Malaysia** **-1.98%** **-4.80%** **-1** **-5** **6**

**India** **-0.22%** **3.48%** **-52** **19** **7**

**Asia**

**Philippines** **-3.49%** **-2.85%** **-7** **-43** **5**

**Thailand** **-5.73%** **-3.81%** **-5** **-30** **1**

**Indonesia** **0.45%** **2.19%** **-22** **-28** **2**

**Africa** **South Africa** **-2.44%** **4.74%** **-23** **-6** **14**

Note: Interest rates correspond to swap rates at the specified terms, except
for Hungary, where government securities with 3-year (instead of 2-year)
maturities where used as a reference. For the Philippines, a 2-year swap
rate is used.
Source: Bloomberg.

Looking ahead, several risks to the stability of
international financial markets persist. In addition to
those related to the recovery of economic activity, the
following stand out: i) a more sustained and higher
than anticipated increase in inflation in some
advanced economies resulting in an earlier-thananticipated withdrawal of monetary stimuli, which
could cause higher volatility in global financial
markets, and particularly affect emerging economies
that, in general, have less fiscal and monetary policy
room to maneuver; ii) possible distortions of some
financial assets’ valuation that could lead to a sudden
correction in their prices; and iii) an increase in public
and private debt levels. In addition, emerging
economies could possibly face greater challenges in
the medium term as their sources of financing
become more limited, in a context of a greater
absorption of resources by advanced economies and
because of China's participation in global investment
indexes.

**A.2. Current situation of the Mexican economy**

**A.2.1. Mexican markets**

Since the last monetary policy decision to date,
financial asset prices in Mexico exhibited a mixed
behavior (Chart 7), in an environment of caution
given the upsurge in COVID-19 cases around the
world and uncertainty regarding the monetary policy
stance of advanced countries. In this regard, as


described in the previous section, a less

accommodative monetary policy in advanced

economies continues to be incorporated.

The Mexican peso fluctuated in a range between
19.77 and 20.49 pesos per US dollar, ending the
period with an appreciation of 2.38% (Chart 8). This
occurred in a context in which both spot- and futuretrading conditions improved slightly.

**Chart 7**

**Mexican Markets’ Performance**

Percent, MXN/USD and index


8.0

7.0


37,000

32,000


57,000

52,000


6.0

5.0


47,000

42,000


4.0


26.0

25.0

24.0

23.0

22.0

21.0

20.0

19.0

18.0


M Bond


4.0

3.5

3.0

2.5

2.0

1.5

1.0

0.5

0.0

Inflation-indexed bonds


Range in year Range since BdM last monetary policy 21-Jun-21 06-Aug-21

decision

Source: Prepared by Banco de México.


Range in year Range since BdM last monetary policy 21-Jun-21 06-Aug-21


**Chart 8**

**Mexican Peso Exchange Rate**

**with Moving Averages**

MXN/USD


26.00
25.50 Mexican peso
25.00 100-day moving average
24.50 50-day moving average
24.00
23.50
23.00
22.50
22.00
21.50
21.00
20.50
20.00
19.50
19.00
18.50
18.00
17.50
17.00

J    F   M    A   M   J    J    A    S   O    N   D    J    F   M   A    M J   J    A

2020 2021

Source: Prepared by Banco de México.

Interest rates of government securities exhibited a
mixed behavior (Chart 9) with an upward and
flattening trend of the yield curve, with increases of
up to 62 basis points in the short-term part of the
curve and increases of up to 33 basis points in
longer-term instruments. The yield curve for real rate
instruments showed a similar dynamic, with
increases of up to 85 basis points in the short end of


16


-----

the curve and increases of up to 15 basis points in
the long-term segment. In this context, breakeven
inflation and inflation risk premia implicit in spreads
between nominal and real rates of market

instruments showed mixed adjustments with respect
to the June monetary policy decision (Chart 10).
These adjustments took place in an environment in
which trading conditions in this market slightly
improved during the period covering the monetary
policy decision.

**Chart 9**

**Nominal Yield Curve of Government Securities**

Percent; basis points

8.00 90

7.50 80

7.00 6 70

#¡REF!

6.50 60

6.00 50

5.50 40

5.00 30

4.50 20

4.00 10

3.50 0

June 21, 2021 Aug.6, 2021 Change (June 21, 2021 to Aug.6, 2021)

Trading range over the period

Source: PIP.
Note: The chart does not include bonds maturing in December 2021 and
June 2022. CETES with similar maturities are considered.

**Chart 10**

**Breakeven Inflation and Inflation Risk Implicit in**

**Government Securities’ Interest Rate**

Basis points

500

475

450

425

400

375

350

325

300

275 3-year

10-year

250 20-year

30-year

225 3-year average

10-year average

200 20-year average

175 30-year average

150

J       M       S        J        M       S       J        M

2019                  2020                 2021

Source: PIP.


Regarding expectations for the trajectory of the
monetary policy reference rate, information implied
by the Interbank Equilibrium Interest Rate (TIIE, for
its Spanish acronym) swap curve incorporates an
increase of around 50 basis points in the reference
rate between the August and September meetings
(Chart 11). In a related manner, the median of the
consensus of forecasters surveyed by Citibanamex
anticipates the reference rate to be at 4.50% in the
next monetary policy decision. For the end of 2021,
market variables anticipate a target rate of 5.25%,
while the median of the aforementioned survey
expects a level of 5.00%.

**Chart 11**

**Banco de México Overnight Interbank Rate**

**Implied in TIIE IRS Curve**

Percent


Source: Prepared by Banco de México with Bloomberg data.

**A.2.2. Economic activity in Mexico**

According to Mexico's GDP flash estimate, the
Mexican economy continued to recover during the
second quarter (Chart 12), with heterogeneity among
sectors. In particular, services continued to reactivate
throughout the quarter in an environment in which
various services have been reopening in tandem with
progress in the vaccination campaign, while
industrial production has shown weakness in a
context in which shortages of certain industrial inputs
prevailed.

As for external demand, during the second quarter of
2021, manufacturing exports, both automotive and
non-automotive, exhibited moderate growth as
compared to the previous quarter (Chart 13). By
destination, exports to the United States exhibited a

17


8.50
8.25
8.00
7.75
7.50
7.25
7.00
6.75
6.50
6.25
6.00
5.75
5.50
5.25
5.00
4.75
4.50
4.25
4.00
3.75
3.50


-----

loss of dynamism, while those to the rest of the world
rebounded.[5]

**Chart 12**

**Gross Domestic Product**

Quarterly percentage change, s. a.


16

12

8

4

0


-4

-8

-12

-16


-20 Q-II 1/

I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV I II

2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021

s. a. / Seasonally adjusted figures.
1/ The figure for the second quarter of 2021 refers to the flash estimate of
quarterly GDP published by INEGI.
Source: Mexico’s System of National Accounts (SCNM, for its Spanish
acronym), INEGI.

**Chart 13**

**Total Manufacturing Exports**

Indexes 2013 = 100, s. a.


remained on an upward trend. In May, gross fixed
investment partially reversed the decline observed in
April, although it continued to show a weak
performance. The machinery and equipment

component fell for the second consecutive month,
halting its expansion after the relatively good
performance it had exhibited during the first quarter
of the year. In turn, investment in construction
reactivated at the margin, although it remained below
the levels reported in February 2020.

As for production, the flash estimate suggests that
tertiary activities continued to reactivate, while
industrial production showed weakness (Chart 14).
During the April- May period, the services that mostly
contributed to the growth of tertiary activities were
professional, corporate and business support

services; commerce; government activities;

temporary accommodation and food and beverage
preparation services; and educational and health
services. The weak performance of industrial activity
at the end of the second quarter was the result of a
generalized deceleration of the subsectors that
comprise it. In June, manufacturing fell for the third
consecutive month, mainly as a result of the negative
evolution of the transportation equipment sector due
to the shortage of certain industrial inputs.
Construction reversed the recovery observed in May,
while mining exhibited a loss of dynamism (Chart 15).

**Chart 14**

**Global Indicator of Economic Activity**

Indexes 2013 = 100, s. a.


180

160

140

120

100

80

60

40

20


140

130

120

110

100

90

80

70

60

50

40

30

20


0

J

2013


M S J

2014


M S J

2015


M S J

2016


M S J

2017


M S J

2018


M S J

2019


M S J

2020


M S J M J

2021


s. a. / Seasonally adjusted series and trend series based on data in nominal
US dollars. The former is represented by a solid line and the latter by a
dotted line.
Source: Prepared by Banco de México with data from the Tax
Administration Service (SAT, for its Spanish acronym), the Ministry of the
Economy (SE, for its Spanish acronym), Banco de México, the National
Institute of Statistics and Geography (INEGI, for its Spanish acronym).
Mexico’s Merchandise Trade Balance, and the National System of
Statistical and Geographical Information (SNIEG, for its Spanish acronym),
Information of national interest.

According to its monthly indicator, private

consumption continued to recover in May, although it
remained below the level reported in February 2020.
Within this indicator, consumption of goods

continued to show high dynamism, attributed to its
imports’ component, while consumption of services

5 Refers to the value of merchandise exports in current US dollars. This
value differs from that reported for goods exports by Mexico’s System of


120

115

110

105

100

95

90

85

80

75

70

65

60


J

2013


M S J

2014


M S J

2015


M S J

2016


M S J

2017


M S J

2018


M S J

2019


M S J

2020


M S J M J

2021


s. a. / Seasonally adjusted and trend series. The former is represented by a
solid line and the latter by a dotted line.
1/ Figures up to May 2021.
2/ Monthly Industrial activity Indicator figures up to June 2021
Source: Mexico’s System of National Accounts (SCNM, for its Spanish
acronym), INEGI.

National Accounts (SCNM, for its acronym in Spanish), given that the latter
represents the value-added measured in constant pesos.


18


-----

**Chart 15**

**Industrial Activity [1/]**

Indexes 2013 = 100, s. a.


**Chart 16**

**Output Gap Estimates [1/]**

**Excluding Oil Industry [4/ ]**

Potential output percentages, s. a.


130

120

110

100

90

80

70

60

50

J

2013


M S J

2014


M S J

2015


M S J

2016


M S J

2017


M S J

2018


M S J

2019


M S J

2020


M S J M J

2021


12

8

4

0

-4

-8

-12

-16

-20

-24


June


s. a. / Seasonally adjusted and trend series. The former is represented by a
solid line and the latter by a dotted line.
1/ Figures in parenthesis correspond to their share in the total in 2013.
Source: Mexico’s System of National Accounts (SCNM, for its Spanish
acronym), INEGI.

Regarding the economy's cyclical position, timely
information suggests that during the second quarter
of 2021, slack conditions for the economy overall
were below those of the first quarter, although they
remain significantly wide (Chart 16), with large
differences across sectors. At the end of the second
quarter, labor market indicators showed a mixed
behavior. In particular, while the national

unemployment rate decreased slightly and the
employed population increased, labor participation
decreased again while the urban unemployment rate
rose slightly (Chart 17). In June, the number of new
IMSS-insured jobs continued to recover, although it
remained at around 430 thousand jobs below the
level reported prior to the health emergency. Finally,
after having fallen in March and April, unit labor costs
in the manufacturing sector increased at the margin
in May, remaining above pre-pandemic levels (Chart
18).


J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M

2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021

s. a. / Calculations based on seasonally adjusted figures.
1/ Output gap estimated with a tail-corrected Hodrick-Prescott filter; see
Banco de México (2009), “Inflation Report, April-June 2009”, p.74.
2/ GDP timely figures as of Q1 2021, and IGAE figures as of March 2021,
in line with said timely figure.
3/ Output gap confidence interval calculated with a method of unobserved
components.
4/ Excludes both oil and gas extraction, support services for mining, and
petroleum and coal products’ manufacturing.
Source: Prepared by Banco de México with INEGI data.

**Chart 17**

**National and Urban Unemployment Rates**

Percent, s. a.

8.5

National unemployment rate

8.0

7.5 Urban unemployment rate

7.0

6.5

6.0

5.5

5.0

4.5

4.0

3.5

3.0

June

2.5

J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S JMJ

2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021


s.a./ Seasonally adjusted series and trend series. The former is represented
by a solid line and the latter by a dotted line.
Source: Prepared by Banco de México with data from ENOE, ETOE (from
April to June 2020), and ENOE new edition (ENOE[N]) from July to date.

19


-----

**Chart 18**

**Productivity and Unit Labor Costs in the**

**Manufacturing Sector [1/ ]**

Índexes 2013 = 100, s. a.


170

Unit labor costs

160

Productivity

150

140

130

120

110

100

90

May

80

J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M

2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021


s. a. / Seasonally adjusted and trend series. The former is represented by a
solid line and the latter by a dotted line.
1/ Productivity based on hours worked.
Source: Prepared by with seasonally adjusted data of the Monthly
Manufacturing Industry Survey and industrial activity indicators of Mexico’s
System of National Accounts (Sistema de Cuentas Nacionales de México,
SCNM), INEGI.

In June 2021, domestic financing to firms continued
to contract in real terms at an annual rate. This has
been partly the result of a reduction in bank lending
to both smaller- and large-sized firms. Although the
demand for credit from these companies remains at
low levels, there has been an incipient recovery at
the margin. Likewise, lending conditions for firms in
general continued to be tight as compared to the
beginning of the pandemic, although they have not
presented additional restrictions so far this year.
Meanwhile, during the second quarter of the year, net
corporate debt issuance in the domestic market
continued to show a low dynamism, thus extending
the lackluster behavior observed during the first
quarter of the year. As for credit to households, the
housing portfolio continued to show positive real
annual variations, although its growth has moderated
throughout the year. At the same time, banks’ current
consumer loan portfolio moderated its contraction at
an annual rate, with the greater dynamism of the
credit card and payroll portfolios standing out at the
margin. This, in a context characterized by a gradual
recovery of household demand for credit and where
lending conditions have not shown an additional
tightening.

Interest rates of bank credit to firms have generally
followed the dynamic of the bank funding rate.
Intermediation margins have remained above prepandemic levels. In turn, mortgage interest rates
remained at levels around their historic lows.
Meanwhile, after having decreased in the previous
months, credit card interest rates increased slightly
in April, while in the rest of the segments they
remained relatively stable. Thus, the margins of


intermediation for consumer credit remain at higherthan-pre-pandemic levels. As for portfolio quality, the
corporate loan delinquency rate declined in June and
remained at low levels. After having followed a
moderate upward trend since November 2020, the
mortgage loan delinquency rate also declined and
remains at low levels. Lastly, in spite of having
declined for the fourth consecutive month, consumer
portfolio delinquency rates remain at high levels.

**A.2.3. Development of inflation and inflation**
**outlook**

Between June and July 2021, annual headline
inflation fell from 5.88 to 5.81%. Non-core inflation
contributed 13 basis points to this reduction, which
was partially offset by a higher incidence of core
inflation of 6 basis points (Chart 19 and Table 1). The
decline in non-core inflation was associated with
lower energy inflation, as the arithmetic effect of the
significant decreases in gasoline prices in April 2020
continued to fade. Higher core inflation reflects the
additional shocks that continue to affect it, such as
disruptions in supply chains and in the production
processes of various goods and services.

**Chart 19**

**Consumer Price Index**

**Annual percentage change**

13

12 CPI

11 Core

10

Non-core

9

8

7

6

5

4

3

2

1

0

-1

-2

-3 July

J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M

2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021

Source: Banco de México and INEGI.

Indeed, between June and July 2021, annual core
inflation increased from 4.58 to 4.66%. Annual
merchandise inflation changed from 5.81 to 5.74%
(Chart 20), reflecting an increase from 5.91 to 6.14%
in food items and a reduction from 5.69 to 5.30% in
non-food items (Chart 21). In turn, as demand for
several of these services continued to recover,
annual inflation of services further increased, from
3.22 to 3.46% in the referred period. Most of this
behavior was due to the increase in the annual
inflation of the other services category, which
registered 4.78 and 5.17% during this period, with the

20

|CPI|Col2|Col3|Col4|
|---|---|---|---|
|||||
|Core||||
|Non-core||||
|||||
|||||
|||||
|||||
|||||
|||||
|||||
|||||
|||||
|||||
|||||
|J||||


-----

higher annual variations in the prices of tourism, food
and entertainment services standing out the most.

**Chart 20**

**Merchandise and Services Core Price Sub-index**

Annual percentage change

7

Merchandise

6 Services

5

4

3

2

1

F1 Jul.

0

J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M

2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021

Source: Banco de México and INEGI.

**Chart 21**

**Merchandise Core Price Sub-index**

Annual percentage change

8

7

6

5

4

3

2

1

Food, beverages and tobacco Non-food merchandise July

0

J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M

2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021


**Chart 22**

**Non-core Price Sub-index**

Annual percentage change


25

20

15

10

5

0

Non-core

-5 Agricultural and livestock products

Energy and government-authorized prices

-10

-15 July

J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M

2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021


Source: Banco de México and INEGI.

Annual non-core inflation decreased from 10.00 to
9.39% between June and July 2021 (Chart 22 and
Table 1). This trend was mainly determined by the
decrease from 17.13 to 14.41% in the annual inflation
of energy products, as a result of lower annual
variations in gasoline prices, which went from 15.85
to 9.69%, and which continue to reflect the fading of
the arithmetic effect of the significant decreases in
their prices in April of last year. Nevertheless, this
was partially offset by the increase from 6.95 to
7.77% in the annual inflation of agricultural and
livestock products.


Source: Banco de México and INEGI.

As for inflation expectations drawn from Banco de
México’s Survey among Private Sector Forecasters,
between May and July, the median of expected
headline inflation for the end of 2021 increased from
5.00 to 6.00%, while that corresponding to the core
component increased from 3.91 to 4.66%. In turn,
medians of expectations for the end of 2022 were
adjusted from 3.61 to 3.67% for headline inflation,
and from 3.60 to 3.68% for core inflation. On the
other hand, the medians of headline and core
inflation expectations for the medium and long terms
remained around 3.50%. Finally, the compensation
for inflation and inflation risk increased and remains
at high levels. Within it, both inflation expectations
and the inflation risk premium increased.

Considering the nature of the shocks that have
affected headline and core inflation, these are
expected to decrease, particularly for horizons of one
year and beyond, and to converge to the 3% target
during the first quarter of 2023. These forecasts are
subject to risks and additional shocks. On the upside:
i) external inflationary pressures; ii) cost-related
pressures; iii) core inflation persistence; iv) exchange
rate depreciation; and v) increases in agricultural and
livestock product prices. On the downside: i) effects
stemming from the negative output gap; ii) additional
social distancing; and iii) exchange rate appreciation.
The balance of risks for the trajectory of inflation
within the forecast horizon is biased to the upside.

21


-----

**Table 1**

**Consumer Price Index and Components**

Annual percentage change

**Item** **May 2021** **June 2021** **July 2021**

**CPI** **5.89** **5.88** **5.81**

**SubyacenteCore** **4.37** **4.58** **4.66**

**Merchandise** **5.76** **5.81** **5.74**

Food, beverages and tobacco 5.49 5.91 6.14

Non-food merchandise 6.05 5.69 5.30

**Services** **2.84** **3.22** **3.46**

Housing 1.86 1.98 2.09

Education (tuitions) 1.12 1.15 1.23

Other services 4.08 4.78 5.17

**No SubyacenteNon-core** **10.76** **10.00** **9.39**

**Agricultural and livestock products** **4.67** **6.95** **7.77**

Fruits and vegetablesFruits abd vegetables -3.63 2.65 4.99

Livestock productsLivestock 12.23 10.61 10.08

**Energy and government-authorized prices Energéticos y Tarifas Aut. por Gobierno** **15.97** **12.45** **10.67**

Energy productsEnergy 22.96 17.13 14.41

Government-authorized pricesTarifas Autorizadas por Gobierno 2.25 2.72 2.57

Source:INEGI.

22


-----

-----

-----

