-----

-----

**FOREWARNING**
This document is provided for the reader’s convenience
only. The translation from the official Spanish version was
made by Banco de México’s staff. Discrepancies may arise
between the original document in Spanish and its English
translation. For this reason, the original Spanish version is
the only official document.


**1. PLACE, DATE, AND PARTICIPANTS**

**1.1. Place: Meeting held by virtual means.**

**1.2. Date of Governing Board meeting: September**
29, 2021.

**1.3. Participants:**

Alejandro Díaz de León, Governor.
Galia Borja, Deputy Governor.
Irene Espinosa, Deputy Governor.
Gerardo Esquivel, Deputy Governor.
Jonathan Heath, Deputy Governor.
Rogelio Eduardo Ramírez, Secretary of Finance and
Public Credit.
Gabriel Yorio, Undersecretary of Finance and Public
Credit.
Elías Villanueva, Secretary of the Governing Board.

Prior to this meeting, preliminary work by Banco de
México’s staff analyzing the economic and financial
environment as well as the developments in inflation
and the determinants and outlook for inflation, was
conducted and presented to the Governing Board
(see Annex).

**2. ANALYSIS AND RATIONALE BEHIND THE**
**GOVERNING BOARD’S VOTING**

**_International environment_**

**The majority mentioned that global economic**
**activity continued to recover, although at a**
**slower** **pace** **and** **heterogeneously** **across**

**countries and sectors, associated with vaccine**
**availability, the evolution of the pandemic, and**
**spending** **programs.** **They** **noted** **that** **the**

**shortage of inputs has contributed to a**
**deceleration of industrial and manufacturing**
**production. One member stated that retail sales and**
purchasing managers’ indices also show signs of
moderation. He/she added that in several countries,
output and employment gaps remain negative,
particularly in emerging economies with a tighter
fiscal and monetary space. Another member added
that the global economy continues to be affected by
the effects of the pandemic: i) the health challenge


associated with infections and the vaccination
process; ii) the heterogeneity in the recovery; iii) the
differences among countries regarding the space
available to incentivize spending; iv) the transition
from an abrupt shutdown of activities to a vigorous
expansion in a short period of time, which intensified
the impact on the supply chains for goods’ production
and generated an irregular pace in the recovery of
services; and v) a profound reallocation of spending,
with increases in consumption of durable goods and
reductions in services, which increased the

asymmetry in production and price pressures faced
by each sector.

**One member stated that the revisions to growth**
expectations by international organizations point to a
moderation for advanced and Asian economies, as
well as to a marginal increase for Latin American
economies. He/she added that the outlook continues
to be subject to a high degree of uncertainty. He/she
pointed out as factors of concern for global growth: i)
the persistence of heterogeneity among sectors and
economies; ii) the intensification in magnitude and
duration of supply shocks; iii) the high demand due
to the reopening and to the economic stimuli, and iv)
the spread of the Delta variant. **Another member**
noted that growth forecasts for the United States
have been revised downwards for 2021.

**All members mentioned that global inflation**
**continued to increase due to pressures from**
**higher commodity and energy prices, as well as**
**production bottlenecks. Most members added**
**the higher ocean freight costs and some members**
added spending programs and the marked

reallocation of expenditure towards merchandise.
Regarding this last point, one member noted that in
the United States, the deflator for durable goods
spending increased from -1.54% in February 2020 to
6.96% in July of this year. He/she added as factors
that have pressured inflation, the lack of flexibility in
production of goods and the unprecedented
distortions in the labor market that have led to lower
availability of labor, which could be associated with
the perception of contagion risk and with the effects
of transfers to households. **Another member**
detailed that OECD estimates suggest that

transportation costs from China to the United States
and Europe add about 11 percentage points to these
economies' merchandise import price inflation, and
about 1.5 percentage points to overall inflation.
However, one member added that some stabilization
of inflationary dynamics has been observed recently,
particularly in advanced economies and in some
emerging Asian economies.

1


-----

**Another member noted that the difficulties faced on**
the production side do not correspond to typical
supply shocks. He/she added that unprecedented
stimuli spending has been channeled to the
consumption of goods and services available under
the pandemic, thus widening output and price
differences among sectors. He/she argued that the
lack of flexibility in the production of goods, the
reallocation of spending towards merchandise, and
an unprecedented fiscal support in advanced
economies have reduced supply’s capacity to absorb
the growth of demand, generating an environment
prone to multiple shocks and inflationary pressures.
In this regard, he/she pointed out that inflationary
pressures have been heterogeneous and greater in
economies that are more integrated to global trade
and that have implemented greater spending stimuli.
He/she mentioned that the disruptions caused by the
pandemic are very different from those observed in
other crises, contributing to an environment of high
uncertainty, which has made it difficult to identify their
short- and medium-term effects.

**One member considered that inflationary pressures**
can be foreseen to start subsiding once economic
activity normalizes and the production of inputs
increases. He/she pointed out that, in line with the
above, the median of forecasts of the members of the
Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC)

anticipates inflation in the United States to be 2.2%
at the end of 2022. He/she stated that the
expectation of the transitory nature of inflationary
pressures is also reflected in the implied trajectories
for the future prices of wheat, corn and soybean,
which anticipate deflations in 2022. Another member
noted that several measures of inflation expectations
in the United States, including those of business and
consumers, have increased. He/she added that the
5-year breakeven inflation rate implicit in fixedincome markets in that country is 2.5%. One member
argued that given the reopening of the economy, the
higher inflation outlook and pressures on supply
chains and on commodities and energy are not
expected to revert soon, and uncertainty about their
duration prevails. **Another member said that while**
the effects of the shocks are expected to be
predominantly transitory, the risks to price formation
at the global level are on the upside, given the wide
range of prices impacted and the magnitude of the
price increases, and the extended time horizon over
which they have affected inflation. **One member**
added as upside risks that the potential approval of a
new stimulus package in the United States reinforces
demand, as well as a worsening of the energy crisis
in China due to the shortage of coal and natural gas.
However, he/she added that information from market


instruments shows stable inflation expectations for
longer terms.

**The majority pointed out that the central banks of**
**the main advanced economies have maintained**
**their accommodative monetary stance, although**
**some of them are already expecting to reduce it,**
**while those of several emerging economies**
**continue reducing it. One member specified that in**
their latest decisions central banks of advanced
economies reaffirmed that the accommodative
stances, with interest rates at historically low levels,
will be maintained for a prolonged period. Another
member mentioned that the main challenge for
central banks has been to distinguish between
changes in relative prices that are of a transitory
nature and more persistent ones. He/she considered
that in some economies high inflation is being
observed along with macroeconomic imbalances,
forcing their monetary authorities to act more
aggressively. **Most members noted that the**
**Federal Reserve indicated that it could start**
**reducing its asset purchase program this year**
**and that the program would end in mid-2022. One**
member mentioned that while this process is
expected to be orderly, which would avoid an
episode similar to the so-called Taper Tantrum, it is
important to have greater caution, as the latest
forecasts imply a more rapid adjustment than
previously anticipated. **Some members noted that**
both markets and FOMC members expect the first
increase in the federal funds rate to be in 2023.
However, **one member added that several FOMC**
members moved forward their expectations of an
increase to 2022. On the other hand, he/she noted
that, in contrast to the global trend of stimulus
reduction, and derived from the possible default of
China’s real estate developer Evergrande Group, the
People's Bank of China took measures to increase
liquidity in that economy. **Another** member

mentioned that despite the increase in inflation, most
central banks in emerging economies continue with
highly accommodative policy stances and negative
real interest rates, which allows them to continue
supporting economic activity. He/she added that
Mexico stands out for having a positive ex-ante real
interest rate, in contrast to what has been observed
in other economies, which are also registering certain
deviations of inflation from their targets.

**One member highlighted the greater margin for**
monetary policy maneuver in the United States and
other advanced economies. He/she explained that
this is due to structural factors that have lowered
inflation, potential growth, and the neutral rate.
He/she added that these economies could be more

2


-----

patient in withdrawing the monetary stimulus, as in
recent decades their price formation processes and
inflation expectations have remained anchored at or
below their target levels. On the other hand, he/she
mentioned that small and open emerging economies
are highly sensitive to inflationary pressures and
global monetary and financial conditions. He/she
pointed out that Mexico is facing significant external
inflationary pressures and, will soon face the effects
of greater global financial restrictions. He/she stated
that those economies that complement their
domestic savings with external sources must
maintain a sound macroeconomic policy stance.
He/she added that monetary policy should contribute
to maintain inflation around its target, enabling an
orderly adjustment of the economy, the exchange
market and the yield curve, while avoiding capital
outflows. **Another** member pointed out the

importance of coordination between fiscal and
monetary policies and considered that monetary
policy’s effectiveness to achieve the convergence of
inflation to the target could be obstructed. He/she
expressed that the processes of fiscal consolidation
and normalization of interest rates can trigger
different risks that could exert pressure on the
dynamics of global inflation and international
financial conditions, and thus it is likely that countries
facing less fiscal pressure may achieve inflation
convergence towards its targets with less effort than
those in which the fiscal equilibrium has deteriorated
significantly.

**Most members stated that international financial**
**markets exhibited a stable performance, and that,**
**recently, interest rates increased, particularly in**
**the United States and the US dollar appreciated**
**in view of prospects of a reduction in the Federal**
**Reserve's asset purchase program. One member**
noted that although markets have shown some
volatility in recent days, the announcements on the
reduction of asset purchases have been carried out
without major disruptions in debt markets or in risk
premia. **Some members pointed out that in recent**
weeks some stock indices reached historic highs.
**One member stated that this is due to a highly**
accommodative policy stance at the global level,
which implies vulnerabilities in case of a correction in
assets' valuation.

**Some members noted a mixed performance in**
emerging economies' financial markets. **One**

member considered that they were favored by
expectations that an accommodative monetary
policy stance would be maintained in the United
States. He/she noted that volatility in emerging
market currencies decreased sharply, although it


increased towards the end of the period. **Another**
member added that emerging markets exhibited a
negative bias due to higher risk aversion. **One**
member mentioned that moderate capital inflows
were observed, although they concentrated mainly in
China.

**Some members noted that adjustments in monetary**
conditions could lead to episodes of volatility in
international financial markets. **One member noted**
that this could imply a tightening in financial
conditions, especially for emerging economies.
**Another member pointed out that the lack of an**
agreement to increase the debt ceiling in the United
States would cause nervousness in financial markets
and capital outflows from emerging economies to
safe-haven assets. He/she added as a risk the
possible default of _Evergrande Group, since its_
relative importance would imply risks of contagion
and systemic risks, which would translate into
episodes of volatility at a global level and to a
tightening of financing conditions. Meanwhile, **one**
member considered that the highly accommodative
monetary policy would continue to favor global
financial conditions for some time.

**_Economic activity in Mexico_**

**Most members mentioned that the Mexican**
**economy continued to recover during the third**
**quarter of the year, although stating that there**
**are still marked differences across sectors and**
**regions. One member** added that the Central region,
which has a higher concentration of services, was the
most affected by the pandemic, while the Northern
and North-Central regions, where manufacturing
production is more prevalent, performed better.
**Some** members highlighted that economic activity
remains below pre-pandemic levels. **One member**
stated that the latest data point to a deceleration in
economic activity. He/she specified that, according to
the Timely Indicator of Economic Activity (IOAE, for
its acronym in Spanish), in August economic activity
could have registered a level similar to that of May,
indicating four months of stagnation.

**On the demand side, most members** **agreed that**
**consumption continued to recover, although**
**some of them noted that it fell in June.** **Some**
members highlighted that consumption was

supported by the good performance of remittances
and the wage bill. **One** member pointed out that,
during the first 7 months of the year, remittances
increased by 23.5% as compared to the same period
of 2020, and that in July the wage bill exceeded the
levels registered in February 2020. Another member

noted that timely indicators of purchases in

3


-----

commercial establishments suggest consumption
has performed well. In turn, **some** members
underlined the weakness of certain indicators related
to consumption, such as consumer confidence and
sales reported by the National Retailers Association
of Mexico (ANTAD, for its Spanish acronym). **One**
member pointed out that credit card and debit card
expenditure remained stagnant. **Regarding**

**investment, most members** **considered that it**
**remains weak.** **Some members** emphasized that it
remains below pre-pandemic levels. **One** member
considered that investment continued recovering
moderately. **Another** member pointed out that it
showed stability in recent months. **One** member
mentioned that investment is expected to follow an
unfavorable trajectory.

**Regarding the external sector, most members**

**underlined the differentiated performance of**
**exports and problems related to the supply of**
**inputs. Some** members highlighted the impact on
automotive exports, while non-automotive exports
continued recovering. **One** member stated that in
August automotive exports were 16.76% below the
levels registered in February 2020, while nonautomotive manufacturing exports were 8.25%
above the levels observed in the same period of
2020. Another member considered that, despite the
aforementioned supply-related problems, exports
have recovered considerably. However, **one**

member mentioned that in August both oil and nonoil exports fell relative to the previous month.
**Another member** highlighted that non-oil imports of
intermediate goods and consumer goods are above
the levels registered in late 2019, while capital
imports are at lower levels.

**On the supply side, most members underlined**
**the heterogeneous recovery across different**
**sectors. They underlined that manufacturing is**
**still being affected negatively by the shortage of**
**inputs, especially in sectors more integrated to**
**global production chains, such as the automotive**
**sector. They added that services continued to**
**recover, albeit heterogeneously across sectors.**
**One member mentioned that industrial production**
reactivated in July, due to a boost in manufacturing.
However, he/she warned that the sector overall
seems to have lost momentum since the beginning
of the second quarter. Another member stated that
the construction sector shows a lack of dynamism
and noted that tertiary activities have performed
better, although in recent months they have slightly
decelerated. **One** member added that most

components of this sector are still below their prepandemic levels. **Another** member stated that


services continue recovering, with the negative
impact centered on the sectors most exposed to
contagion dynamics.

**Most members highlighted that the labor market**
**continues to recover. However, they noted that**
**weak conditions still prevail. One member pointed**
out that labor participation has not returned to its prepandemic levels yet, that the urban unemployment
rate is 5.5%, and that the underemployment rate is
13%, a level almost twice as high as in normal times.
**Another** member stated that underemployment
remains the buffer for the labor market. One member
added that alternative unemployment increased
slightly in July, and that it is currently above prepandemic levels. Another member pointed out that
the unemployment rate has not decreased

significantly since May and that it is still far from its
pre-pandemic levels. He/she mentioned that the
unemployment rate that includes the

underemployed, the unemployed and the inactive
who are available to work is at 26.3% of the extended
PEA (Economically Active Population, for its Spanish
acronym). He/she highlighted that formal IMSSinsured employment has continued to recover, and is
currently at a level 192 thousand jobs lower than that
observed in February 2020. Some members added
that the recovery of the labor market is still unequal
by gender. One member underlined that the reading
of the labor market has become more complicated.

**All members agreed that the economy maintains**
**ample slack conditions, with marked differences**
**across sectors. One member stated that, according**
to timely information, slack conditions continued to
narrow during the third quarter, although they remain
wide and heterogeneous across sectors. **Some**
members mentioned that these are expected to
continue narrowing. **One** member emphasized that
there is a greater uncertainty in estimates of slack.
He/she added that this derives from the pandemicrelated effects on goods and services’ production
capacity, and from a deep reallocation of spending.
**Another** member expressed that the Global
Economic Activity Indicator (IGAE, for its Spanish
acronym) has not yet surpassed its pre-pandemic
level, and that aggregate activity remains 7.6% below
its trend level according to the OECD. He/she stated
that all of the above is evidence of the long road that
the Mexican economy still has ahead to reach a full
recovery. One member mentioned that the closure of
activities and the decrease in certain firms’ capacity
might have affected markets’ flexibility and

competitiveness, as well as potential growth. These
effects are hard to estimate given that, at the same
time, digitalization and automation processes have

4


-----

accelerated and human-capital formation processes
have been affected.

**Most members** **highlighted that the Mexican**
**economy is expected to continue recovering**
**during the rest of the year and in 2022. One**
member stated that said prevision is based on
advances in the vaccination process, the boost from
external demand, and the recovery of domestic
spending. **Another** member mentioned that market
consensus maintains optimistic expectations which
confirm a more robust recovery pattern than initially
anticipated. **One** member mentioned that the third
wave of infections, less mobility, stagnation of the
IGAE and the decline in business opinion and
consumer confidence indicators represent risks for
the recovery, which is not yet fully established and is
incomplete.

**_Inflation in Mexico_**

**All members mentioned that global inflationary**
**pressures** **and** **bottlenecks** **in** **production**

**continue affecting headline and core inflation.**
**Some members** highlighted the influence of

inflationary pressures in the United States. In this
regard, one member underlined that such economy
stands out for its high inflationary pressures. Some
members pointed out that the above has affected
food merchandise prices. **One** member highlighted
the importance of these prices in the case of Mexico,
given that the food component has a weight of close
to 25% in headline inflation, while in other emerging
economies it is merely 22%, and in advanced
economies it is 14%. Nevertheless, he/she pointed
out that international references suggest that some of
these pressures have started to decline. **Another**
member mentioned the disproportionate impact of
food commodity prices on a reduced group of
products relevant for the Consumer Price Index.
He/she mentioned that the atypical inflation of just
three key products: cooking oils, corn tortilla, and
fresh milk, accounts for 50 basis points of the
increase in core inflation in 2021. Nonetheless,
he/she added that the international prices of the main
production inputs of the latter have already started to
decrease. **One** member mentioned that non-food
merchandise inflation is also highly correlated with
that of the United States, which generates a process
of imported inflation which would explain the
dynamics of higher inflation in the Northern and
North-Central regions of Mexico. **Another** member
pointed out that during 2020, the decline in world
inflation levels did not occur in the same magnitude
in Mexico. He/she stated that, despite the stability of
the Mexican peso, the prices of goods and services


that are susceptible to foreign exchange adjustments
have increased constantly, which suggests the high
sensitivity of these goods to other global costs in
addition to exchange rate pressures.

**Most members** **emphasized the increase in**
**headline and core inflation in the first fortnight of**
**September. One member indicated that unexpected**
increments have been observed since the previous
monetary policy decision. He/she added that, this
year so far, monthly headline inflation has been
above analysts’ expectations and only on two
occasions core inflation was lower than anticipated.
**Another** member highlighted that inflation

rebounded consistently, coming close to 6%, despite
economic activity remaining below pre-pandemic
levels, the insufficient recovery of employment, and
credit to the private sector continuing to contract.
He/she added that the persistence of high inflation
levels for a prolonged period can contaminate the
price formation process and lead to a de-anchoring
of expectations. **One** member underlined that
headline inflation was affected by additional shocks,
causing its trimmed mean indicator to be above 5%.
He/she mentioned that, among emerging economies,
Mexico has one of the highest levels of headline and
core inflation relative to the headline inflation target,
and that, in line with some estimates, recent
inflationary dynamics are being pressured by both
short-term and higher-persistence factors. He/she
added that the frequency and the magnitude of
fortnightly revisions have increased, particularly in
merchandise prices. He/she noted that surveys
among private sector businesses point to multiple
significant effects on their productive processes, with
possible implications on prices. Finally, he/she
mentioned that the financial cost in real terms
decreased for all agents and is below the costs
expected at the beginning of the year. **Another**
member considered that inflationary pressures have
started to decrease at the margin. He/she stated that,
over the last three fortnights, the monthly changes in
headline inflation, services inflation, and non-core
inflation have been in line with their historic average.
He/she indicated that the only component with
behavior deviating from its historic average is that of
merchandise, which has been affected by disruptions
in supply chains and by changes in consumption
patterns. However, he/she considered that the
magnitude of increments in this component is likely
to have decreased.

**Most members noted that core inflation has**
**followed an upward trend, mainly due to an**
**increase in the annual change in merchandise**
**prices. Some** members pointed out that core

5


-----

inflation has been above 4% for a prolonged period.
**Some members noted that the trimmed mean**
indicator of this component continues to increase.
**One member stated that the levels the core sub-**
index is registering are among the highest observed
since April 2009. All components of this sub-index
are under pressure as more than half of their monthly
increments lie above 4% at an annualized rate.
Meanwhile the trimmed mean indicator continues
showing the same trend than the official figure, which
has increased for 10 consecutive months, and
already stands nearly at 5%. **One member**
mentioned that supercore inflation is at 3.43%, which
is similar to its pre-pandemic levels. **Another**
member noted that, over the past five years,
merchandise prices have faced constant pressures,
which could not be contained during the pandemic
despite an unprecedented negative output gap. One
member added that different measures, that adjust
this index for seasonality or that are obtained from a
decomposition at different frequencies, suggest that
the pressures affecting it are greater than those
observed in other inflationary episodes. He/she
stated that pressures on non-food merchandise
prices show a high degree of dispersion, making it
difficult to determine the average duration of these
pressures. **Some members mentioned the rise in**
services inflation in recent months, although **other**
members noted that this component declined at the
margin. **One** member considered that,

notwithstanding the above, the services component
continues to be an additional factor of inflationary
pressures. **Another** member noted that the

phenomenon of reversion to trend associated to the
gradual reopening of the economy has led to an
increase in the annual rate of inflation in the clothing
and services components which had displayed price
increases below their historical average in 2020.
However, he/she stated that the annualized biennial
rate, which eliminates the ups and downs that
occurred in the previous two years, shows that the
trend in these components is quite stable.

**Some** members mentioned that non-core inflation
reached 8.86% in the first fortnight of September.
**One** member emphasized that the evolution of this
component has reflected two opposite movements:
the effect of greater variations in agricultural and
livestock product prices and the decline in LP gas
inflation from June to date, as a result of the price cap
policy. He/she considered that this contributes to an
underestimation of inflation, since during this period
the international references of LP gas continued to
increase, and thus, in the absence of price caps,
headline inflation would probably have been adjusted
upwards. **Another member stated that the recent**


behavior of the non-core sub-index is mainly
explained by the increases in LP gas prices, since
the price cap policy allows for an adjustment in
consumer prices according to international

references.

**The majority of members pointed out that**
**expectations for headline and core inflation for**
**2021 and 2022 increased again, while medium-**
**and** **long-term** **inflation** **expectations** **have**

**remained more stable, although the latter are at**
**levels above the target. They highlighted that**
**short-term expectations are well above the**
**target. One member stated that expectations for the**
end of 2022 are at a level close to the average
observed in other inflationary episodes. **Another**
member attributed the stability of long-term

expectations to the credibility of the central bank.
**One** member considered the stability of these
expectations to be consistent with the transitory
nature of current inflationary pressures. As for
inflation expectations derived from market

instruments, he/she mentioned that those of 6 to 10
years are currently at 3.0%. On the other hand,
**another member added that the compensation for**
inflation and inflationary risk implicit in 10-year and
30-year bonds displays a cumulative increase during
the year of 70 and 73 basis points, respectively.
He/she considered it of concern that these are on an
upward trend and warned that such behavior could
mark the beginning of a process of de-anchoring of
long-term expectations.

**Most members noted that headline and core**
**inflation forecasts were again revised upwards**
**from those published in the April-June 2021**
**Quarterly Report. One** member stated that this
responds to the inflationary pressures that have
arisen and to the reduction of slack. **Another**
member pointed out that headline inflation is
expected to converge to the target in the third quarter
of 2023. He/she mentioned that the revised forecasts
do not consider additional shocks or the possibility
that the current ones may be prolonged. **One**
member highlighted that the scenarios locate
inflation at twice the target level. He/she estimated
that headline inflation will be around 6.4% at the end
of the year and that core inflation will be above 5%
during the next nine months, reaching a maximum
level of 5.6% in February 2022.

**The majority of members pointed out that**
**inflationary** **pressures** **are** **associated** **with**

**shocks that are expected to be transitory.**
**However, they noted the risk of a negative impact**
**on the price formation process. One** member

6


-----

mentioned that pressures have continued to worsen
due to external and domestic factors, and thus their
transitory nature seems to be less probable. He/she
warned that the persistence of high inflation levels for
a prolonged period could de-anchor medium- and
long-term expectations. He/she said that if inflation
remains high for a prolonged period, economic
agents incorporate it into their expectations without
distinguishing between transitory or permanent
increases or between those coming from supply or
demand shocks, so that inflationary pressures tend
to become entrenched. Another member mentioned
that in addition to supply shocks, inflation is also
facing various structural factors that will limit the
decline in prices in the coming months. He/she
pointed out that inflationary pressures point to a
structural and inertial problem of core inflation that
can hardly be considered transitory. He/she added
that the changes in relative prices originated by the
new consumption patterns possibly will not be
reversed in a long time, given that the upward
adjustment in service prices is occurring at the same
time that merchandise inflation remains high. **One**
member mentioned that high inflation is the result of
various transitory or exogenous factors: i) the
increase in international commodity prices; ii) the
reversion of prices to their trend in a group of goods
and services, which should not be cause for concern
for the central bank since it is the result of the process
of closing and gradual reopening of the economy;
and iii) the adjustment in the relative prices of some
goods derived from changes in consumption patterns
and disruptions in production processes. He/she
stated that the change in consumption patterns is a
one-time change, and warned that, in the case of
disruptions in production processes, it is foreseen
that these pressures are to begin receding as the
normalization process advances. He/she added that
in the first fortnight of September the joint effect of
the atypical variations in merchandise prices and the
reversion in services and clothing prices was 109
basis points, which reveals that a significant part of
the increase in core inflation is transitory in nature.
He/she considered that inflationary pressures have
started to ease at the margin, which will result in a
reduction of the annual inflation rate in the future.

**Among the upward risks to inflation, most**
**members** **mentioned** **external** **inflationary**

**pressures. Some members added cost pressures**
and an exchange rate depreciation. **One member**
mentioned also the risk of high persistence of core
inflation and increases in agricultural and livestock
product prices. **Another member noted that higher**
inflationary pressures are expected as the reopening
progresses and the output gap closes. One member


noted that, although the deterioration in short-term
inflation expectations is marginal, inflation has
continued to rise and, although a further increase
was already anticipated due to arithmetic effects, this
dynamic represents a challenge if inflation

expectations continue to be revised upwards. As for
downside risks, **another member pointed to the**
widening of the negative output gap, further social
distancing measures, and an exchange rate
appreciation. **Most members considered the**
**balance of risks to inflation within the forecast**
**horizon to be biased to the upside.** **One member**
mentioned that this is due to the persistence of
multiple supply shocks and the external boost to
aggregate demand, and added that inflationary
pressures are expected to continue for the next few
months.

**_Macrofinancial environment_**

**Most members considered that Mexican financial**
**markets have exhibited a mixed performance**
**since the previous monetary policy decision.**
**They** **mentioned** **that** **the** **Mexican** **peso**

**appreciated slightly, although in recent days, and**
**in** **line** **with** **what** **has** **been** **observed**

**internationally, it depreciated and its volatility**
**increased. One member noted that the recent**
depreciation was due to the fact that the peso is one
of the most sensitive currencies to interest rate
adjustments, which has led to the currency reaching
levels above 20.50 pesos per dollar. He/she added
that a favorable adjustment could take place as
volatility conditions normalize. **Most members**
**mentioned that interest rates increased. One**
member pointed out that the yield curve of
government instruments rose, especially in the
middle part. **Some members pointed out that the**
stock market recently registered adjustments in a
narrow range. One member added that the Mexican
stock market recorded its highest level of the year
during this period. **Another member noted that**
trading conditions in both the fixed income and equity
markets in Mexico had improved. He/she added that
sovereign risk indicators deteriorated slightly. **One**
member stated that Pemex's risk indicators are still
among the highest of all oil companies worldwide.
Regarding monetary aggregates, he/she

emphasized the deceleration in their expansion rate,
mainly explained by a lower growth of term deposits,
since demand for liquid assets remains high,
although **another** member considered that it is still
below its level of 2020.

**One member pointed out that fiscal discipline in**
Mexico is an anchor for macroeconomic stability,

7


-----

since there is currently no problem in this area that
could exert pressure on sovereign risk or the
exchange rate. **Another member added that**
optimistic growth expectations are strengthened by a
balanced fiscal package that, although it does not
generate much momentum, it does not distort the
decisions of economic agents.

**Most members pointed out that credit to the**
**private sector continued to perform poorly and**
**highlighted the fall in financing to firms. One**
member stated that this segment has been the most
affected, with a reduction of 9.7% in real terms.
**Another member mentioned that financing to Small-**
and Medium-sized Enterprises (SMEs) shows a
contraction of 13% compared to pre-pandemic
levels, with no signs of improvement. He/she argued
that a contraction of credit is observed even in
sectors that did not experience a recession. **Most**
**members noted that consumer credit continued**
**to decline and** **some members indicated that**
mortgage lending has grown at a more moderate
pace. **One** member pointed out that total financing
continued to contract in real terms at an annual rate,
albeit at a slower pace than in previous months.
He/she added that foreign financing contracted more
than domestic financing. Some members mentioned
that delinquency rates have continued to decrease.
**One member pointed out that this, together with**
financial stability conditions, minimizes the possible
harmful effect of higher interest rates on households
and firms. He/she added that the decline in credit and
investment responds to factors beyond monetary
policy, such as economic slack and the environment
of uncertainty.

**_Monetary policy_**

**Most Governing Board members pointed out that**
**due to the variety, magnitude, and the extended**
**horizon over which the shocks have affected**
**inflation, they may pose risks to the price**
**formation process and to inflation expectations.**
**In order to avoid such risks, they** **deemed**
**necessary to reinforce the monetary policy**
**stance by adjusting it to the trajectory required**
**for inflation to converge to its 3% target within**
**the forecast horizon. Therefore, they decided to**
**increase the target for the overnight interbank**
**interest rate by 25 basis points to 4.75%. They**
**emphasized that for the next monetary policy**
**decisions they will assess the factors that have**
**an incidence on the foreseen trajectory for**
**inflation and its expectations, in order for the**
**policy rate to be consistent at all times with the**
**orderly and sustained convergence of headline**


**inflation to the 3% target within the time frame in**
**which monetary policy operates, enabling an**
**adequate adjustment of the economy and**
**financial markets.**

**One member considered that given the transitory**
and exogenous nature of the inflationary process, a
less accommodative monetary stance would be
inefficient as it does not solve the problems that give
rise to the current levels of inflation such as the
increase in the prices of commodities and the
problems in supply chains. In contrast, he/she
considered that a higher rate would have a negative
impact on a wide range of the economy’s margins,
such as consumption, investment, credit, public
finances and domestic financial markets, among
others. He/she argued that this would occur in the
midst of a still incomplete recovery from one of the
most severe crises on record. He/she added that the
variables most sensitive to monetary policy, such as
credit, consumption and investment, have

deteriorated considerably. He/she pointed out that
raising interest rates in the current juncture would
also imply not taking advantage of the anchor of
fiscal discipline on country risk and on the foreign
exchange rate. He/she highlighted that in the
absence of fiscal discipline, the central bank is
obliged to provide such an anchor, but that the
current fiscal policy should make room for a more
accommodative monetary policy. He/she stated that
interest rate increases reduce room for eventually
reacting to a cycle of increases in the Federal
Reserve’s funds rate and that if Banco de México
acts too soon in anticipation, it may be forced to bring
the interest rate to levels that are too restrictive in
order to avoid a deterioration of its relative stance.
He/she stated that a continued upward adjustment in
interest rates may be interpreted as a signal that
observed inflation is of a relatively permanent nature.
He/she considered that this may affect inflation
expectations and the price formation process.
He/she pointed out that the recent interest rate
increases and the subsequent adjustments to shortterm inflation expectations seem to confirm this.
He/she stated that, from the first increase to date,
short-term inflation expectations have only

increased, so that the intended objective of the
supposed reinforcement of monetary policy seems to
have had very low effectiveness. He/she mentioned
that it would be better to have a more effective
communication policy that thoroughly explains the
nature of the inflationary shock, instead of
responding mechanically with interest rate increases,
which do not manage to slow inflation down and may
negatively affect inflation expectations and the price
formation process. He/she expressed that, from

8


-----

his/her view, the idea that interest rate increases are
necessary to reinforce the institution’s credibility
seems to underestimate the progress achieved in
this realm.

**Another member highlighted that with the aim of**
preventing inflation expectations from deteriorating,
the recommendation has been to take prudent
decisions that are predictable and well
communicated. He/she highlighted that it is important
to differentiate between a reinforcement of monetary
policy and a cycle of interest rate increases, given
that the Mexican economy is in a better

macroeconomic position than other similar

economies, fiscal and monetary stimuli in Mexico
were limited, and an ample slack has been
maintained. He/she stated that reinforcing monetary
policy allows to act preventively in light of
expectations of less accommodative monetary
conditions worldwide in the following months, at a
time when inflation has increased again and in which
its expectations for the next 12 months and for the
end of next year have been marginally affected.
He/she considered that expectations for the next 12
months registered the greater increase and may limit
the effectiveness of the monetary policy

reinforcement. He/she added that monetary policy’s
effectiveness is also achieved by effectively
communicating the factors that are determining the
evolution of prices. He/she pointed out that most of
the current inflationary pressures are attributable to
an unprecedented situation that will not continue
indefinitely, but that these pressures represent a
challenge to decision making. He/she estimated that,
considering that the current asymmetric supply shock
has favored some sectors and harmed others, a
process of reallocation of resources in the economy,
which monetary policy should facilitate, is expected.
He/she warned that as a consequence of the
pandemic, demand conditions in the loanable funds
market have been significantly compressed to levels
even below those of the 2008 crisis, which could
suggest that the range in which the neutral interest
rate is estimated may have adjusted downwards.

**One** **member stated that an increase in the**
reference rate indicates that the Governing Board is
worried about the level and trajectory of inflation and
is acting decisively. He/she mentioned that decisive
monetary policy actions are required, taking
advantage of the spaces available to meet the central
bank’s primary mandate. He/she noted that recently
inflation has been above expectations, leading to
their steady deterioration, with levels above 6% for
2021 and with smaller increases for 2022. He/she
pointed out that this has led to expectations of


reference rate increases in the following months,
which, in the current scenario, may be justified.
He/she warned that if these increases do not
materialize, it could be interpreted as a signal of
complacency. He/she noted that it must be explained
that inflationary shocks demand decisive actions and
it must be warned that, if inflation continues to
increase, the expansionary policy stance will
continue to diminish. He/she stated that in this way
credibility will be strengthened in order to maintain
inflationary expectations anchored, which allows to
comply with the central bank’s primary mandate.
He/she pointed out that expectations of a more
robust recovery diminishes the need for a further
stimulus. He/she added that financial conditions and
the absolute and relative monetary policy stances
allow to continue with an adjustment. Likewise,
global monetary conditions also aim towards a
relative monetary policy stance that is less lax.
He/she stated that the improvement in trading
conditions in money markets allows to raise interest
rates without an undesired tightening of financial
conditions. He/she considered that raising the
reference rate will have a reduced effect on
economic recovery, given the limited transmission of
the credit channel. He/she mentioned that the
causality of monetary policy on inflation via the
expectations channel is not bidirectional, since a
more restrictive policy stance helps to reduce
inflationary pressures rather than the other way
around. Furthermore, the increase in the interest rate
sends a signal of greater commitment with the
primary objective, while the inaction of monetary
policy given the accumulation of inflationary shocks
is a factor that generates a deterioration of
expectations. For that reason, he/she pointed out
that monetary policy must be proactive in face of the
harmful effects of inflationary shocks, regardless of
their nature or temporality. Thus, the increase in
rates is a preventive and timely measure in view of
transitory shocks that but which, when combined,
have an indeterminate duration which may transcend
the time-frame in which monetary policy operates.
He/she added that this increase is a direct signal that
that more inflation will not be tolerated, in order to
avoid a greater deterioration of inflation expectations
that would make it harder to maintain an environment
of price stability. Finally, he/she pointed out that if the
increase in prices were to continue, the expansionary
monetary policy stance will have to be reduced until
a neutral posture is achieved, or even one that is
slightly restrictive, more consistent with the current

9


-----

inflationary gap and a much narrower negative output
gap.

**Another** **member highlighted the rise in inflation**
once again above expectations, and the subsequent
upward adjustment of the expected trajectory in an
environment of high uncertainty, pointing out that this
situation implies renewed tensions in monetary policy
implementation. He/she added that the increase in
inflation has implied a significant loss of purchasing
power for the population and that if inflation were to
remain elevated for a prolonged period, it would be
incorporated into agents’ inflation expectations,
which would tend to entrench inflationary pressures
in the economy. He/she considered that any likely
initial stage of a process of de-anchoring of long-term
expectations necessarily requires timely action by
this central bank. He/she mentioned that if a new
adjustment were not implemented, the convergence
of inflation to the target within the time frame in which
monetary policy operates would be jeopardized.
Additionally, he/she reflected that the appropriate
pace for withdrawing the monetary stimulus must be
evaluated, arguing that a greater effort should be
made in normalizing monetary policy, in order to
avoid a scenario of exchange rate depreciation and
an acceleration in the pace of price increases.
He/she pointed out that failure to do so would mean
failing to comply with the primary mandate. He/she
recalled that, between 2015 and 2017, it took an
increase of 400 basis points and 20 months for core
inflation to start declining, in the presence of new
shocks. He/she highlighted that an increase in the
rate would seek to prevent the further strengthening
of second round effects in the price formation
process. He/she stated that, for the time being, no
additional risks have materialized but it is very likely
that a more complex scenario will be observed,
which, under a preventive approach, would require a
more aggressive adjustment. He/she added that, in
light of the above, it is essential to maintain a prudent
approach in monetary policy that allows to implement
adjustments in a timely and sufficient manner, and
ensures an orderly and sustainable convergence of
inflation to the target.

**One** **member pointed out that headline and core**
inflation forecasts have been revised significantly
upwards on numerous occasions throughout the
year, in response to inflationary pressures and to a
reduction in ample slack conditions. He/she added
that this points to the need for a trajectory for the
interest rate target that reduces the monetary
stimulus. He/she added that, considering the
simultaneity and magnitude of the shocks that have
affected headline and core inflation, as well as the


upward revision of their forecasts and that slack in
the economy will close at a faster pace than
previously expected, it is essential for Banco de
México to reinforce its commitment to comply with its
constitutional mandate of safeguarding the domestic
currency’s purchasing power. He/she argued that
although shocks to headline and core inflation are
expected to be mostly transitory in nature, there is a
risk that price formation and inflation expectations
may be contaminated due to: i) the broad range of
prices affected; ii) the magnitude of price increases;
iii) the extended horizon over which they have
occurred; iv) the persistent reallocation of household
spending; and v) greater uncertainty about the
adjustment of the economy and prices in the face of
an unprecedented scenario. He/she considered that
tolerating high inflation levels, very much above the
target, without reinforcing the monetary policy stance
to levels consistent with a trajectory that fosters the
convergence of inflation to the target within the
forecast horizon, would contribute to deteriorate the
price formation process and contaminate inflation
expectations, which would in turn undermine Banco
de México's credibility, with high costs for society.

**3. MONETARY POLICY DECISION**

Although the shocks that have increased inflation are
expected to be transitory, due to their variety,
magnitude, and the extended horizon over which
they have affected it, they may pose risks to the price
formation process and to inflation expectations. In
order to avoid such risks, it was deemed necessary
to reinforce the monetary policy stance by adjusting
it to the trajectory required for inflation to converge to
its 3% target within the forecast horizon. The
Governing Board decided to increase the target for
the overnight interbank interest rate by 25 basis
points to 4.75%.

For the next monetary policy decisions, the
Governing Board will assess the factors that have an
incidence on the foreseen trajectory for inflation and
its expectations, in order for the policy rate to be
consistent at all times with the orderly and sustained
convergence of headline inflation to the 3% target
within the time frame in which monetary policy
operates, enabling an adequate adjustment of the
economy and financial markets.

**4. VOTING**

Alejandro Díaz de León, Galia Borja, Irene Espinosa,
and Jonathan Heath voted in favor of increasing the
target for the overnight interbank interest rate by 25
basis points to 4.75%. Gerardo Esquivel voted in

10


-----

favor of leaving the target for the overnight interbank
interest rate unchanged at 4.50%.

**5. DISSENTING OPINIONS/ VOTES**

**Vote. Gerardo Esquivel**

I believe that raising the interest rate in the current
juncture is ineffective and inefficient. It is ineffective
because a higher rate does not solve the factors that
originate inflationary pressures: increases in

international input prices and disruptions in supply
chains. It is inefficient because the increase may
affect the economy in several areas: consumption,
investment, credit and public finances. The increase
also reduces future room for the time when the


Federal Reserve begins its normalization process.
Acting too soon in anticipation of said process may
imply that in the future the rate will have to be
adjusted to a very restrictive level to avoid affecting
the relative policy stance. Finally, the increase could
also be counterproductive. Continued increases
could be interpreted as signals that inflation is of a
permanent nature. This could affect expectations and
the price formation process. Since the first increase
to date, short-term expectations have only risen and
therefore the sought objective has not been met.
Thus, the question arises as to whether a
communication policy that explains the nature of the
current inflationary shock clearly would be better than
responding mechanically with continuous rate
increases.

11


-----

**ANNEX**

The information in this Annex was prepared for this
meeting by the staff of Banco de México’s
Directorate General of Economic Research and
Directorate General of Central Bank Operations. It
does not necessarily reflect the considerations of the
members of the Governing Board as to the monetary
policy decision.

**A.1. External conditions**

**A.1.1. World economic activity**

Available indicators suggest that world economic
activity continued to recover during the third quarter
of the year, although at a slower pace than as
expected at mid-year. This recovery was driven by
the expansion of the major advanced economies and
of some emerging economies. Recovery continued
to be heterogeneous across countries, reflecting
differences in the availability of vaccines, the
evolution of the pandemic, and stimulus spending.
The dynamism of industrial production has

diminished due to the intensification of bottlenecks,
the re-imposition of certain restrictions on mobility in
some Asian economies, and the shortage of inputs
(Chart 1). Services have also shown a slower pace
of recovery in recent months, despite the fact that the
reopening process has continued in most

economies. Global inflation continued to increase
due to pressures on commodity prices, base effects,
bottlenecks in production, spending support

programs and the reallocation of spending towards
merchandises. As such, in most of the main
advanced and emerging economies, inflation was
above their central banks' targets.

In this environment, the central banks of the major
advanced economies have maintained their

monetary stimulus, although those of Norway and
Korea announced an increase in their interest rates
and others already foresee a reduction of their
monetary stimulus, while those of several emerging
economies continue to diminish it. Financial markets
remained fairly stable for most of the period since
Mexico’s last monetary policy decision, although in
recent weeks an increase in volatility and lower risk
appetite at a global level were observed. The above,
in an environment in which there are also concerns
regarding the spread of the Delta variant of the
SARS-CoV-2 virus and the real estate sector in
China, among other factors.

1 Expressed as a quarterly annualized rate, US seasonally adjusted GDP
grew at a rate of 6.6% during the second quarter of 2021.


Among key global risks, those associated with the
pandemic, inflationary pressures, and adjustments
to monetary and financial conditions stand out. In
particular, the emergence of new and more resistant
variants of the SARS-CoV-2 virus, coupled with the
slow vaccination process in some countries, may
delay global economic recovery. Although some of
the factors that have been driving global inflation are
expected to be largely transitory, it cannot be ruled
out that some of them, such as the disruptions in
global supply chains, may last longer than
anticipated, resulting in a greater persistence of
inflation at high levels, which in a context of
economic recovery could lead to a more rapid
tightening of monetary policy.

**Chart 1**

**Global: Purchasing Managers’ Index:**

**Production Component**

Diffusion Index, s. a.

65

60

55

50

45

40

35 Manufacturing

Manufacturing (excl. China)

30 Services

Services (excl. China)

25

August

20

2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021

s. a. / Seasonally adjusted figures.
Source: IHS Markit.

In the United States, available indicators for the third
quarter of the year suggest that, after registering a
seasonally adjusted quarterly growth of 1.6% in the
second quarter, economic activity continued to
recover during the third quarter (Chart 2). However,
the surge of COVID-19 cases and the intensification
of bottlenecks have reduced the dynamism of this
recovery.[1] Private consumption continued to be one
of the drivers of economic activity, although it
moderated in the face of the reduction of some
stimuli such as unemployment subsidies, the rise in
inflation, the surge of infections, and the persistent
supply restrictions for some products, such as
automobiles and electronic goods. Although new
orders for capital goods from businesses point to a
weakening of investment, available figures on

12

|Chart 1 Global: Purchasing Managers’ Index: Production Component Diffusion Index, s. a.|Col2|
|---|---|
|||
|Manufacturing Manufacturing (excl. China) Services Services (excl. China)|August|


-----

business inventories suggest that these could
contribute positively to growth in the third quarter of
the year.

**Chart 2**

**US Real GDP and Components**

Quarterly percentage rate and contributions in

percentage points, s. a.

10 50

8 45

6 40

4 35

2 30

0

-2 Private consumption expenditures 25

Residential investment 20

-4 Nonresidential investment

-6 Change in private inventories 15

-8 Net exportsGovernment consumption expenditures 10

-10 Total 5

-12 0

I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV I II III

2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021

s. a. / Seasonally adjusted figures.
Note: The shaded area refers to the Blue Chip forecasts for September
2021.
Source: Bureau of Economic Activity (BEA) and Blue Chip.

US industrial production continued to expand,
although at a more moderate pace, registering a
seasonally adjusted monthly growth of 0.4% in
August, after having grown 0.8% in July. This
moderation was largely due to the contraction in
mining due to the impact of Hurricane Ida that
affected oil and gas extraction in the Gulf of Mexico.
Manufacturing activity expanded 0.2% in August,
after having rebounded 1.6% in July due to the
reopening of some automotive plants. The growth in
August occurred despite the shutdown of

petrochemical plants and refineries due to Hurricane
Ida and the persistent shortage of semiconductors.
Gas and electricity generation was driven by the
greater demand for air conditioning due to unusually
warm weather conditions. The Purchasing

Managers' Index (PMI) of the manufacturing sector
suggests that the gradual recovery of this sector may
continue in the coming months.

The US labor market continued to recover during
August, although at a slower pace than in previous
months due to the impact of the higher levels of
COVID-19 cases on some activities. The non-farm
payroll registered an increase of 235,000 jobs in
August, after the 1.1 million jobs registered in July.
Employment increased in sectors such as

professional, scientific and technical services,
management of companies and enterprises,

2 In annualized terms, euro area GDP registered a quarter-on-quarter
seasonally adjusted variation of 9.2% during the second quarter of 2021.


transportation and warehousing, and manufacturing,
albeit in some cases at a slower pace than in
previous months. In contrast, employment stagnated
in art, entertainment and recreation services, as well
as in accommodation, food and education, while
contracting in other services such as in retail trade.
Thus, the level of employment was still 5.7 million
below pre-pandemic levels. The unemployment rate
decreased from 5.4% in July to 5.2% in August. Job
vacancy rates have remained at high levels, despite
the expiration of additional unemployment insurance
payments, which adds to uncertainty about the
evolution of wage dynamics and labor participation.

In the euro area, available indicators suggest that
economic activity during the third quarter of the year
continued to recover at a strong pace, after having
grown at a seasonally adjusted quarterly rate of 2.2%
during the second quarter.[2] The dynamism of the
economy has continued to be favored by the
continued recovery of household consumption and
business investment, reflecting the lifting of mobility
restrictions, greater confidence, and favorable
financial conditions. Industrial activity continued to
expand, although its growth in the short term may
continue to be limited due to bottlenecks in supply
chains. The unemployment rate declined from 7.8%
in June to 7.6% in July, while an increasing number
of firms have highlighted labor shortages as a
constraint to production. Purchasing Managers'
Indices suggest that economic activity will continue
to recover during the third quarter.

In the United Kingdom, available indicators suggest
that economic activity continued to recover during
the third quarter of 2021, after having grown at a
seasonally adjusted quarterly rate of 4.8% during the
previous one.[3] Economic activity has been

supported by the lifting of restrictions associated with
the COVID-19 pandemic, which has mainly favored
art, entertainment and recreation services. However,
retail sales deteriorated in July and August, partly
reflecting disruptions in supply and retailers'
difficulties in sourcing goods and services. The
unemployment rate continued to diminish by falling
from 4.7% in June to 4.6% in July, while there have
been greater difficulties in filling job vacancies,
particularly in the sectors of accommodation and
food services, art, entertainment and recreation, and
warehousing and transportation. The Purchasing
Managers' Indices of the manufacturing and service
sectors suggest that the UK economy will continue

3 In annualized terms, the UK GDP variation during the second quarter of
2021 was 20.7%.

13


-----

to recover at the end of the third quarter, although at
a more moderate pace.

In Japan, available information suggests that, after
having grown at a seasonally adjusted quarterly rate
of 0.5% during the second quarter of the year,
economic activity will continue to gradually recover
in the third, despite the implementation of a new
state of emergency as of July.[4] Economic activity has
been driven by the demand for capital goods, while
household consumption, particularly in services, has
continued to be limited by the health measures. The
unemployment rate decreased from 2.9% in June to
2.8% in July. Purchasing Managers' Indices indicate
that manufacturing activity will grow at a moderate
pace in the third quarter, while the services sector
would continue to deteriorate, in line with the
extension of the state of emergency to August and
September in some regions of the country.

In the main emerging market economies, growth has
been heterogeneous across regions, mainly

depending on the evolution of the pandemic and the
exposure of each country to the impact on global
supply chains. In Latin America, economic activity in
most countries has recovered during the third
quarter. In emerging Asia, recovery has been
heterogeneous. While some of the economies in that
region that were strongly affected by the health crisis
during the second quarter of the year have started to
recover, others have slowed down due to the impact
of the intensification of the effects on supply chains.
In China, economic indicators on consumption,
investment and industrial production have

decelerated, in an environment in which some of the
economic stimuli have started to be withdrawn, new
restrictions have been imposed due to the COVID-19
pandemic, and the risk of a slowdown in the real
estate sector has increased due to the regulatory
changes implemented over the last year and the
financial vulnerabilities of some of the main firms. In
emerging Europe, available indicators overall
suggest a relatively robust growth, partly reflecting
the advance in the vaccination process and the
normalization of activities.

International commodity prices exhibited a mixed
behavior since Mexico’s previous monetary policy
decision. In particular, during most of August, oil
prices decreased due to a deterioration in the outlook
for demand as a result of the spread of new variants
of the SARS-CoV-2 virus in some of the main
economies, particularly in Asia. This trend was later

4 In annualized terms, Japan GDP grew at a quarter-on-quarter
seasonally adjusted variation of 1.9% during the second quarter of 2021.


reversed after the disruptions in energy production
and distribution due to the hurricanes that affected
the US Gulf Coast, the lower crude oil inventories,
and expectations of a recovery in oil demand in
2022. Natural and L.P. gas prices continued to
increase, in an environment of a greater demand and
supply restrictions associated with the shutdown of
extraction plants and gas pipelines in some regions
due to climatic factors, relatively low inventory levels,
and lower exports by some of the main producers,
especially Russia. In turn, the prices of most
industrial metals have increased, although with
episodes of volatility, as a result of supply restrictions
associated with disruptions in global supply chains.
However, in some cases, such as that of iron, prices
have diminished due to the lower dynamism of
industrial production in some countries, including
China. Finally, the prices of most grains decreased
due to higher production expectations in major
producing countries, such as the United States and
Canada, although there are still disruptions to
exports in the United States due to disturbances in
certain ports along the Gulf of Mexico.

**A.1.2. Monetary policy and international financial**
**markets**

Inflation continued to rise worldwide, pressured by
commodity prices, base effects, bottlenecks in
production chains, as well as spending programs
and the reallocation of spending towards

merchandises. The increase in headline inflation in
most major advanced economies placed it above
their central banks' targets, with the exception of
Japan (Chart 3). In the United States, inflationary
pressures were higher than in the rest of advanced
economies. However, pressures in this country have
moderated for some items, resulting in a decrease in
consumer price index (CPI) inflation from 5.4% in
July to 5.3% in August. In this context, short-term
inflation expectations drawn from surveys continued
to increase for most of these economies, while those
for longer terms, drawn from financial instruments,
also showed increases for economies such as the
United Kingdom and the euro area.

14


-----

**Chart 3**

**Selected Advance Economies:**

**Headline Inflation**

Annual percentage change

6.0 United States PCE 1/
5.5 United States CPI
5.0 Japan 2/
4.5

Euro area

4.0

United Kingdom

3.5
3.0 Canada
2.5
2.0
1.5
1.0
0.5
0.0

-0.5
-1.0
-1.5
-2.0 August
-2.5 July
-3.0

2005 2009 2013 2017 2021


adjusted upwards its expectations about the
trajectory of its reference interest rates. In this
context, expectations drawn from financial

instruments anticipate interest rate increases in
some of the main advanced economies in 2022 and
2023 (Chart 4).

**Chart 4**

**Reference Rates and Implied Trajectories in OIS**

**Curves[1/]**

Percent


**― US Federal Reserve 2/**
**― Bank of England**
**― Bank of Japan**
**― Bank of Canada**

**― European Central Bank deposit rate**
**― OIS implicit trajectory Sep.24, 2021**
**--- OIS implicit trajectory Aug 6, 2021**


1/ The personal consumption expenditure deflator is used.
2/ Excludes fresh food. This series does not exclude the effect of the rise in
consumption tax in May 2014 and October 2019, nor the effect of the free
daycare and preschool program in October 2019.
Source: Bureau of Economic Analysis, Bureau of Labor Statistics, Eurostat,
Bank of Japan, Statistics Canada, Office of National Statistics.

In the main emerging economies, headline inflation
was above their central banks’ targets in many
cases. Although inflation has continued to rise in
most of these economies, there was some
moderation in certain countries of the Asian region
as a result of the imposition of greater contention
measures in light of the surge of COVID-19 cases
that has weakened demand, as well as of
idiosyncratic factors in some economies.

In this environment, the central banks of the major
advanced economies left their interest rates
unchanged at levels around zero, except for South
Korea and Norway, which announced 25 basis-point
rate increases. Most banks in these economies
continued to use their balance sheets to preserve
favorable financing conditions and to foster the
convergence of inflation to their respective long-term
targets, although the European Central Bank
announced a moderate reduction in the pace of
purchases under its Pandemic Emergency Purchase
Program (PEPP), while leaving its total amount
unchanged. Most central banks have reiterated that
they will be patient in withdrawing their

accommodative monetary stances until inflation
reaches their targets in a sustained manner.
However, given the progress in economic recovery
and the risk of persistent inflationary pressures,
some central banks are expected to reduce their
monetary stimulus. In the period reported, the
Federal Reserve pointed out that it considers that if
progress towards its targets continues as

anticipated, a moderation in the pace of its asset
purchase program may soon be justified, and

|Col1|Col2|Col3|Col4|Col5|Col6|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|||||||
|||||||
|||||||
|||||||
|||||||
|||||||
|||||||


1/ OIS: Fixed floating interest rate swap where the fixed interest rate is
associated to the effective overnight reference rate.
2/ For the observed reference rate of the U.S. the average interest rate of
the target range of the federal funds rate (0.0% - 0.25%) is used.
Source: Banco de México with data from Bloomberg.

Among the recent monetary policy decisions in the
main advanced economies, the following stand out:

i) In its September meeting, the Federal Reserve

left its target range for the federal funds rate
unchanged at 0-0.25% and mentioned that it
would be appropriate to maintain it until labor
market conditions have reached levels consistent
with its maximum employment estimate and
inflation has increased to 2% and is on track to
moderately exceed this target for some time. It
also stated that the economy has made progress
towards these goals, and if such progress
continues as anticipated, the Federal Open
Market Committee (FOMC) considers that a
moderation in the pace of asset purchases may
soon be justified. In this regard, the Chairman of
the Fed explained that, overall, FOMC members
consider that, as long as the recovery remains on
track, a gradual tapering process of asset
purchases that concludes by the middle of next
year is likely to be appropriate. It also indicated
that the timing and pace of said tapering will not
be intended to send a direct signal regarding the
timing of an interest rate increase. In this context,
the medians of the forecasts of FOMC’s members

15


3.0%

2.5%

2.0%

1.5%

1.0%

0.5%

0.0%

-0.5%


End of
2022


End of
2020


End of
2021


-1.0% 2020

2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023


End of
2023


-----

published in September point to the following
changes: a downward revision in growth
expectations for 2021 and upward revisions for
2022 and 2023, as well as an increase in the
expected unemployment rate for 2021. In turn,
headline inflation expectations for this year were
revised significantly to the upside, from 3.4 to
4.2%, and for 2022 from 2.1 to 2.2%, although
inflation is expected to remain at this level during
2023 and decrease to 2.1% in 2024. Forecasts
for core inflation were revised upward for 2021
and, to a lesser extent, for 2022 and 2023. As for
the reference rate, the median of forecasts
increased from 0.1 to 0.3% for 2022 and from 0.6
to 1.0% for 2023, while for 2024 it was 1.8%. This
suggests expectations of between three and four
interest rate increases by the end of 2023 and at
least six in total by the end of 2024. Within the
FOMC, nine of the 18 members anticipate the first
increase to occur during 2022. The implied
trajectory for the federal funds rate in financial
instruments incorporates expectations of

between two and three increases by the end of
2023, anticipating the first increase of 25 basis
points to occur at the end of the first quarter of
that year.

ii) In its September meeting, the European Central

Bank (ECB) left its refinancing rate, key deposit
facility rate and key lending facility rate
unchanged at 0.0, -0.5 and -0.25%, respectively.
It also reiterated that the Board expects these
interest rates to remain at current or lower levels
until inflation is observed to reach 2% during its
forecast horizon, remain at that level in a
sustained manner, and progress in core inflation
is sufficiently advanced to be consistent with the
stabilization of inflation at 2% over the medium
term, which could imply a transitory period in
which inflation is moderately above its target. The
ECB maintained its Asset Purchase Program
(APP) unchanged at €20 billion monthly. It noted
that it considers that favorable financing

conditions can be maintained with a moderately
lower pace of net asset purchases under the
Pandemic Emergency Purchase Program

(PEPP) than in the two previous quarters, while
leaving the total amount of €1,850 billion
unchanged. In this regard, the ECB’s President
explained that this adjustment in the pace of
purchases is a recalibration of its program rather
than a withdrawal of stimulus (tapering).

iii) In its September meeting, the Bank of Japan left

unchanged its short-term policy rate at -0.1% and
its long-term interest rate (indexed to its 10-year


bond) at around 0%, as well as its asset purchase
program. Said central bank ratified that, if
necessary, it will not hesitate to take additional
easing measures and that it expects interest rates
to remain at or even below their current levels. In
addition, it announced the preliminary outline of a
measure to provide funds to financial institutions,
which seeks to support efforts to address issues
associated with climate change, the preliminary
scheme of which was disclosed in its July
meeting.

iv) In its September meeting, the Bank of England

left unchanged its reference interest rate at
0.10% and its asset purchase program. It recalled
that, in its August meeting it noted that, should the
economy evolve in line with its central forecasts,
a modest tightening of monetary policy during the
forecast horizon would likely be necessary in
order to be consistent with meeting the 2%
inflation target on a sustainable basis over the
medium term. In this regard, it indicated that
some recent events seem to have strengthened
the previous case, although a considerable level
of uncertainty persists. Regarding its current
asset purchase program, said central bank
reiterated expectations that it will conclude at the
end of 2021. In addition, its minutes mention that
most Monetary Policy Committee’s members
agreed that any tightening of the initial monetary
policy should be implemented by an increase in
the reference interest rate, even if said tightening
was appropriate before the end of the current
asset purchase program.

The monetary authorities of emerging economies
face different risks for price formation than those of
advanced economies, as inflation and its

expectations have not remained below their targets
for prolonged periods of time. In particular, emerging
economies that are more commercially integrated
with advanced economies that have recovered more
rapidly and have registered greater rises in inflation,
in addition to domestic and idiosyncratic factors, face
important risks as these increases may be greater
and more persistent than anticipated. In this context,
some central banks in this group of economies have
continued reducing their monetary stimulus. In
particular, during the reporting period, the central
banks of Hungary, Chile, Brazil and Russia
announced additional interest rate increases and the
Bank of Peru increased its rate for the first time since
the beginning of the pandemic by 25 basis points in
August and another 50 basis points in September.
After having raised its interest rate last March,
Turkey's central bank announced a 100-basis point

16


-----

cut in its interest rate, following the increase
announced last March.

In this environment, international financial markets
have been relatively stable overall since the last
monetary policy decision in Mexico (Chart 5),
although in recent weeks there has been an increase
in volatility and a lower risk appetite for global risk. In
this context, since Mexico’s previous monetary
policy decision, the stock markets of the majority of
the main advanced economies exhibited a relatively
stable behavior during most of the period, with the
positive performance of the Japanese market
standing out due to expectations of a greater fiscal
stimulus for this economy, among other factors.
Nevertheless, in recent weeks, some stock indices
registered moderate growth and greater volatility
partly associated with uncertainty about the
evolution of the pandemic, high inflation, the
expectation of a reduction in the monetary stimulus,
and concerns about China’s real estate sector.
Emerging markets, on the other hand, posted
moderate gains in general (Chart 6). In foreign
exchange markets, the dollar depreciated

moderately against most of the currencies of
advanced economies during the first part of the
reporting period, while in subsequent weeks this
movement was reversed. Emerging economies'
currencies registered mixed adjustments in a narrow
range, in some cases corresponding to

depreciations. Long-term government bond interest
rates in the main advanced economies rose, leading
to a slight steepening of the yield curves. Long-term
interest rates in emerging economies mostly showed
increases. In this environment, since Mexico’s
previous monetary policy decision, moderate net
capital inflows were recorded in most emerging
economies, mainly in China, although capital
outflows from some fixed-income markets have been
recently observed.


**Chart 5**

**Change in Selected Financial Indicators from**

**August 6 to September 24, 2021**

Percent; basis points


15%

10%


75

50


5%


25

0


0%

-5%


-10%


-25

-50


1/ The MSCI Emerging Markets Index consists of 24 countries. 2/ DXY: a
weighted average estimated by the Intercontinental Exchange (ICE) of the
nominal exchange rate of the main six currencies operated globally with the
following weights: EUR 57.6%, JPY: 13.6%, GBP: 11.9%, CAD: 9.1%, SEK:
4.2%, and CHF: 3.6%. 3/ J.P. Morgan index is constructed with the
weighted average by the nominal exchange rate of emerging economies’
currencies with the following weights: TRY: 8.3%, RUB: 8.3%, HUF: 8.3%,
ZAR: 8.3%, BRL: 11.1%, MXN: 11.1%, CLP: 11.1%, CNH: 11.1%, INR:
11.1% and SGD: 11.1%.
Source: Bloomberg and ICE.

**Chart 6**

**Selected Emerging Economies: Financial**

**Assets Performance since August 9, 2021**

Percent, basis points Percentage, basis points


Note: Interest rates correspond to swap rates at the specified terms, except
for Hungary, where government securities with 3-year (instead of 2-year)
maturities where used as a reference. For the Philippines, a 2-year swap
rate is used.
Source: Bloomberg.

17


-----

Looking ahead, several risks to the stability of
international financial markets persist. In addition to
those related to the recovery of economic activity,
the following stand out: i) a more sustained and
higher-than-anticipated increase in inflation in some
advanced economies resulting in an earlier-thananticipated withdrawal of monetary stimuli that would
lead to tighter global financial conditions, particularly
affecting emerging economies that, in general, have
less fiscal and monetary policy room to maneuver; ii)
possible distortions in the valuation of some financial
assets that could lead to a sudden correction in their
prices; and; iii) high levels of private debt and the
associated insolvency and default problems that
could lead to contagion and to a tightening of
financial conditions, particularly in emerging

economies; and iv) an increase in public debt and the
associated risk of unsustainable public finances. In
addition, emerging economies could also face
greater challenges in the medium term as their
sources of financing become more limited, in a
context of greater absorption of resources by
advanced economies and because of China's
participation in global investment indices.

**A.2. Current situation of the Mexican economy**

**A.2.1. Mexican markets**

Since the previous monetary policy decision to date,
financial asset prices in Mexico have exhibited a
mixed behavior (Chart 7), in an environment in which
the central banks of developed countries reiterated
that the withdrawal of the monetary stimulus will be
gradual and that monetary policy will remain
accommodative for a prolonged period. In the last
few days, a climate of greater risk aversion prevailed
in light of the financial situation of a major Chinese
real estate developer and a certain degree of caution
due to the surge in COVID-19 cases worldwide. In
this context, in some emerging economies, monetary
policy is expected to be less accommodative due to
the rebound in inflation and its expectations.

In the case of the Mexican peso, exchange rate
volatility increased, and the peso fluctuated in a
range between 19.86 and 20.37 pesos per dollar,
ending the period with a depreciation of 0.13%
(Chart 8). This occurred in a context in which both
spot- and future trading conditions improved.


Range in year Range since previous monetary policy decision Aug.9, 21 Sept.24,21


Source: Prepared by Banco de México.

Interest rates of government securities exhibited a
mixed behavior (Chart 9), with a flattening trend with
movements between -7 and 35 basis points along
the curve. The yield curve of real rate instruments
showed similar dynamics, registering movements
between -24 and 18 basis points across all
maturities. In this context, with respect to the August
monetary policy decision, compensation for inflation
and inflation risk premia implicit in spreads between
nominal and real rates of market instruments
registered upward movements in 3- and 10-year
maturities, while in 20- and 30-year maturities they
decreased (Chart 10). These adjustments took place
in an environment in which trading conditions in this
market improved.

18


**Chart 7**

**Mexican Markets’ Performance**

Percent, MXN/USD and index


8.0

7.0


37,000

32,000


57,000

52,000


6.0

5.0


47,000

42,000


4.0


26.0

25.0

24.0

23.0

22.0

21.0

20.0

19.0

18.0


M Bond


4.0

3.5

3.0

2.5

2.0

1.5

1.0

0.5

0.0

Inflation-indexed bonds


Source: Prepared by Banco de México.

**Chart 8**

**Mexican Peso Exchange Rate**

**with Moving Averages**

MXN/USD


25.50
25.00
24.50
24.00
23.50
23.00
22.50
22.00
21.50
21.00
20.50
20.00
19.50
19.00
18.50
18.00
17.50
17.00


2020 2021


-----

**Chart 9**

**Nominal Yield Curve of Government Securities**

Percent, basis points

8.00 40

7.50 35

7.00 6 30

#¡REF!

25

6.50

20

6.00

15

5.50

10

5.00

5

4.50 0

4.00 -5

3.50 -10

Aug.9, 2021 Sep.24,2021 Change (Aug.9, 2021 to Sep.24,2021)

Trading range over the period

Source: PIP.
Note: The chart does not include bonds maturing in December 2021 and
June 2022. CETES with similar maturities are considered.

**Chart 10**

**Breakeven Inflation and Inflation Risk Implicit in**

**Government Securities’ Interest Rate**

Basis points

500

475

450

425

400

375

350

325

300

275 3-year

10-year

250 20-year

30-year

225 3-year average

10-year average

200 20-year average

175 30-year average

150

J      M       S       J       M       S       J       M       S

2019                    2020                     2021

Source: PIP.

In line with the establishment of a swap mechanism
between Banco de México and the Federal Reserve,
an auction of financing in dollars was held on August
18 in which resources for an amount of 100 million
dollars were allotted.

Regarding the measures initially announced by
Banco de México on April 21, 2020, as set forth in its
press release of February 25, 2021, the term of
certain facilities will end on September 30 of this
year.


Regarding expectations for the trajectory of the
monetary policy reference rate, information implied
by the Interbank Equilibrium Interest Rate (TIIE, for
its Spanish acronym) swap curve incorporates an
increase of around 50 basis points in the reference
rate between the September and November
meetings (Chart 11). In a related manner, the median
of the consensus of forecasters surveyed by
Citibanamex anticipates the reference rate to be at
4.75% in the next monetary policy decision. For the
end of 2021, market variables anticipate a target rate
of 5.24%, while the median of the aforementioned
survey expects a level of 5.00%.

**Chart 11**

**Banco de México Overnight Interbank Rate**

**Implied in TIIE IRS Curve**

Percent

8.50
8.25
8.00
7.75
7.50
7.25
7.00
6.75
6.50
6.25
6.00
5.75
5.50
5.25
5.00 Banxico reference rate
4.75
4.50 Latest figure (09/24/21)
4.25
4.00 Previous monetary policy
3.75 decision (08/12/21)
3.50

J   A   J   O   J  A   J  O   J   A   J   O   J   A  J   O

2019         2020          2021          2022

Source: Prepared by Banco de México with Bloomberg data.

**A.2.2. Economic activity in Mexico**

After having expanded in the second quarter of the
year (Chart 12), economic activity continued to
recover in the beginning of the third, although with
marked differences across sectors and in a context
of persistent uncertainty regarding the pandemic.

As for external demand, in August, non-automotive
manufacturing exports contracted at the margin, thus
reversing the growth observed in July, albeit
remaining at relatively high levels (Chart 13).
Automotive exports continued their downward trend,
reflecting the effects of the ongoing global
semiconductor shortage. By destination, in August,
exports to the United States reversed the rebound
observed in the previous month, while shipments to

19


-----

the rest of the world exhibited a negative
performance.[5]

**Chart 12**

**Gross Domestic Product**

Quarterly percentage change, s. a.


16

12

8

4

0


-4

-8

-12

-16


-20 Q-II

I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV I II

2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021

s. a. / Seasonally adjusted figures.
Source: Mexico’s System of National Accounts (SCNM, for its Spanish
acronym), INEGI.

**Chart 13**

**Total Manufacturing Exports**

Indices 2013 = 100, s. a.


services continued to recover gradually. Meanwhile,
in June, gross fixed investment accentuated the
weakness it has exhibited in recent months.
Investment in machinery and equipment fell for the
third consecutive month, although it remained above
the level observed in February 2020, while
investment in construction showed an incipient
downward trend.

As for production, in July industrial activity reversed
the declines of May and June (Chart 14). During that
month, the performance of industrial activity was
driven by the manufacturing sector excluding
transportation equipment, as the latter continued to
be affected by the shortage of certain inputs. Both
construction and mining exhibited weakness (Chart
15). In July, tertiary activities performed

heterogeneously across its subsectors. In particular,
there were increases in leisure and other services;
commerce; temporary accommodation and food and
beverage preparation services; and educational and
health services. On the other hand, financial and real
estate services; transportation and mass media
information services; and professional, corporate
and business support services registered declines. It
should be noted that the decline in the latter occurred
in the context of the transition to the new regime of
outsourcing.

**Chart 14**

**Global Indicator of Economic Activity**


180

160

140

120

100

80

60

40

20


Indices 2013 = 100, s. a.


140

130

120

110

100

90

80

70

60

50

40

30

20


0


J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J A

2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021

s. a. / Seasonally adjusted series and trend series based on data in nominal
US dollars. The former is represented by a solid line and the latter by a
dotted line.
Source: Prepared by Banco de México with data from the Tax
Administration Service (SAT, for its Spanish acronym), the Ministry of the
Economy (SE, for its Spanish acronym), Banco de México, the National
Institute of Statistics and Geography (INEGI, for its Spanish acronym).
Mexico’s Merchandise Trade Balance, and the National System of
Statistical and Geographical Information (SNIEG, for its Spanish acronym),
Information of national interest.

According to its monthly indicator, after having
recovered gradually in previous months, in June
private consumption halted its pace of recovery,
remaining below the level reported in February 2020.
Consumption of imported goods continued its
upward trend and that of domestic goods fell for the
second consecutive month, while consumption of

5 Refers to the value of merchandise exports in current US dollars. This


120

115

110

105

100

95

90

85

80

75

70

65

60


National Accounts (SCNM, for its acronym in Spanish), given that the latter

represents the value-added measured in constant pesos.


J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J

2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021

s. a. / Seasonally adjusted and trend series. The former is represented by
a solid line and the latter by a dotted line.
Source: Mexico’s System of National Accounts (SCNM, for its Spanish
acronym), INEGI.


value differs from that reported for goods exports by Mexico’s System of


20


-----

**Chart 15**

**Industrial Activity [1/]**

Indices 2013 = 100, s. a.


**Chart 16**

**Output Gap Estimates [1/]**

**Excluding Oil Industry [4/ ]**

Potential output percentages, s. a.


130

120

110

100

90

80

70

60

50


J


A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J

2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021


12

8

4

0

-4

-8

-12

-16

-20

-24


Q-II
July


2013


s. a. / Seasonally adjusted and trend series. The former is represented by
a solid line and the latter by a dotted line.
1/ Figures in parenthesis correspond to their share in the total in 2013.
Source: Mexico’s System of National Accounts (SCNM, for its Spanish
acronym), INEGI.

Regarding the economy's cyclical position, available
information suggests that at the beginning of the third
quarter of 2021 slack conditions for the economy as
a whole remained wide (Chart 16) and with marked
differences across sectors. In August, labor market
indicators showed some weakness. In particular, the
labor participation rate decreased at the margin and
the employment to working-age population ratio
remained at a similar level to that of the previous
month, while the national unemployment rate was
also similar to that of July and the urban
unemployment rate decreased (Chart 17). In August,
the number of new IMSS-insured jobs continued to
recover, although it remained around 192 thousand
jobs below pre-pandemic levels. Finally, in July, unit
labor costs in the manufacturing sector were similar
to those of previous months (Chart 18).


J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J

2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021

s. a. / Calculations based on seasonally adjusted figures.
1/ Output gap estimated with a tail-corrected Hodrick-Prescott filter; see
Banco de México (2009), “Inflation Report, April-June 2009”, p.74.
2/ GDP timely figures as of Q2 2021, and IGAE figures as of July 2021, in
line with said timely figure.
3/ Output gap confidence interval calculated with a method of unobserved
components.
4/ Excludes both oil and gas extraction, support services for mining, and
petroleum and coal products’ manufacturing.
Source: Prepared by Banco de México with INEGI data.

**Chart 17**

**National and Urban Unemployment Rates**

Percent, s. a.

8.5

National unemployment rate

8.0

7.5 Urban unemployment rate

7.0

6.5

6.0

5.5

5.0

4.5

4.0

3.5

3.0

August

2.5

J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A JA

2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021

s.a./ Seasonally adjusted series and trend series. The former is represented
by a solid line and the latter by a dotted line.
Source: Prepared by Banco de México with data from ENOE, ETOE (from
April to June 2020), and ENOE new edition (ENOE[N] ) from July to date.

21


-----

**Chart 18**

**Productivity and Unit Labor Costs**

**in the Manufacturing Sector [1/ ]**

Indices 2013 = 100, s. a.


170

Unit labor costs

160

Productivity

150

140

130

120

110

100

90

July

80

J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M

2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021


s. a. / Seasonally adjusted and trend series. The former is represented by
a solid line and the latter by a dotted line.
1/ Productivity based on hours worked.
Source: Prepared by with seasonally adjusted data of the Monthly
Manufacturing Industry Survey and industrial activity indicators of Mexico’s
System of National Accounts (Sistema de Cuentas Nacionales de México,
SCNM), INEGI.

In July 2021, domestic financing to firms moderated
its contraction in real terms at an annual rate. This is
explained by a smaller reduction of bank lending to
both large- and smaller-sized firms. It should be
noted that the demand for corporate credit shows an
incipient recovery at the margin, although it remains
at low levels. Likewise, lending conditions for firms in
general continued to be tight compared to the
beginning of the pandemic, although they have not
shown additional restrictions so far this year.
Meanwhile, net corporate debt issuance in the
domestic market continued to show low dynamism,
extending the lackluster behavior that has been
present since the first quarter of the year. In terms of
credit to households, the housing portfolio continued
to grow with dynamism. In turn, banks’ current
consumer loan portfolio reduced its contraction at an
annual rate for the fourth consecutive month, mainly
due to a greater dynamism, at the margin, of payroll
loans. This, in a context characterized by a gradual
recovery of household demand for credit and lending
conditions that have not tightened further.

Interest rates of bank credit to firms have followed
the dynamic of the bank funding rate. Intermediation
margins in general decreased, nearing pre
pandemic levels. At the same time, mortgage
interest rates remained at levels around their historic
lows. In June, credit card interest rates were similar
to those observed during the first quarter of the year,
while personal credit rates fell slightly. Thus,
consumer credit intermediation margins remained at
levels higher than pre-pandemic ones. With respect
to portfolio quality, the corporate loan delinquency


rate declined in July and remained at low levels. The
mortgage loan delinquency rate also declined, after
having followed a moderate upward trend since
November 2020, and also remains at low levels. In
spite of having declined for the fifth consecutive
month, consumer portfolio delinquency rates remain
at high levels.

**A.2.3. Development of inflation and inflation**
**outlook**

Between July and the first fortnight of September
2021, core inflation continued to increase, while noncore inflation decreased. Annual headline inflation
remained at a high level, increasing from 5.81 to
5.87% between the abovementioned dates (Chart 19
and Table 1). The increase in core inflation reflects
the fact that it continues to be influenced by
pandemic-related shocks that have affected the
supply chains and production processes of various
goods and services. The decrease in non-core
inflation was associated with lower energy inflation,
as a result of the reduction in LP gas prices in August
due to the introduction of the price cap policy.

**Chart 19**

**Consumer Price Index**

Annual percentage change

13

12 CPI

11 Core

10

Non-core

9

8

7

6

5

4

3

2

1

0

-1

-2

-3 F1 Sep.

J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S

2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021

Source: Banco de México and INEGI.

Annual core inflation increased from 4.66 to 4.92%
between July and the first fortnight of September
2021. Within it, the annual variation of merchandise
prices rose from 5.74 to 6.27%, reflecting the higher
production costs that several productive processes
face due to pandemic-related shocks (Chart 20). In
particular, annual food merchandise inflation rose
from 6.14 to 6.84% during this period, while non-food
merchandise inflation increased from 5.30 to 5.64%
(Chart 21). During the referred period, annual
inflation of services remained relatively stable,
registering levels of 3.46 and 3.41%, respectively. As
for its components, annual inflation of services other
than education and housing fell from 5.17 to 4.74%
between those dates, while housing and education

22

|CPI Core Non-core|Col2|
|---|---|
|F||


-----

inflation increased, albeit from low levels, the former
from 2.09 to 2.25% and the latter from 1.23 to 2.04%.

**Chart 20**

**Merchandise and Services Core Price Sub-index**

Annual percentage change

7

Merchandise

6 Services

5

4

3

2

1

F1 Sep.

0

J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S

2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021

Source: Banco de México and INEGI.

**Chart 21**

**Merchandise Core Price Sub-index**

Annual percentage change

8

7

6

5

4

3

2

1

Food, beverages and tobacco Non-food merchandise F1 Sep.

0

J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S

2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021


**Chart 22**

**Non-core Price Sub-index**

Annual percentage change


25

20

15

10

5

0

-5

-10

-15


F1 Sep.


Source: Banco de México and INEGI.

Between July and the first fortnight of September
2021, annual non-core inflation fell from 9.39 to
8.86% (Chart 22 and Table 1). This result was due
to the decrease from 34.97 to 17.61% in the annual
variation of LP gas prices, as a result of the
aforementioned price cap policy. This was partially
offset by the 7.77 to 10.01% increase in the annual
inflation of agricultural and livestock products, mainly
due to the higher annual variation of fruit and
vegetable prices.


J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S

2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021

Source: Banco de México and INEGI.

As for inflation expectations drawn from Banco de
México’s Survey among Private Sector Forecasters,
between July and August, the median of expected
headline inflation for the end of 2021 increased from
6.00 to 6.05%, while that corresponding to the core
component went from 4.66 to 4.90%. Medians of
expectations for the end of 2022 were adjusted from
3.67 to 3.75% for headline inflation and from 3.68 to
3.70% for core inflation. The medians of headline
and core inflation expectations for the medium and
long terms remained around 3.50%. Finally, the
compensation for inflation and inflation risk

registered a moderate average increase and
remained at high levels, reflecting the behavior of
both inflation expectations and the inflation risk
premium.

Considering the nature of the shocks that have
affected headline and core inflation, the

corresponding forecasts were revised upwards
compared to those previously released, and the
larger increases correspond to the short term.
Annual headline and core inflation projections are
expected to decrease, particularly for one year and
beyond, and to converge to the 3% target by the end
of the forecast horizon. These forecasts are subject
to risks and additional shocks. On the upside: i)
external inflationary pressures; ii) cost-related
pressures; iii) core inflation persistence; iv)

exchange rate depreciation; and v) increases in
agricultural and livestock product prices. On the
downside: i) a widening of the negative output gap;
ii) greater social distancing; and iii) exchange rate
appreciation. The balance of risks for the trajectory
of inflation within the forecast horizon is biased to the
upside.

23


-----

**Table 1**

**Consumer Price Index and Components**

Annual percentage change

**1st fortnight Sep.**

**Item** **July 2021** **August 2021**
**2021**

**CPI** **5.81** **5.59** **5.87**

**SubyacenteCore** **4.66** **4.78** **4.92**

**Merchandise** **5.74** **5.99** **6.27**

Food, beverages and tobacco 6.14 6.51 6.84

Non-food merchandise 5.30 5.41 5.64

**Services** **3.46** **3.43** **3.41**

Housing 2.09 2.17 2.25

Education (tuitions) 1.23 1.92 2.04

Other services 5.17 4.87 4.74

**No SubyacenteNon-core** **9.39** **8.14** **8.86**

**Agricultural and livestock products** **7.77** **8.95** **10.01**

Fruits and vegetablesFruits abd vegetables 4.99 5.94 8.70

Livestock productsLivestock 10.08 11.54 11.15

**Energy and government-authorized prices Energéticos y Tarifas Aut. por Gobierno** **10.67** **7.50** **7.95**

Energy productsEnergy 14.41 10.07 10.77

Government-authorized pricesTarifas Autorizadas por Gobierno 2.57 1.99 1.89

Source:INEGI.

24


-----

-----

-----

