-----

-----

**FOREWARNING**
This document is provided for the reader’s convenience
only. The translation from the official Spanish version was
made by Banco de México’s staff. Discrepancies may arise
between the original document in Spanish and its English
translation. For this reason, the original Spanish version is
the only official document.


**1. PLACE, DATE, AND PARTICIPANTS**

**1.1 Place:** Meeting held by virtual means.

**1.2. Date of Governing Board meeting:** December
16, 2020.

**1.3. Participants:**
Alejandro Díaz de León-Carrillo, Governor.
Irene Espinosa-Cantellano, Deputy Governor.
Gerardo Esquivel-Hernández, Deputy Governor.
Javier Eduardo Guzmán-Calafell, Deputy Governor.
Jonathan Ernest Heath-Constable, Deputy

Governor.
Arturo Herrera-Gutiérrez, Secretary of Finance and
Public Credit.
Gabriel Yorio-González, Undersecretary of Finance
and Public Credit.
Elías Villanueva-Ochoa, Secretary of the Governing
Board.

Prior to this meeting, preliminary work by Banco de
México’s staff analyzing the economic and financial
environment as well as the developments in inflation
and the determinants and outlook for inflation, was
conducted and presented to the Governing Board
(see Annex).

**2. ANALYSIS AND RATIONALE BEHIND THE**
**GOVERNING BOARD’S VOTING**

**_International environment_**

**Most members mentioned that global economic**
**activity** **has** **been** **recovering,** **although**

**heterogeneously among countries and sectors.**
**Some members noted that it is still below pre-**
pandemic levels. They pointed out that the
differences in the recovery are partly associated with
the implemented policies. In this regard, **one**
member noted that consumption and investment
have recovered more in economies that have
implemented significant relief measures.

**The majority of members highlighted the**
**increase in COVID-19 infections in advanced**
**economies. They noted that, in this context,**
**growth forecasts for the next few quarters have**


**been revised downwards. One** member indicated
that confidence indicators have deteriorated as a
result of the implementation of new lockdown
measures. **Another** member considered that the
recovery has continued and that growth forecasts for
2020 and 2021 have improved compared to those of
last June. He/she stated that advanced economies'
forecasts have increased for the second half of 2021
in light of expectations that vaccination will allow for
a greater control of the pandemic. **One** member
noted that the slowdown in advanced economies will
have a negative impact on global activity, with longerlasting effects.

**Most members highlighted the risks for global**
**economic growth associated with the evolution**
**of the pandemic and with vaccine production and**
**distribution. One member mentioned that the start**
of the vaccination phase in the United Kingdom and
the United States could help reactivate consumer
confidence and support the recovery. **Another**
member noted that while several vaccines are
expected to complete their testing stages in the short
term, it is not yet possible to dispel doubts about their
effectiveness nor to rule out potential errors in their
implementation. **Most members added as a risk**
**that fiscal stimuli turn out to be insufficient to**
**support the recovery. One member stated that**
recent announcements and decisions by various
authorities have contributed to diminish the

perception of risks derived from an early withdrawal
of relief measures. Another member highlighted the
obstacles in the Brexit process, the unsustainability
of public and corporate debts, as well as the
possibility of a bubble in the prices of technology
firms’ equity. Some members stated that the balance
of risks to global growth remains biased to the
downside. **One** member considered that the
environment for the recovery is uncertain, with a
better outlook in the medium term.

**The majority of members mentioned that inflation**
**in advanced economies remains below their**
**central banks' targets. One member stated that a**
recomposition of relative prices, with increases in
those of certain merchandises and decreases in
those of services, has been observed. He/she
highlighted the marked volatility in energy prices in
the face of changes in the outlook for economic
recovery. He/she pointed out that in the United
States food inflation has increased significantly and
services inflation has decreased considerably.
He/she added that in the euro area lower food
inflation and the weakness in services prices have
been reflected in headline and core inflation levels

1


-----

close to zero. He/she also noted that in Japan
headline and core inflation are markedly negative.
**Another member pointed out that in some emerging**
economies upward pressures on inflation due to food
price increases and exchange rate depreciations
were observed. One member noted that the effects
of lower global aggregate demand have been more
significant in services as well as in some goods, such
as clothing and footwear. He/she mentioned that
global inflation forecasts remain low, although with a
greater variability than a year ago.

**All members mentioned that central banks of**
**advanced economies reiterated their intention to**
**maintain** **accommodative** **monetary** **policy**

**stances for an extended period. Most members**
**highlighted the possibility of further monetary**
**stimuli. Some members stressed the Federal**
Reserve's decision to maintain its range for the
federal funds rate at 0-0.25%. **One member stated**
that given its new monetary policy strategy, it would
take longer than before for this central bank to raise
its interest rates. **Another member noted that in its**
latest decision it committed to continue buying
monthly Treasury bonds and mortgage-backed
assets for an indefinite period, at the established
minimum amounts. He/she added that the European
Central Bank kept its reference rates unchanged and
announced increases and extensions in its asset
purchase programs and long-term refinancing
facilities. **Most members noted that the fiscal**
**authorities of several advanced economies also**
**announced extensions to their relief programs.**
**Some members stated that the expectation of an**
additional fiscal stimulus package in the United
States has gained strength.

**Most members agreed that global financial**
**markets have performed favorably, driven by**
**progress in the development of vaccines against**
**COVID-19. One member pointed out that the**
increase in commodity prices and the orderly
resolution of the electoral process in the United
States also contributed to the improved functioning
of financial markets.

**The majority of members highlighted the**
**favorable performance of stock markets in the**
**main economies, the depreciation of the US**
**dollar against a broad basket of currencies and**
**the lower risk aversion. One member stated that**
certain stock indexes have even reached record
highs. He/she added that corporate bond spreads
also declined. Another member explained that the
lower risk aversion has favorable implications for less
secure assets such as those from emerging


economies. **One** member added that the extension
of monetary stimuli has increased the valuations of
financial assets. **Another member considered that**
going forward markets are expected to continue to
perform favorably with the progress in the

vaccination process, which could be consolidated
starting in the second quarter of 2021.

**Most members mentioned that financial markets**
**of** **emerging** **economies** **also** **performed**

**positively, highlighting the increase in capital**
**inflows. Some members referred to the increase in**
inflows to equity instruments. **One member pointed**
out that this result contrasts with the situation
observed in previous months. **Another** member
added that, despite this increase, significant
contractions continue to be registered in cumulative
flows during the year. One member pointed out that
capital inflows have had a positive impact on
currency prices, stock market indexes and interest
rates in emerging economies. **Another member**
noted that the current environment has been
favorable for assets from these economies, although
there have been episodes of volatility.

**The majority of members considered that**
**international financial markets are subject to**
**several risks, with those already mentioned for**
**global activity standing out. One member added**
that neither external nor idiosyncratic risks can be
ruled out, which, if materialized, could have a
significant impact on emerging economies.

**_Economic activity in Mexico_**

**All members highlighted that, after the recovery**
**of the third quarter, economic activity in Mexico**
**continued to improve at the beginning of the**
**fourth.** **Most members indicated that activity**
**remains below pre-pandemic levels and that the**
**pace of recovery has moderated. One member**
added that it is difficult to make an accurate
assessment of the evolution of activity during the
fourth quarter, due to the limited information available
and the uncertainty associated with the pandemic.

**All members noted that external demand has**
**shown** **greater** **dynamism.** **Most** **members**

**pointed out that during October, exports,**
**especially** **manufactures,** **exceeded** **pre-**

**pandemic** **levels.** **One** member stated that

consumption of imported goods registered an annual
variation of -19% in September and that imports of
oil-related consumer goods contracted by 44% in
October. **Some members mentioned that the**

2


-----

recovery in exports and the marked weakness in
imports have led to a trade balance surplus.

**Most members noted that consumption and**
**investment continue to show a lackluster**
**performance. Some members highlighted the 16%**
annual contraction in investment in September. One
member pointed out that investment is the weakest
component of aggregate demand, underlining the
sluggishness of construction. **Another member**
added that investment was already weak prior to the
pandemic. He/she stated that the annual variation of
private consumption was -11.4% in September and
that of non-oil imports of consumer goods

was -29.3% in October. He/she highlighted the
strength of remittances, which are a determinant of
consumption, and stated that from January to
October they accumulate 33,564 million US dollars.
**One member mentioned that consumption of**
domestically produced goods has followed an
upward trajectory since June, in contrast with the
trajectory of consumption of imported goods. Some
members emphasized the forecast of a slow
recovery of consumption and investment. **One**
member added that the vaccination phase will extend
for a relatively long period and that it is subject to
risks, and that for this reason it is difficult to anticipate
a rapid rebound in consumption and investment.
He/she mentioned that the situation is complicated
by a complex external environment, potential
obstacles to remittances in the coming months, the
absence of fiscal support, and an unfavorable
environment for investment.

**On the supply side, most members highlighted**
**the heterogeneity in the recovery of different**
**sectors. They pointed out that manufacturing**
**production has had the best performance,**
**exhibiting levels close to those seen prior to the**
**pandemic, while construction and services**
**continue to show weakness. In that regard, some**
members noted that, after manufacturing production
exhibited a significant annual contraction of 35.3% in
April, this figure was 1.0% in October. They indicated
that accommodation and food preparation services,
transportation and information services, and

recreation services have shown the greatest
weakness. **One member highlighted that industrial**
production fell at an annual rate of 29.4% in May and
of only 3.1% in October. He/she added that in that
month construction contracted 9.7% on an annual
basis. Another member highlighted that the primary
sector continued to grow.

**The majority of members agreed that the labor**
**market has continued to recover, although**


**elements of weakness prevail. One member**
emphasized that the recovery has been slow,
especially for women, and that pre-pandemic levels
have not been reached yet. **Some members**
highlighted the decline in the labor participation rate
and the high levels of unemployment,

underemployment and of the population not
economically active but available to work. **One**
member stated that the latter increased by 3 million
between March and October of this year. **Another**
member mentioned that between February and April
formal and informal employment decreased by 12.5
million and that between May and October it
increased by 9.7 million. Some members highlighted
the increase in the rate of informal employment. One
member pointed out that the informal sector of the
labor market is the only one that records employment
rates similar to those observed prior to the pandemic.
He/she added that in October the number of people
in formal employment was still 1.4 million lower than
that recorded in March of this year.

**Most members noted that the economic recovery**
**will be gradual and prolonged. Some members**
highlighted the outlook for positive, albeit moderate,
growth rates for 2021 and 2022. One member stated
that, according to the most recent survey of private
sector forecasters, growth expectations for 2020
remained at -9% and for 2021 they rose from 3.34%
to 3.44%. **Another member considered that**
economic activity could take several years to return
to the level of the first quarter of 2019. He/she
indicated that the vaccine does not change the
outlook in the short term, since it is estimated that
some groups could begin to be vaccinated until the
middle of next year, so that the economic impact will
continue for a considerable part of 2021. From a
longer-term perspective, **some members voiced**
concerns about the possible decline in potential
growth. **One member argued that potential growth**
will be affected by pre-pandemic developments in
investment and total factor productivity, as well as by
the impact of the health crisis on these variables.
He/she added that for the period 2021-2030, the
median of forecasters surveyed by Banco de México
has recently set the expected average annual growth
of the economy between 1.9 and 2%. He/she stated
that, in the absence of policies to boost private
investment and productivity, potential growth will be
lower.

**In view of the economic contraction and the**
**expected recovery scenarios, most members**
**agreed that ample slack conditions are foreseen**
**throughout the time frame in which monetary**
**policy operates. One member considered that given**

3


-----

the impact on productive activity, the output gap will
remain negative for a long period. Another member
stated that slack conditions are anticipated to
continue narrowing gradually. One member pointed
out that the labor market continues to operate under
ample slack conditions.

**Most members mentioned that an environment of**
**uncertainty and downward risks to economic**
**activity persists. Some members warned that with**
the increase in the number of COVID-19 infections,
additional social distancing measures may be
implemented, which would affect the pace of
recovery. One member mentioned that, although the
vaccination campaign is about to begin, there is
uncertainty about the process of acquiring and
distributing vaccines, and about the latter’s

effectiveness. Another member emphasized that an
improvement in the health situation and economic
recovery, particularly in the United States, are key
factors for the recovery of Mexico’s economy. **One**
member considered as risks to productive activity: i)
volatility in financial markets, either due to reductions
in risk appetite or idiosyncratic factors; ii) greater
solvency problems of households and firms, and iii)
an impact on public finances and its possible effect
on the conditions of access to financial markets.

**_Inflation in Mexico_**

**All members indicated that annual headline**
**inflation fell between October and November due**
**to a reduction in both its core and non-core**
**components. One member noted that annual**
headline inflation in November was within its
variability interval, with monthly inflation being at its
lowest historical level for that month since 1970.
**Another member stated that headline inflation**
surprised in November by decreasing 76 basis
points, from 4.09% in October to 3.33% in November.
**Most** **members noted that inflation has suffered**
**from the effects of the pandemic.**

**All members emphasized the decline in core**
**inflation between October and November, with**
**the** **lower** **annual** **change** **in** **non-food**

**merchandise** **prices** **standing** **out,** **mainly**

**associated with the longer duration and greater**
**intensity of discount sales during the "El Buen**
**Fin" period. Some members added that the prices**
of services also decreased. One member considered
that part of the success of "El Buen Fin" in managing
to sustain a decline in prices for a long period has its
origin in the weakness of aggregate demand, whose
effect on prices materialized through this program.
**Another** member pointed out that several factors


could be influencing the decline in non-food
merchandise prices. On the one hand, the weakness
of demand could lead to a more persistent decline in
prices. On the other hand, supply-related effects and
a recomposition of spending towards merchandise
would exert upward pressure on prices once the
sales period ends.

**Most members pointed out that the effect of "El**
**Buen Fin" on prices is expected to be transitory.**
**One member noted that the effect is likely to fade**
rapidly. **Another** member explained that compared
to the second fortnight of October, the change in the
prices of non-food merchandise, which were no
longer on discount sale in the second half of
November, shows that in about 80% of the cases the
prices have already reached their original level or
even a higher one. He/she emphasized that private
sector analysts also anticipate a transitory effect,
since, although their inflation expectations for 2020
were adjusted downwards, those for 2021 remained
stable above the target. **One member highlighted**
that food merchandise inflation remains at high
levels, slightly below 7%. He/she pointed out that
during the first half of December core inflation could
be subject to additional pressures, which might make
it reach levels near those registered in October.
He/she stated that these adjustments might reflect
the fact that towards the end of the year some supplyrelated pressures had been accumulated due to the
effects of the pandemic, which had not been offset by
the weakness of demand. He/she noted that this
could be associated with the recomposition of
household spending, which has intensified as a result
of the pandemic, with higher spending on

merchandise and lower spending on services.
He/she argued that this is confirmed by the fact that
annual merchandise inflation is much higher than
that of services.

As for non-core inflation, some members mentioned
that it fell, mainly due to the fall in the annual rates of
change of fruits and vegetable and gasoline prices.
**One** member pointed out that this component of
inflation tends to be the most volatile and added that
the annual rate of change of energy prices was
negative.

**Some members highlighted the importance of**
identifying whether the referred reduction in inflation
will be transitory or more persistent. **One member**
underlined that, despite the decline in headline
inflation, core inflation was 3.66%, above the 3%
target and close to its average since April 2018.
**Another member considered that the behavior of**
core inflation is not consistent with what is usually

4


-----

observed during the bottom stage of the business
cycle, when all expenditure items are typically
affected. He/she noted that, due to the nature of the
pandemic and the social distancing measures,
households have concentrated their expenditure
mostly on merchandise and have significantly
reduced their spending on services, which brings
about additional uncertainty on the inflationary
process.

**Most members mentioned that headline inflation**
**expectations for the end of 2020 were adjusted**
**downwards and those for the medium and long**
**terms remained stable at levels above the 3%**
**target. One** member pointed out that inflation
expectations for the end of 2020 were adjusted
significantly downwards to 3.5% in December.
**Another member stated that analysts expect**
inflation to end 2021 at 3.5%. **Some members**
pointed out that the inflationary risk premium and
inflation expectations drawn from market instruments
also decreased in the last weeks. In this context, one
member considered that inflation expectations
remain anchored and under control.

**Most members pointed out that the trajectories of**
**both headline and core inflation for the next 12 to**
**24 months are expected to be around 3%. One**
member noted that this scenario assumes the
gradual fading of supply pressures and greater
effects of slack on headline and core inflation within
the forecast horizon. **Some** members considered
that headline inflation would end the year at levels
below 3.5%. **Some** members highlighted that
inflation forecasts indicate that the target would be
attained in 2022. **One member stated that the**
evolution of inflation in the following months will
continue to be influenced by the impact of the
pandemic on supply and demand, as well as by the
behavior of the peso exchange rate, among other
factors. **Another** member pointed out that a rise in
inflation is anticipated mainly associated with a
comparison base effect that would prevail until April
2021, while inflation would maintain its convergence
to the 3% target during the second half of 2021. One
member argued that fundamental inflation

determinants, such as the exchange rate

appreciation, the weakness of demand and low
energy prices, exhibit a behavior that tends to favor
price stability. He/she mentioned that the recent
international events have dissipated factors of
uncertainty and improved the balance of risks around
the inflation forecast.


**As for upward risks to inflation, most members**
**highlighted possible episodes of exchange rate**
**depreciation.** **One** member mentioned that

considering the historical trend of the exchange rate,
there is a risk of a further depreciation of the peso,
which would imply delaying the convergence of
inflation to the target. Another member emphasized
that a relatively stable evolution of the peso
exchange rate, at levels similar to the current one,
may be unfeasible given that the peso exchange rate
may be affected by several factors, including a
deterioration of the health situation, the election
process next year, the challenges for public finances,
the evolution of the sovereign rating, the high liquidity
of the peso in international financial markets under a
volatile environment, and the recent draft proposal of
reforms to Banco de México’s Law. Some members
added the risk posed by wage increases. **One**
member argued that the adjustment to the minimum
wage may be of such a magnitude as to complicate
the convergence of inflation to the target during the
time frame in which monetary policy operates.
**Another member added the risk of aggressive wage**
increases in 2021 possibly contributing to a
deterioration of inflation expectations. He/she also
noted the persistence of core inflation, despite the
slack conditions. One member highlighted the risk of
core inflation pressures stemming from the

recomposition of spending towards merchandise, as
well as several cost-related pressures on firms.
**Another member considered that, although core**
inflation still remains at relatively high levels, this
should not be overestimated as this indicator is still
reflecting the price dynamics of the most severe
phase of the pandemic, when food and other
merchandise prices increased significantly. He/she
noted that the performance of this indicator can be
expected to be more favorable once these price
increases are undone, which would contribute to
reduce headline and core inflation levels.

As for downward risks to inflation, **some** members
highlighted an exchange rate appreciation and a
greater than expected effect of the negative output
gap. **One** member added greater social distancing
measures or persistence in the decline in prices due
to “El Buen Fin”, as well as lower inflationary
pressures worldwide. **Another member stated that**
recent international events have improved the
balance of risks for inflation, as factors of uncertainty
about the behavior of the exchange rate have
dissipated.

**Some members considered that the balance of risks**
around the projected trajectory of inflation remains
uncertain. One of them noted that this is associated

5


-----

with the unprecedented shocks that have affected
the economy this year and the opposing effects they
have had on inflation. Another member pointed out
that, although the current scenario is subject to both
downward and upward risks, the balance is biased to
the upside.

**_Macrofinancial environment_**

**Most members noted that financial markets**
**showed a favorable behavior partly due to**
**greater risk appetite in international markets.**
**One member highlighted the soundness of Mexico's**
macroeconomic fundamentals.

**The majority of members mentioned that the**
**stock market registered gains and noted that the**
**Mexican peso appreciated. One member added**
that the peso has significantly reversed the
depreciation it presented at the beginning of the
pandemic. **Another member pointed out that,**
although trading conditions have improved, they
have still not returned to those observed prior to the
pandemic. He/she added that, recently episodes of
peso volatility, associated with the discussion
regarding the reform to Banco de México’s Law, were
observed.

**Most members noted that short-term interest**
**rates exhibited moderate adjustments and long-**
**term interest rates decreased. They mentioned**
**that** **sovereign** **risk** **premia** **have** **shown**

**reductions and are now at levels similar to those**
**prior to the pandemic. One member added that**
long-term risk premia still remain above the levels
observed one year ago. Some members pointed out
that outflows in government securities have slowed
and that foreign investor inflows have already been
registered. **One member noted that despite the**
above, accumulated outflows during the year amount
to USD 18 billion (excluding USD 7 billion from
Pemex's repo operations), which is the highest level
recorded since at least 2013. He/she added that
appetite for domestic instruments remains low.
**Another member warned that risk appetite in global**
financial markets remains fragile and prone to capital
outflows.

**The majority of members stated that risks to**
**financial markets persist and further episodes of**
**volatility cannot be ruled out, although** **one**
member mentioned that the balance of risks for
financial markets has recently improved. **The**
**majority considered that the proposed reform to**
**Banco de México’s Law may represent a risk for**


**financial markets.** **Some members added that it**
may exert pressure on the peso exchange rate.

**Some** members noted that the state of public
finances is a risk factor. One member mentioned that
the shortfall in budget revenues continued to widen
due to lower tax and oil revenues. He/she added that
the use of resources from the Budget Revenue
Stabilization Fund (FEIP, for its acronym in Spanish)
and the repurchase operation carried out by Pemex
in November, reported as revenues, have allowed
the fiscal balance to register a greater surplus than
programmed. However, he/she argued that this does
not reflect the risks of public finances adequately.
He/she added that the resources of the FEIP will
have been spent in 2021, which will exert more
pressure on programmable spending. He/she noted
that the fiscal balance could deteriorate in the event
of increased spending pressures associated with the
continuation of the pandemic and the materialization
of a downgrade of sovereign credit ratings. Another
member noted that some rating agencies affirmed
the investment grade of the sovereign debt without
changing its outlook, which reduces the possibility of
the country losing its credit rating in the short term.
He/she noted that the expected debt-to-GDP ratio for
Mexico in the following years is below that of
emerging countries with better credit ratings, and that
a lower debt service in the future may set Mexico
apart from other countries and increase the
attractiveness of domestic assets. He/she added that
fiscal discipline and responsibility are important in
preserving macroeconomic fundamentals.

**Some members expressed concerns about Pemex's**
financial situation. They mentioned that the

possibility of this company requiring additional
support may affect public finances. **One member**
pointed out that the fall in its sales has led to an
increase in its indebtedness with suppliers and to a
contraction in investment. He/she added that Pemex
accumulates significant under-spending in

investment, which could affect future crude oil
production in a context where it has registered
figures below those expected. He/she stated that the
cost of hedging against Pemex’s default risk is higher
than that for other oil companies with similar credit
ratings, which reflects markets’ perception about the
risks stemming from the state-owned company’s
financial situation.

**Most members mentioned that the evolution of**
**financing to firms and consumers remains a**
**cause of concern.** **Some members highlighted the**
reduction in credit to consumers and small- and
medium-sized firms. **One member noted that**

6


-----

consumer credit via credit cards registered a real
annual contraction of 12.5% in October, while credit
to small- and medium-sized firms showed an annual
fall of 6.3% in the same month, although its most
recent monthly variation was slightly positive after
having declined for seven consecutive months.
**Another member pointed out that financing to firms**
and consumers continued to fall for the fifth
consecutive month. **Some** members noted that the
contraction of credit in Mexico contrasts with that
observed in other economies, with **one member**
highlighting the cases of both advanced and
emerging economies. **Another member attributed**
this situation to the implementation of fiscal stimuli
programs in several countries, while **one member**
emphasized the lack of government guarantees for
bank credit. **Another member stated that the**
evolution of credit is determined by supply and
demand factors. He/she pointed out that the level of
commercial banks’ deposits tends to boost the
supply of credit, while business confidence

influences demand. He/she added that, while it
cannot be ruled out that demand factors play a part
in the current situation, evidence from Banco de
México’s Survey on General Conditions and

Standards in the Banking Credit Market (EnBan, for
its acronym in Spanish) indicates that credit lines
offered by commercial banks’ have decreased and,
thus, supply factors contributing to the contraction of
credit cannot be minimized.

**One member considered that public policies that**
incentivize the supply and demand of credit should
be strengthened. He/she added that development
banks must intensify their efforts, not only by
expanding the credit they offer, but also by providing
guarantees to debtors. He/she noted that these
measures should aim at promoting investment and
consumption, particularly of durable goods. He/she
highlighted that it is necessary to maintain a
responsible flexibilization that adjusts to the severity
of the current situation, both to avoid imbalances and
to promote greater credit flows.

Regarding financial stability, **another member**
mentioned that, although the banking system
maintains high capital levels, the continuation of the
health emergency and the slow economic recovery
may deteriorate its capitalization. He/she added that
it is therefore important to monitor all warning signs,
particularly regarding the deterioration of the credit
portfolio. In this regard, he/she noted that the pastdue portfolio increased in October, particularly in the
credit card segment, due to the expiration in
September of the special accounting criteria.


**Some** members highlighted that the current
environment is not conducive to private investment.
**One member added that the outlook of uncertainty**
and economic expectations are conditions that do not
incentivize investment. Another member mentioned
the lack of fiscal support. One member argued that,
in face of a complex environment, a sound and
sustainable macroeconomic stance that promotes
confidence and contributes to an orderly adjustment
of financial markets and of the economy overall is
essential. He/she emphasized the importance of
maintaining sustainable public finances, a low and
stable inflation, and a sound and well-capitalized
financial system.

**As to the recent initiative to amend Banco de**
**México Law regarding the acquisition of foreign**
**currency cash, most members agreed that it is**
**positive that Congress, and in particular the**
**Chamber of Deputies, decided to open a space**
**for reflection regarding the proposal, with the**
**objective of contributing to the process of**
**analysis to find the best options for the solution**
**of the issues and challenges raised. They**
**highlighted that it is fundamental that the**
**solution reached preserves Banco de México’s**
**autonomy and that it does not affect its**
**operation. They pointed out that the risk that the**
**Central Bank's balance sheet may become**
**contaminated with resources of illicit origin must**
**be avoided, as it would jeopardize the availability**
**of international reserves and access to external**
**financing** **sources,** **which** **could** **lead** **to**

**macroeconomic and financial instability. One**
member mentioned that Banco de México has
pointed out that it agrees with the benefits pursued
by this proposal in regards to improving the
circulation of foreign currency that enters our country
as a result of legal activities. However, he/she
underlined that efforts in this direction must preserve
the constitutional autonomy granted to Banco de
México and avoid jeopardizing its operation and the
availability of international reserves. He/she argued
that if the actions adopted in this regard address the
above-mentioned risks, this would avoid introducing
a considerable and unnecessary factor of uncertainty
in Banco de México’s functions and in the financial
system’s operations. **Another member mentioned**
the comments by a rating agency stating that in case
the proposal were approved in its actual terms, it
would affect the Central Bank’s autonomy along with
the macroeconomic stability of the country. He/she
added that this constitutes a risk for the Central Bank
and for the national financial system.

7


-----

**_Monetary Policy_**

**Considering the impact on inflation, economic**
**activity and financial markets, the inflation**
**outlook and the uncertainty surrounding it, as**
**well as the convenience of consolidating a**
**downward trajectory of headline and core**
**inflation towards the 3% target, most members**
**agreed to maintain the target for the overnight**
**interbank interest rate at 4.25%. Two** members
voted for lowering the target to 4.00%. **Most**
**members agreed that the decision to leave the**
**policy rate unchanged constitutes a pause which**
**provides the necessary room to confirm the**
**convergence of the inflation trajectory to its**
**target.**

**One** member mentioned that, considering the
pandemic-related supply, demand and financial
shocks, monetary policy must contribute to maintain
inflation at low levels and around its target, foster an
orderly functioning of financial markets, financial
system stability, and contribute to a sustained
economic recovery. He/she noted that, to achieve
these goals it is important that the yield curve follows
an orderly behavior, given that the aggregate
demand components respond to the different
segments of the curve. He/she argued that an orderly
and sustainable downward adjustment in this curve
has benefits, especially considering the pandemicrelated impacts, and contributes to a better response
of aggregate demand and the financial system.
He/she considered that, especially in emerging
economies, medium- and long-term interest rates
include various risk premia and that inflation must
remain low and stable to lower inflationary risk
premia throughout the yield curve. He/she stressed
that for small open emerging economies, which need
to complement their domestic savings with external
sources of financing, it is important to maintain a
stable macroeconomic environment, both to attract
and to retain capital, and to have the financial
conditions required for an orderly adjustment of the
economy. In this regard, he/she highlighted that so
far this year short- and long-term interest rates in
Mexico have adjusted downwards significantly as
compared to other emerging economies, which,
despite having lower short-term interest rates, have
been subject to pressures on long-term ones. He/she
added that pandemic-related factors have made it
more difficult to maintain low and stable risk premia
in emerging economies, given that a deep economic
contraction, lower public revenue, growing spending
and capital outflow pressures were observed
simultaneously. He/she pointed out that it is
necessary to avoid taking measures that might


jeopardize macroeconomic stability and soundness.
In this context, he/she referred to the proposal
seeking to modify Banco de México’s Law which has
been recently approved by the Mexican Senate.
Finally, he/she considered that leaving the policy rate
unchanged would allow to better identify the
challenges and trade-offs faced by monetary policy,
in an environment in which headline and core
inflation have been pressured by opposing factors
and have exhibited considerable volatility in their
most recent figures, despite the sharp economic
weakness. In addition, this room for maneuver would
provide greater clarity over other significant risk
factors that are affecting the Mexican economy.

**Another** member expressed that further extending
the pause in the monetary easing cycle would allow
to assess, based on incoming information, monetary
policy’s margin of maneuver and reinforce the
credibility of the Central Bank’s commitment to its
primary mandate. He/she argued that extending the
pause would allow to confirm if inflation, mainly its
core component, has started a downward trend or
whether November’s data were atypical. He/she
stated that the balance of risks for inflation remains
uncertain and recalled that core inflation’s resistance
to decline has been observed for a long period, and
that thus it is prudent to not anticipate conclusions,
which could be counterproductive. He/she added that
high risks that could generate volatility persist.
He/she underlined that domestic risks have gained
more relevance and could exert pressure on the
exchange rate, which would further stress the
monetary policy stance. In particular, regarding the
proposal to amend Banco de México’s Law, he/she
mentioned that allowing more time to analyze the
challenges associated with inflows of foreign
currency cash to the country was a positive decision.
He/she pointed out that, although there are risks
associated with this legislative process, it is key to
address said challenges without jeopardizing the
Central Bank’s autonomy, which has been a
cornerstone of Mexico’s macroeconomic stability and
the main strength behind the country’s credit profile.
In addition, he/she emphasized that the weakening
of public finances, Pemex’s fragile situation, and the
deterioration of the business environment worsen the
concerns regarding country risk, and that the
electoral process in 2021 could also lead to more
volatility. For this reason, he/she stated that insofar
as the exchange rate risk persists, a prudent
monetary policy approach as the one followed should
be maintained, in order to assess if there is a margin
for a greater stimulus. Finally, he/she considered that
the monetary policy statement should clearly
communicate that the current monetary policy

8


-----

decision seeks to guarantee the downward trend of
inflation to its target in the time frame in which
monetary policy operates, and that a prudent and
responsible monetary policy implementation is the
best way to confirm the Central Bank’s commitment
to price stability.

**One** member pointed out that the decision in
November to make a pause in monetary policy
implementation had the objective of obtaining greater
clarity regarding the future trajectory of inflation.
He/she considered that the time elapsed has not
been sufficient to achieve the above. First, he/she
pointed out that there are no signs of a sustained
reduction of inflationary pressures. Second, he/she
added that upwards risks to inflation have intensified
and that the most important one stems from the
proposed reform to Banco de México’s Law. He/she
pointed out that recent experience shows its potential
repercussions on the exchange rate, and that
statistical exercises indicate that even moderate
exchange rate depreciations can make inflation
deviate from its target considerably. He/she stated
that although the recent decision to provide a space
for dialogue is welcome, the risks associated with the
proposal would continue insofar as this initiative is
not defined. In this context, he/she considered that a
message of monetary policy easing would contradict
the Central Bank’s reasoning on the issue and, thus,
would be detrimental for the institution. To the above
he/she added the possible impact of an adjustment
in the minimum wage on prices. Third, he/she
underlined the risk of new volatility episodes in global
financial markets, as well as risks derived from
idiosyncratic factors, among which he/she

highlighted the challenges to public finances, due in
part to the possible need to provide additional
support to Pemex, in view of the continuous
deterioration of its financial situation. Fourth, he/she
mentioned that the date of inflation’s convergence to
the target continues to be postponed, and that both
analysts’ inflation expectations and their

incompatibility with the adjustments in the reference
rate anticipated by many of them highlight the
credibility challenges faced by the Central Bank.
Regarding the future trajectory of the reference rate,
he/she argued that the prevailing uncertainty does
not allow for the provision of accurate forward
guidance. He/she warned that messages of such
nature, or others that give the impression that
monetary policy is focused on goals different from
inflation, such as stimulating growth, would generate
confusion in the markets and would accentuate the
credibility challenges. In this regard, he/she

underlined the importance of pointing out that
monetary policy will be implemented in a prudent


manner, with pragmatism and flexibility, based on
incoming information in each meeting, with the goal
of attaining the convergence of inflation to its target
within the period of monetary policy influence.

**Another member pointed out that the recent decline**
in inflation, the favorable evolution of its determinants
and the improvement in the balance of risks provide
additional room to continue with the monetary easing
cycle. He/she claimed that the need for a greater
easing is attributed to a number of factors. First,
credit to households and firms continues contracting.
An additional monetary easing would allow

businesses to reduce financing costs and to improve
credit granting conditions, which have recently
deteriorated. He/she stated that, despite the low level
of development of the financial system, when credit
fluctuations are very pronounced, such as in the
current juncture, their impact on aggregate activity is
significant despite the fact that only a fraction of the
economy operates with bank credit. Second, he/she
mentioned that the ex-ante real interest rate in
Mexico is still high as compared to other emerging
economies. He/she pointed out that in many
countries this rate has become negative, while in
Mexico it remains positive. He/she added that
although some countries which have lowered their
policy rates more than Mexico, as is the case of Brazil
and South Africa, show high long-term rates, this
derives from the fact that their sovereign risk is higher
than Mexico’s. Other countries with lower sovereign
risk, such as Chile, Peru and, to a lesser extent,
Colombia, have managed to cut their short-term
interest rates, while maintaining long-term rates at
low levels. He/she noted that the current level of
sovereign risk in Mexico provides an opportunity to
continue easing monetary policy and to affect the
entire yield curve. Third, he/she mentioned that the
macroeconomic outlook in Mexico is characterized
by the typical symptoms of economies conducting a
very tight monetary policy. As the first symptom,
he/she underlined the poor performance of demand
components that are more sensitive to interest rates,
such as consumption with credit cards and
investment. As an additional symptom, he/she
mentioned the contrast between the dynamism of the
external sector, which does not directly respond to
the domestic interest rate, and the less dynamic
performance of the domestic economy, which does
depend on said rate. He/she considered that the
current account surplus is also associated with a tight
monetary policy, which encourages saving and
discourages investment. He/she warned that,

maintaining the real interest rate high, in a context of
weak aggregate demand, incurs the risk of falling into
a long and deep recession, and that it can even affect

9


-----

potential growth. Finally, he/she considered that the
cycle of reductions cannot end and that it is urgent to
restart it once there are opportunities, as in the case
of the current juncture, that allow the provision of
support to the economy without jeopardizing the
Central Bank’s primary objective of price stability.

**One member considered that since the last policy**
decision inflation has performed favorably, the
Mexican peso has appreciated and sovereign risk,
measured with Credit Default Swaps (CDS), has
decreased to pre-pandemic levels. He/she

mentioned that meanwhile, economic activity

continues exhibiting a clear bias to the downside, to
such a degree that a historic surplus of 6.7% of GDP
was recorded in the current account in the third
quarter. He/she cautioned that the vaccine against
COVID-19 will not prevent the scenario of a weak
recovery in the short term. He/she added that, in view
of fiscal austerity, monetary policy is the only
countercyclical instrument. He/she emphasized that,
based on the monetary policy stance, there is still
room to adopt a more expansionary effort, given that
the neutral rate is lower considering the sharp fall of
economic activity. He/she added that, if the impacts
that limit investment are not addressed, irreversible
structural damage will be done to future generations.
Given the expectation of a fragile, difficult and
prolonged economic recovery, it is necessary to
adopt, as practically in the rest of the world, a highly
accommodative stance, and to point out that it will
remain so for a long period. As a consequence,
he/she stated that the Central Bank must continue
with the cycle of lowering the reference rate, and with
the complementary measures that have

accompanied said cycle. He/she mentioned that
given the described outlook and considering the lag
with which monetary policy operates, it is imperative
to lower the reference rate. He/she added that,
during the 2009 financial crisis, real interest rates
remained very low, and even negative, which made
the monetary stimulus compatible with a relative
price stability. He/she noted that a lower real interest
rate than that adopted at that time is necessary,
given that the impact of the ongoing crisis on
economic activity is much greater and the recovery is
anticipated to be slower. He/she stated that
temporary deviations of inflation, when following a
foreseen trajectory, should not lead to an

overreaction, given that upward pandemic-related
distortions in inflation would need to dissipate over
the following months. He/she emphasized that the
level of interest rates should strengthen financing,
without compromising financial stability. He/she
noted that a low level of interest rates reduces the
risk of default for variable-rate loans, which represent


a significant fraction of credit granted to firms and
improves renegotiation conditions of debtors.

Likewise, it increases asset valuation, improving the
balance sheet of financial institutions and

businesses’ guarantees to obtain loans. He/she
underlined that one of the messages of the past
Financial Stability Report is that a recovery of
economic activity and employment contributes to
reduce the rate of default on credits, and that for this
reason, monetary stimulus to the economy is
currently compatible with financial stability. He/she
indicated that a pause in the monetary easing cycle,
when there is room to extend it, self-limits the
monetary stimulus needed for the economic
recovery. Consequently, it is necessary to continue
lowering interest rates to strengthen the signal of the
Central Bank’s commitment. Considering the lag with
which monetary policy operates, it is not appropriate
to have expectations that the easing will stop for
some time, but, on the contrary, that it will continue
and will be maintained in the medium term until the
economy shows a sustained improvement. In this
way, households and businesses can mitigate the
current uncertainty with the prevalence of lower costs
of financing. He/she concluded that the final stage of
the downward cycle depends on the moment when
economic activity begins to significantly respond to
the monetary stimulus. Similarly, the pace of the
monetary easing cycle will have to consider the
evolution of the risks to the inflationary outlook.
He/she considered that currently it is possible to
continue with the easing cycle, given that inflation is
estimated to converge to its target and that multiple
risks, both domestic and external, have been
thoroughly assessed so as to be addressed
efficiently. He/she stated that, at the present moment
this opportunity should be taken to continue with a
monetary stimulus consistent with price stability,
given that any imbalance in the future could limit
Banco de México’s room for maneuver.

**3. MONETARY POLICY DECISION**

The risks for inflation, economic activity and financial
markets pose major challenges for monetary policy
and for the economy in general. Considering the
mentioned forecasts for inflation, the uncertainty that
surrounds them, as well as the convenience of
consolidating a downward path for headline and core
inflation towards the 3% target, with the presence of
all its members, Banco de México’s Governing Board
decided by majority to maintain the target for the
overnight interbank interest rate at 4.25%. Two
members voted for lowering the rate to 4.00%. This
pause provides the necessary room to confirm that
the trajectory of inflation converges to the target.

10


-----

Looking ahead, monetary policy implementation will
depend on the evolution of the factors that have an
incidence on headline and core inflation, on their
foreseen trajectories within the forecast horizon, and
on their expectations.

The Governing Board will take the necessary actions
on the basis of incoming information in order for the
policy rate to be consistent with the orderly and
sustained convergence of headline inflation to Banco
de México’s target within the time frame in which
monetary policy operates. In addition, it is imperative
to safeguard the institutional framework, strengthen
the macroeconomic fundamentals and adopt the
necessary actions on both monetary and fiscal policy
fronts, to enable a better adjustment of domestic
financial markets and of the economy as a whole.

**4. VOTING**

Alejandro Díaz de León-Carrillo, Irene EspinosaCantellano and Javier Eduardo Guzmán-Calafell
voted in favor of maintaining the target for the
overnight interbank interest rate at 4.25%.

Gerardo Esquivel-Hernández and Jonathan Ernest
Heath-Constable voted in favor of lowering the target
for the overnight interbank interest rate to 4.00%.

**5. VIEWPOINTS / DISSENTING VOTES**

**Vote. Gerardo Esquivel-Hernández**

In November, annual inflation fell by 76 basis points
in comparison with October (from 4.09 to 3.33%).
Although this might be partially due to transitory
factors, private sector forecasters anticipate annual
inflation will end 2020 at 3.4%, an expectation that is
certainly more favorable than that at the time of the
previous monetary decision (3.95%). Looking ahead,
inflation expectations remain stable, while the
Central Bank’s forecasts estimate inflation will near

.


the target starting in the third quarter of 2021.
Although core inflation remains relatively high, this is
due to factors associated with the first stage of the
lockdown, which are expected to fade by the second
half of 2021. Considering the amount of slack in the
economy, the high appreciation of the peso, the
decline in country-risk perception, and forecasts on
energy prices, no inflationary pressures are foreseen
in the short term. For all of the above, and given that
economic reactivation is expected to take place at a
relatively slow pace, and that both consumption and
domestic investment remain weak, I believe that it
would have been more prudent on this occasion to
resume the easing cycle and lower the interest rate
target by 25 basis points.

**Vote. Jonathan Ernest Heath-Constable**

My vote for a 25 basis-point reduction is a reiteration
of my voting and viewpoint in the past monetary
policy decision. The fundamental reason for my vote
is that we face a fragile, difficult and prolonged
recovery after a sharp fall in economic activity and its
resultant negative impact on the labor market. In the
last month, inflation has fallen considerably, the peso
has significantly appreciated, and risk perception is
close to levels observed prior to the onset of the
pandemic. In addition, the inflation rate for the end of
the year is anticipated to be very close to the Central
Bank’s point target, with it being imminent that many
states will go back into lockdown due to an increase
in the pandemic’s levels of contagion. For this
reason, I believe it is erroneous to continue with this
pause, and to miss this window of opportunity to
implement a more accommodative monetary policy,
consistent with the economic crisis that we face and
with the room to maneuver provided by the inflation
outlook. To think that in this favorable context we
need to pause to have more clarity on the risk factors
does not adequately take into consideration the
magnitude of the current crisis

11


-----

**ANNEX**

The information in this Annex was prepared for this
meeting by the staff of Banco de México’s General
Directorate of Economic Research and General
Directorate of Central Bank Operations. It does not
necessarily reflect the considerations of the
members of the Governing Board as to the monetary
policy decision.

**A.1. External conditions**

**A.1.1. World economic activity**

Available information for the fourth quarter suggests
that world economic activity has continued to recover
gradually, driven by the reopening of various
productive activities and by household and business
support programs. However, this recovery has taken
place at a more moderate pace since July and in a
more heterogeneous manner among countries and
sectors (Chart 1). Regardless of the greater
optimism generated by the approval, production and
distribution of vaccines, the implementation of new
lockdown measures due to the resurgence of
COVID-19 cases in several countries has started to
be reflected in mobility and household and business
confidence indicators of some major advanced
economies. The effects of this second wave of
infections have varied depending on the evolution of
the pandemic and on lockdown measures

implemented in each country. Thus, the performance
of economies still differs among sectors, with
services being more affected than the industrial
sector due to the new mobility restrictions. The
behavior of inflation has also continued to be
heterogeneous among countries, depending on both
the magnitude and direction of the shocks stemming
from the pandemic as well as on the idiosyncratic
features in each country. In the main advanced
economies inflation remained below their respective
central banks’ targets, while its behavior in most
emerging economies continued to be

heterogeneous.

In this environment, the main central banks kept their
policy interest rates at historically low levels,
continued to use their balance sheets to promote a
proper functioning of financial markets and reiterated
their intention to maintain an accommodative
monetary policy stance for an extended period.
Some of the main advanced economies announced
new fiscal stimuli packages, while in other cases the
negotiation processes have been extended. The
monetary, financial and fiscal measures


implemented in advanced economies, along with the
progress in the development of vaccines to fight
COVID-19 and expectations of a new fiscal stimuli
package in the United States, favored a positive
behavior of international financial markets.

In this context, the forecasts of private sector
analysts and multilateral organizations continue to
anticipate a strong contraction of the world economy
in 2020 and a gradual recovery in 2021. However,
higher-frequency forecasts among analysts point to
a slight downward revision of estimated growth for
the fourth quarter of 2020 and the first quarter of
2021, particularly in those countries that have
implemented new lockdown measures in response
to the upsurge of COVID-19 infections. In turn,
progress in the approval, production and distribution
of vaccines has been reflected in an upward revision
of forecasters’ expectations for the second half of
2021. These forecasts continue to be subject to a
high degree of uncertainty associated with the
evolution of the pandemic, the production and
distribution of vaccines, the sufficiency of fiscal
stimuli to support economic recovery, the possible
intensification of social conflicts, and other tensions
worldwide.

**Chart 1**

**Global: Purchasing Managers’ Index (PMI)**

**Production Component**

Diffusion index, s. a.

60

55

50

45

40

35

Manufacturing

30 Manufacturing (excl. China)

Services

Services (excl. China)

25

November

20

2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020

s. a. / Seasonally adjusted figures.
Source: Markit.

In the United States, available indicators suggest
that the recovery of economic activity continued at
the beginning of the fourth quarter, although at a
more moderate pace, after registering a seasonally
adjusted quarterly growth of 7.4% during the third

12


-----

quarter (Chart 2).[1] In particular, the rise in capital
goods orders during October points to a continued
recovery of investment in equipment, while the
increase in housing starts and sales indicate a new
rise in residential investment. Nevertheless, retail
sales have decreased and consumer confidence
indicators have moderated, reflecting the

implementation of new lockdown measures. In this
regard, there is certain uncertainty about the outlook
for the US economy associated with the evolution of
the pandemic, the possible imposition of additional
social distancing measures, and the lack of
consensus to approve a new fiscal stimuli package.

After having slightly contracted in September, US
industrial production increased in October and
November at an average monthly rate of 0.7%,
reflecting an expansion in manufacturing activity. In
turn, mining recovered in November, after having
contracted in October due to a weather-related fall in
oil and gas production. Electricity and gas generation
contracted in November declined due to the
unusually warm weather. As for Purchasing
Managers’ Indices of the manufacturing sector, they
remained at high levels, suggesting continuous
growth in this sector.

As to the US labor market, the unemployment rate
continued to decrease from 6.9% in October to 6.7%
in November, although this was mainly the result of
a fall in the labor force. The pace of job creation in
the non-farm sector moderated further, decreasing
from 610,000 new jobs in October to 245,000 in
November due to the imposition of new lockdown
measures in some regions. Likewise, initial claims of
unemployment remained at high levels.

In the euro area, some available data to the fourth
quarter, such as consumer confidence indices,
suggest a moderation in the pace of recovery of
economic activity due to the re-imposition of social
distancing measures in some countries. Likewise,
the PMI of the services sector deteriorated sharply in
November, remaining at contractionary levels. After
several months of negotiations, the European
leaders reached an agreement on the next long-term
budget and a stimulus package for a total of €1.8
trillion.

1 In seasonally adjusted annualized terms, US GDP growth was
33.1% during the third quarter of the year.


**Chart 2**

**United States: Real GDP and its Components**

Annualized quarterly percentage change and

contributions in percentage points, s. a.

50 50

40 Private consumption expendituresResidential investment 45

30 Change in private inventoriesNet exports 40

Nonresidential investment 35

20 Government consumption expenditures

Total 30

10

25

0

20

-10 15

-20 10

-30 5

-40 0

I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV

2016 2017 2018 2019 2020

s. a. / Seasonally adjusted figures.
Source: Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA),

In the United Kingdom, GDP grew at a seasonally
adjusted quarterly rate of 15.5% in the third quarter,
after having contracted 19.8% during the second.
This behavior was driven by the lower dynamism of
private consumption, business investment and, to a
lower extent, public spending, in a context of easing
lockdown measures. Some more timely indicators,
such as retail sales, continued to recover in October,
albeit at a slower pace. PMIs continued to deteriorate
in November, suggesting a moderation of economic
activity during the fourth quarter due to the increase
of COVID-19 cases and the imposition of new social
distancing measures. As to the labor market, the
unemployment rate rose from 4.5% in August to
4.9% in October. Regarding negotiations of the trade
agreement between the United Kingdom and the
European Union, uncertainty persists as to the
possibility that said agreement is reached before
December 31, 2020.

In Japan, after having contracted for three
consecutive quarters, GDP grew at a seasonally
adjusted quarterly rate of 5.3% during the third
quarter of the year. This result reflected the good
performance of private consumption, which was
driven by stimulus measures, along with the increase
in net exports and public spending. Available
consumption and investment indicators to the fourth
quarter of the year, suggest that the recovery of
economic activity continued in October and

November, driven by the extension of some stimulus
measures. However, the upsurge in COVID-19
infections and the reestablishment of certain
restrictions may moderate the dynamism of

13


-----

economic activity in December. As to the labor
market, the unemployment rate increased from 3.0%
in September to 3.1% in October.

In emerging economies, the performance of
economic activity has been heterogeneous,

depending on the evolution of the pandemic, the
extent and duration of the measures to contain it, the
relative importance of the most affected economic
sectors, and the stimulus measures implemented. In
China, industrial production indicators, fixed

investment and retail sales, continued to recover in
October and November. The above mentioned,
along with available information on foreign trade and
PMIs for November, suggest that the economic
recovery will continue during the fourth quarter of the
year. As to Latin American economies, although
some timely indicators to the fourth quarter point to
certain recovery of economic activity in most of the
region, the resurgence of COVID-19 cases and the
imposition of new mobility restrictions in some
countries suggest that the economic recovery may
slow down.

International prices of commodities overall

registered an upward behavior since México’s
previous monetary policy decision. In particular, oil
prices were driven by progress in the development
of vaccines against COVID-19, expectations that a
new fiscal stimuli package is approved in the United
States, and the agreement between the

Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries
(OPEC) and other producers to increase oil
production only by 500,000 barrels per day (bpd) for
next year, which would bring total production cuts to
around 7.2 million bpd in January 2021. Industrial
metal prices maintained their upward trend due to
the continued recovery of industrial production
worldwide. Finally, grain prices exhibited a high
volatility due to the changing weather conditions in
the United States and Canada, registering a
decrease in recent weeks after having increased in
November.

**A.1.2. Monetary policy and international financial**
**markets**

Inflation worldwide has been subject to various
supply and demand shocks stemming from the
evolution of the pandemic and the measures
implemented to contain it. In this context, in recent
months inflation has shown a heterogeneous
behavior among countries, depending on both the
magnitude and direction of shocks, as well as the
idiosyncratic factors in each country. Thus, in the
main advanced economies inflation continues to be


below their respective central banks’ targets (Chart
3). In this context, inflation expectations drawn from
surveys on these economies have shown a greater
dispersion and a certain reduction since the
beginning of the pandemic, in general being below
the levels registered at the beginning of the year.
Expectations drawn from financial instruments
somewhat recovered due to the reopening of
economic activity, after having decreased

significantly at the beginning of the pandemic. In
emerging economies, inflation has fallen in some
countries as a result of the effects of the pandemic
on economic activity and the downward pressures on
the prices of some services. Other countries have
continued to be subject to upward pressures
stemming largely from increases in food prices and
the depreciation of their currencies.

**Chart 3**

**Selected Advanced Economies: Headline**

**Inflation**

Annual percentage change

3.5

United States
Euro area

3.0 Japan

Canada

2.5 United Kingdom

2.0

1.5

1.0

0.5

0.0

October

-0.5 November

November

-1.0

2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020

Source: Bureau of Labor Statistics, Eurostat, Bank of Japan, Statistics
Canada, Office of National Statistics.

Thus, the main central banks of advanced
economies maintained their reference interest rates
at historically low levels, continued to promote the
orderly functioning of financial markets by using their
balance sheets, and reiterated their intention to
maintain an accommodative monetary policy stance
for an extended period. In this regard, expectations
drawn from market instruments continue to

anticipate that these central banks will maintain
highly accommodative monetary policy stances
(Chart 4).

14


-----

**Chart 4**

**Reference Rates and Implied Trajectories in**

**OIS Curves[1/]**

**Percent**

3.0% **― US Federal Reserve 2/**

**― Bank of England**
**― Bank of Japan**

2.5% **― Bank of Canada**

**― European Central Bank deposit rate**
**― OIS implicit trajectory 11 Dic 2020**

2.0% **--- OIS implicit trajectory 06 Nov 2020**

1.5%

1.0%

0.5%

0.0%

-0.5%

End of End of End of
2019 2020 2021

-1.0%

2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022

1/ OIS: Fixed floating interest rate swap where the fixed interest rate is the
effective overnight reference rate.
** In the case of the US observed reference rate, the average interest rate
of the federal funds target range is used (0.0% - 0.25%).
Source: Prepared by Banco de México with Bloomberg data.

Among the monetary policy decisions, the following
stand out:

i) In its November meeting, the Federal Reserve left

unchanged its range for the federal funds rate at
0%-0.25% and reiterated that it expects that it will be
appropriate to maintain this range until labor market
conditions have reached levels consistent with its
maximum employment estimate and inflation has
increased to 2% and is heading moderately to
exceed the 2% target for some time. It also pointed
out that it will continue to increase its holdings of
Treasury bonds by at least USD 80 billion monthly
and of agency mortgage-backed securities by at
least USD 40 billion monthly until substantial
progress has been made towards its maximum
employment and price stability targets. Likewise,
prior to its December meeting, it announced the
extension until March 2021 of several lending
facilities that were set to expire in the last days of
2020. This extension applies to the Commercial
Paper Funding Facility, the Primary Dealer Credit
Facility, the Money Market Mutual Fund Liquidity
Facility and the Paycheck Protection Program
Liquidity Facility. In this context, the medians of
forecasts of the Federal Open Market Committee
(FOMC) suggest that the reference rate will remain
unchanged until 2023. Likewise, both market
variables, as well as the analysts’ consensus
incorporate the expectations that the Fed will
maintain its reference rate unchanged during 2020
and 2021.


ii) In its December meeting, the European Central Bank

(ECB) left its policy rates unchanged, maintaining its
refinancing rate, key deposit facility rate and key
lending facility rate at 0.0, -0.5 and -0.25%,
respectively. It reiterated that these interest rates are
expected to remain at or below their current levels
until inflation forecasts converge strongly to a level
sufficiently close but below the 2% inflation target,
and that this convergence has been consistently
reflected in core inflation dynamics. It also
announced several measures to preserve favorable
financial conditions during the pandemic. It

increased the pandemic emergency purchase
program (PEPP) by €500 billion to a total of €1,850
billion, extending its horizon until March 2022. It also
extended the reinvestment of principal payments
from maturing securities purchased under the PEPP
until at least the end of 2023. Likewise, the ECB
announced adjustments to the conditions of the third
series of targeted longer-term refinancing operations
(TLTRO III), extending to June 2022 the favorable
financing conditions and conducting three additional
operations between June and December 2021. In
the same regard, it decided to offer four additional
pandemic emergency longer-term refinancing

operations (PELTROs) in 2021, and extended to
June 2022 the duration of the set of collateral easing
measures. The ECB also extended to March 2022
the swap lines and repo facilities for both the
Eurosystem’s central banks and those outside the
euro area. The Governing Council pointed out that it
is ready to adjust its instruments as appropriate to
ensure that inflation moves to its target in a sustained
manner, in line with its commitment to symmetry.

iii) In its December meeting, the Bank of Canada left its

reference rate unchanged at 0.25%, reiterating that
it will keep its reference interest rate at levels close
to zero until the slack has been reduced, so that the
2% inflation target is reached in a sustained manner,
which it expects to be achieved until 2023. It also
kept its asset purchase program unchanged and
announced that said program will continue until
recovery is clearly underway and that it will adjust it
as necessary to enable inflation to return to the target
in a sustained manner.

Since Banco de México’s previous monetary policy
decision, most central banks of emerging economies
left their reference interest rates unchanged, except
for Turkey, which increased it, and the Philippines
and Indonesia, which lowered them. Likewise, some
central banks maintained several measures to
provide credit, supply liquidity and foster the proper
functioning of financial markets.

15


-----

In the context of world economic activity described
above, global financial markets exhibited a positive
performance and less volatility. This was mostly due
to the progress in the development of a vaccine
against COVID-19 and the expectations of a new
fiscal stimuli package in the United States, although
the number of COVID-19 infections and the
associated lockdown measures continued to

increase in several countries. The financial assets of
advanced economies thus exhibited positive

adjustments and the main stock market indexes
registered gains (Chart 5). In foreign exchange
markets, the US dollar depreciated slightly against
most developed countries’ currencies and the
interest rates of long-term government bonds
exhibited relative stability. Emerging economies
registered net capital inflows, both to fixed-income
and equity assets. Their stock markets exhibited
gains, while their currencies remained relatively
stable in general, although with a slight depreciation
bias (Chart 6).

**Chart 5**

**Change in Selected Financial Indicators**

**from November 6 to December 11, 2020**

**Percent, basis pointsPercentage, basis points**


**Chart 6**

**Emerging Economies: Financial Assets**

**Performance from**

**November 9 to December 11, 2020**

Percent, basis points


25%

20%


50

40


15%

10%


30

20


5%


10

0


0%

-5%


-10%


-10

-20


1/ MSCI Emerging Markets Index (includes 24 countries).
2/ DXY: Weighted average of the nominal exchange rate of the six main
world-traded currencies (calculated by Intercontinental Exchange, ICE) with
the following weights: EUR (57.6%), JPY (13.6%), GBP (11.9%), CAD
(9.1%), SEK (4.2%), and CHF (3.6%).
3/ J.P. Morgan Index constructed from a weighted average of the nominal
exchange rate of emerging economies’ currencies with the following
weights: TRY (8.3%), RUB (8.3%), HUF (8.3%), ZAR (8.3%), BRL (11.1%),
MXN (11.1%), CLP (11.1%), CNH (11.1%), INR (11.1%), and SGD (11.1%).
Source: Bloomberg and ICE.


Note: Except for Mexico, interest rates correspond to interest rate swaps Note: Interest rates correspond to interes rate swaps for 2-year/10-year maturities,
for 2-year/10-year maturities, respectively.
Source: Banco de México with PIP and Bloomberg data.

Looking ahead, the behavior of financial markets will
depend on several factors, such as the evolution of
the pandemic, the production and distribution of a
vaccine, and the sufficiency of fiscal stimuli
implemented to support the recovery of economic
activity. Other additional risk factors include the high
levels of public and private borrowing; an increase in
the number of bankruptcies in the sectors most
affected by the pandemic; geopolitical and social
conflicts in different regions of the world; and the
possible exit of the United Kingdom from the
European Union without a trade agreement, among
others.

**A.2. Current situation of the Mexican economy**

**A.2.1. Mexican markets**

Since Banco de Mexico’s previous monetary policy
decision to date, the prices of financial assets in
Mexico exhibited a positive bias, in line with that
observed in other emerging economies (Chart 7).
This occurred in an environment of lower volatility,
after the US election results, where expectations that
developed countries’ central banks will maintain an
accommodative monetary policy stance for an
extended period persist, and where a resurgence of
COVID-19 cases in different regions was also
observed. Despite the aforementioned, positive
news regarding the effectiveness and distribution of
vaccines and expectations about additional fiscal
stimuli in the United States provided additional
support to risk assets.

16


-----

The Mexican peso traded in a range between 19.77
and 20.63 pesos per dollar, ending the period with
an appreciation of 1.11% (Chart 8). This occurred in
a context where both spot and forward trading
conditions improved vis-à-vis the period of the
previous monetary policy decision, although they
remain deteriorated with respect to the levels prior to
the pandemic.

In this regard, in line with the swap line mechanism
between Banco de México and the Federal Reserve
established on March 19, on December 7 the
Exchange Commission instructed Banco de México
to renew maturities for a total of USD 3 billion, where
the allocated amount totaled USD 1.13 billion.

**Chart 7**

**Mexican Markets’ Performance**

Percent, MXN/USD and index


Interest rates of government securities exhibited
moderate adjustments differentiated by term. In this
regard, limited increases were observed for those in
the short end of the yield curve, while significant
reductions were observed in the medium and longterm nodes (Chart 9), which led to a reduction of the
3 year - 30 year spread. The yield curve of real-rate
instruments exhibited a similar dynamic to that of
nominal rates. In this context, breakeven inflation
and inflation risk premia implicit in the spreads
between nominal and real market instrument rates
exhibited reductions vis-à-vis the monetary policy
decision of November (Chart 10). It is worth noting
that such adjustments took place in an environment
where trading conditions improved with respect to
the period of the previous monetary policy decision.

**Chart 9**

**Nominal Yield Curve of Government Securities**

Percent, basis points


10.0

9.0

8.0

7.0

6.0

5.0

4.0


26.0

25.0

24.0

23.0

22.0

21.0

20.0

19.0

18.0


48,000

46,000

44,000

42,000

40,000

38,000

36,000

34,000

32,000


M Bond


4.5

4.0

3.5

3.0

2.5

2.0

1.5

1.0

0.5

0.0

Inflation indexed bonds


Trading range over the period


Range in year Range since last monetary policy decision Nov-09-20 Dec-11-20


Source: Prepared by Banco de México.

**Chart 8**

**Mexican Peso Exchange Rate**


Source: PIP.

**Chart 10**

**Breakeven Inflation and Inflation Risk implicit in**

**Government Securities’ Interest Rate Curves**

Basis points


25.50
25.00
24.50
24.00
23.50
23.00
22.50
22.00
21.50
21.00
20.50
20.00
19.50
19.00
18.50
18.00
17.50
17.00

J       F      M      A      M       J       J       A       S      O

2020

Source: Prepared by Banco de México.


Source: PIP.


17


-----

As to the measures announced by Banco de México
in April, the first call for a collateralized financing
facility for commercial banks with corporate loans to
be channeled to micro, small- and medium-sized
enterprises was published on December 4. This
facility is for up to MXN $100 billion.

As to expectations regarding the path of the
monetary policy target rate, information implied by
the Interbank Equilibrium Interest Rate (TIIE, for its
acronym in Spanish) swap curve discounts with a
52% probability that the target rate will remain
unchanged for the monetary policy decision of
December (Chart 11). Likewise, private sector
forecasters surveyed by Citibanamex are also
expecting that the reference interest rate will remain
at 4.25%. For the end of 2020, market variables and
the median of surveyed forecasters anticipate a level
of 4.25%. Finally, for the end of 2021, market
variables are anticipating a target level of 4.01%,
while the median of private sector forecasters
surveyed anticipates a level of 4.00%.

**Chart 11**

**Banxico’s Overnight Interbank Rate Implied in**


some available indicators suggest that after the
recovery of the third quarter productive activity
continued to improve at the beginning of the fourth
quarter, although it still remains below the levels prior
to the pandemic.

As for external demand, at the beginning of the fourth
quarter exports continued to recover due to the
favorable performance of both automotive exports
and the rest of manufacturing exports, particularly to
the United States.[2] Thus, exports reached levels
above those registered prior to the health emergency
(Chart 13).

**Chart 12**

**Gross Domestic Product**

Quarterly percentage change, s. a.

16

12

8

4

0

-4

-8

-12

-16

-20 Q-III

I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV I II III

2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020

s. a. / Seasonally adjusted figures.
Source: Mexico’s System of National Accounts (SCNM, for its Spanish
acronym), INEGI.


8.50
8.25
8.00
7.75
7.50
7.25
7.00
6.75
6.50
6.25
6.00
5.75
5.50
5.25
5.00
4.75
4.50
4.25
4.00
3.75
3.50


J   M M   S   N   F   M   J   O   D   M   J   A   N


Source: Prepared by Banco de México with Bloomberg data.

**A.2.2. Economic activity in Mexico**

During the third quarter, economic activity began to
recover from the severe impact of the COVID-19
pandemic during the second quarter (Chart 12). This
behavior reflected a recovery of external demand,
the reopening of several activities, and greater
population mobility. Although information is limited,

2 Refers to the value of merchandise exports in current US dollars.
This value differs from that reported for goods exports by Mexico’s
System of National Accounts (SCNM, for its Spanish


s. a. / Seasonally adjusted series and trend series based on data in nominal
US dollars. The former is represented by a solid line and the latter by a
dotted line.
Source: Prepared by Banco de México with data from the Tax
Administration Service (SAT, for its Spanish acronym), the Ministry of the
Economy (SE, for its acronym in Spanish), Banco de México, the National
Institute of Statistics and Geography (INEGI, for its Spanish acronym),
Mexico’s Merchandise Trade Balance, and the National System of
Statistical and Geographical Information (SNIEG, for its acronym in
Spanish).

acronym), given that the latter represents the value added,
measured in constant pesos.

|Col1|Chart 12 Gross Domestic Product Quarterly percentage change, s. a.|
|---|---|
||0.97 0.59 0.70 1.22 0.35 1.09 0.56 1.16 1.19 0.57 0.40 0.96 1.14 0.49 0.35 1.40 1.16 0.04 0.16 0.26 12.12|
||-0.65 -0.21 -0.42 -0.09 -0.10 -0.20 -0.64 -1.24 -16.95 Q-III|
|-20 Q- I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV I II II 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 s. a. / Seasonally adjusted figures. Source: Mexico’s System of National Accounts (SCNM, for its Spanis acronym), INEGI. Chart 13 Total Manufacturing Exports Indexes 2013 = 100, s. a. Banxico overnight rate 150 (policy rate) Total 140 Rest of the world Latest figure (Dec.11,2020) 130 United States 120 Last monetary policy decision (Nov.12,2020) 110 100 M M S N F M J O D M J A N 90 1 3 6 9 11 2 5 7 10 12 3 6 8 11 2019 2020 2021 80 repared by Banco de México with Bloomberg data. 70 60 Economic activity in Mexico 50 October J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 s. a. / Seasonally adjusted series and trend series based on data in nomin the third quarter, economic activity began to US dollars. The former is represented by a solid line and the latter by r from the severe impact of the COVID-19 dotted line. Source: Prepared by Banco de México with data from the Ta mic during the second quarter (Chart 12). This Administration Service (SAT, for its Spanish acronym), the Ministry of th|Q-|


18


-----

According to its monthly indicator, private

consumption continued to recover gradually in
September, although it remains below the levels
prior to the health emergency. This behavior
reflected a slow reactivation of consumption of both
domestic goods and services, while the item of
imported goods and services slowed the progress
achieved in previous months. Timely indicators
suggest that this indicator had continued to improve
at the beginning of the fourth quarter. In particular, in
October and November the slight improvement in
sales of light vehicles continued, while the National
Association of Self-Service and Department Stores
(ANTAD, for its acronym in Spanish) sales continued
performing positively. It is worth noting that ANTAD
sales were influenced by the El Buen Fin 2020 sales
campaign, which lasted longer than on previous
occasions. In September, gross fixed investment
reversed partially the recovery it had exhibited
between June and August and remained at levels
well below those registered prior to the health
emergency. Within this indicator, the rebound in
construction observed in August was partially
reversed, while the pace of recovery of investment in
machinery and equipment slowed down markedly in
August and September vis-à-vis the observed in
June and July. Related indicators, such as capital
imports, suggest that investment may slightly
improve at the beginning of the fourth quarter.

As for production, at the end of the third quarter and
beginning of the fourth, productive activity continued
to exhibit a gradual recovery (Chart 14). In particular,
in September, most tertiary activities continued to
recover, although with a significant heterogeneity as
to their performance. Accommodation and food
services; transportation, warehousing and

information; and arts, entertainment, recreation and
other services registered increases. In contrast,
educational, health care and social assistance
services slightly decreased. In October, industrial
activity continued to improve, although it has still not
regained its pre-pandemic level (Chart 15). Within it,
manufacturing and mining continued to reactivate,
although the latter followed a more moderate pace,
while construction remains at low levels, despite the
improvement observed during the month.


s. a. / Seasonally adjusted and trend series. The former is represented by
a solid line and the latter by a dotted line.
1/ Figures as of September 2020.
2/ Figures as of October 2020 of the Monthly Indicator of Industrial
Activity.
Source: Mexico’s System of National Accounts (SCNM, for its acronym in
Spanish), INEGI.

**Chart 15**

**Industrial Activity Indicators [1/]**

Indexes 2013 = 100, s. a.

130

120

110

100

90

80 Total

Mining (22.3%)

70 Manufacturing (49.7%)

Construction (23.3%)

60

Utilities (4.7%)

October

50

J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O

2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020

s. a. / Seasonally adjusted and trend series. The former is represented by
a solid line and the latter by a dotted line.
1/ Figures in parentheses correspond to their share in the total in 2013.
Source: Mexico’s System of National Accounts (SCNM, for its acronym in),
INEGI.

As to the economy’s cyclical position, as a result of
the gradual reactivation of productive activity and
greater population mobility, the considerable

widening of slack conditions observed in previous
months reversed steadily throughout the third
quarter (Chart 16). Slack conditions are anticipated
to have remained significantly wide during the fourth
quarter. According to the results of INEGI's latest
National Survey on Occupation and Employment
(ENOE, for its Spanish acronym), several labor
market indicators continued to show a moderate
improvement in October. In particular, labor
participation continued to increase, while the
underemployment rate decreased once again. In
turn, both the national and urban unemployment

19


**Chart 14**

**Economic Activity Indicators**

Indexes 2013 = 100, s. a.


120

115

110

105

100

95 Total IGAE 1/

90 Industrial production 2/

Services IGAE 1/

85 Agricultural and livestock products IGAE 1/

80

75 September

October

70

J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O

2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020


140

130

120

110

100

90

80

70

60

50

40


-----

rates continued to decrease at the margin, although
they remain above the levels prior to the health
contingency (Chart 17). The creation of IMSSinsured jobs continued to recover moderately,
remaining in November at a level still below that
reported in February. Finally, as a reflection of the
recovery of production and hours worked, in
September unit labor costs in the manufacturing
sector accumulated five consecutive monthly

reductions, remaining at levels slightly higher than
those prior to the COVID-19 pandemic (Chart 18).

**Chart 16**

**Output Gap Estimates [1/]**

**Excluding Oil Industry [4/ ]**

Potential output percentages, s. a.

8

4

0

-4

-8

-12

-16

-20 Global Economic Activity Indicator 2/

Gross Domestic Product 2/

-24 95% Confidence interval 3/

Q-III

September

-28

J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S

2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020

s. a. / Calculations based on seasonally adjusted figures.
1/ Output gap estimated with a tail-corrected Hodrick-Prescott filter; see
Banco de México (2009), “Inflation Report (April-June 2009)", p.74.
2/ GDP figure as of the third quarter of 2020; IGAE figure as of September
2020.
3/ Output gap confidence interval calculated with a method of unobserved
components.
4/ Excludes both oil and gas extraction, support activities for mining, and
petroleum and coal products' manufacturing.
Source: Prepared by Banco de México with INEGI data.

**Chart 17**

**National Unemployment Rate**

Percent of EAP, n. s. a.

6.0

5.5

5.0

4.5

4.0

3.5

3.0

October

2.5

J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O

2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020

n. s. a. / Not seasonally adjusted (original series).
Source: Prepared by Banco de México with data from ENOE, ETOE (from
April to June 2020) and ENOE new edition (ENOE[N]) from July 2020 to date.


s. a. / Seasonally adjusted and trend series. The former is represented by
a solid line and the latter by a dotted line.
1/ Productivity based on hours worked.
Source: Prepared by Banco de México with seasonally adjusted data of the
Monthly Manufacturing Industry Survey and industrial activity indicators of
Mexico’s System of National Accounts (Sistema de Cuentas Nacionales de
_México, SCN), INEGI._

In October, domestic financing to firms contracted at
an annual rate for the fifth consecutive month,
extending the loss of dynamism that has been
observed since May. This was mainly due to the
reduction in bank lending to large firms, which have
moderated their demand for this type of financing visà-vis what was observed at the beginning of the
pandemic. In the domestic corporate market, the
recovery in debt issuance continued in October, after
the low levels of activity exhibited during the second
quarter. Bank lending to smaller firms contracted
further at an annual rate. As for credit to households,
housing portfolio issuance continued to increase,
although it remains below the levels observed prior
to the pandemic. Consumer credit continued to
contract. As to interest rates of bank credit to private
firms, they decreased in October, while the margins
of intermediation remained relatively stable. In
October, interest rates of mortgages continued to
decrease for the ninth consecutive month, while
those of credit cards showed in August levels similar
to those of June. As for portfolio quality, corporate
and mortgage loan delinquency rates remained low,
while those for consumption remained at high levels
and even increased at the margin, after having
decreased in previous months.

20


**Chart 18**

**Productivity and Unit Labor Costs in the**

**Manufacturing Sector [1/]**

Indexes 2013 = 100, s. a.


170

Unit labor costs

160

Productivity

150

140

130

120

110

100

90

September

80

J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S

2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020


-----

**A.2.3. Development of inflation and inflation**
**outlook**

Annual headline inflation fell from 4.09 to 3.33%
between October and November 2020. This
reduction is explained by the lower levels of core
inflation, which were considerably influenced by the
effects of _El Buen Fin, as well as by a significant_
reduction of non-core inflation (Chart 19 and
Table 1).

**Chart 19**

**Consumer Price Index**

Annual percentage change

13

12 CPI

Core

11

Non-core

10

9

8

7

6

5

4

3

2

1

0

-1

-2

-3 November

J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S

2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020

Source: Prepared by Banco de México with INEGI data.

As for annual core inflation, it fell from 3.98 to 3.66%
between October and November. Within it, inflation
of merchandise prices decreased from 5.44 to 4.99%
in that period (Chart 20 and Table 1). This result is
largely associated with the sharp reduction of
inflation of non-food merchandise prices from 3.85 to
3.06%, which was mainly due to the _El Buen Fin_
discount sales. In 2020, this sales period lasted
longer and registered greater intensity of discount
sales, particularly in clothing, furniture, domestic
appliances and entertainment devices. Inflation of
food merchandise and services prices also

decreased during the same period, although more
moderately (Chart 21), from 6.93 to 6.79% and from
2.40 to 2.22%, respectively. In particular, inflation of
services prices continues to reflect the effects
associated with the measures to contain the
COVID-19 pandemic, which have led to a reduction
in the demand for several services, although the
decline in prices during the above mentioned period
was mainly due to the lower annual variations of
tourist services prices.


**Chart 20**

**Merchandise and Services Core Price Sub-index**

Annual percentage change

7

Merchandise

6 Services

5

4

3

2

1

November

0

J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S

2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020

Source: Prepared by Banco de México with INEGI data.

**Chart 21**

**Merchandise Core Price Sub-index**

Annual percentage change

8

7

6

5

4

3

2

1

0

-1 Food, beverages and tobacco Non-food merchandise

November

-2

J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S

2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020

|CPI Core Non-core|Col2|
|---|---|
|November||


Source: Prepared by Banco de México with INEGI data.

Between October and November, annual non-core
inflation decreased from 4.42 to 2.33% (Chart 22 and
Table 1). This reduction is associated with the lower
annual inflation of both energy and agricultural and
livestock product prices. In particular, the annual
inflation of energy prices fell from -0.71 to -3.05%
during the same months, reflecting mostly the lower
annual variation of gasoline prices. The annual
inflation of agricultural and livestock product prices
decreased from 9.61 to 7.20% during the same
months, with the lower annual variations of fruit and
vegetable prices standing out.

21


-----

**Chart 22**

**Non-core Price Sub-index**

Annual percentage change


20

15

10

5

0

-5

-10

-15


November


J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S

2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020

Source: Prepared by Banco de México with INEGI data.

As for inflation expectations drawn from Banco de
México’s Survey of Private Sector Forecasters,
between October and November, the medians for
headline and core inflation at the end of 2020
decreased from 3.95 to 3.64% and from 3.92 to
3.78%, respectively. As to the medians for headline


and core inflation for the end of 2021, they increased
slightly from 3.58 to 3.60% and from 3.50 to 3.53%,
respectively. The median for medium- and long-term
expectations for both headline and core inflation
remained at around 3.50%. Finally, breakeven
inflation and inflation risk decreased since the last
monetary policy decision.

The evolution of inflation is subject to short- and
medium-term risks, among which the following stand
out. To the downside: i) a greater-than-expected
effect due to the negative output gap, greater social
distancing measures or some persistence in the
reduction in prices due to the _El Buen Fin sales_
period; ii) lower inflationary pressures worldwide;
and, iii) additional foreign exchange appreciation. To
the upside: i) core inflation pressures generated by
the recomposition of spending towards

merchandise; ii) episodes of foreign exchange
depreciation; and, iii) various cost-related pressures
for firms. The balance of risks for the projected
trajectory of inflation described above is uncertain.


**Table 1**

**Consumer Price Index and Components**

Annual percentage change

**Item** **September 2020** **October 2020** **November 2020**

**CPI** **4.01** **4.09** **3.33**

**SubyacenteCore** **3.99** **3.98** **3.66**

**Merchandise** **5.40** **5.44** **4.99**

Food, beverages and tobacco 6.99 6.93 6.79

Non-food merchandise 3.71 3.85 3.06

**Services** **2.45** **2.40** **2.22**

Housing 2.20 2.12 2.09

Education (tuitions) 2.16 2.11 2.11

Other services 2.75 2.71 2.37

**No SubyacenteNon-core** **4.10** **4.42** **2.33**

**Agricultural and livestock products** **8.16** **9.61** **7.20**

Fruits and vegetablesFruits abd vegetables 12.76 16.24 9.50

Livestock productsLivestock 4.49 4.29 5.32

**Energy and government-authorized prices Energéticos y Tarifas Aut. por Gobierno** **1.11** **0.68** **-1.13**

Energy productsEnergy -0.39 -0.71 -3.05

Government-authorized pricesTarifas Autorizadas por Gobierno 4.47 3.88 3.46

Source:INEGI.


22


-----

-----

-----

