-----

-----

**FOREWARNING**
This document is provided for the reader’s convenience
only. The translation from the official Spanish version was
made by Banco de México’s staff. Discrepancies may arise
between the original document in Spanish and its English
translation. For this reason, the original Spanish version is
the only official document.


**1. PLACE, DATE, AND PARTICIPANTS**

**1.1. Place:** Meeting held by virtual means.

**1.2. Date of Governing Board meeting:** March 24,
2021.

**1.3. Participants:**
Alejandro Díaz de León-Carrillo, Governor.
Galia Borja-Gómez, Deputy Governor.
Irene Espinosa-Cantellano, Deputy Governor.
Gerardo Esquivel-Hernández, Deputy Governor.
Jonathan Ernest Heath-Constable, Deputy
Governor.
Arturo Herrera-Gutiérrez, Secretary of Finance and
Public Credit.
Gabriel Yorio-González, Undersecretary of Finance
and Public Credit.
Elías Villanueva-Ochoa, Secretary of the Governing
Board.

Prior to this meeting, preliminary work by Banco de
México’s staff analyzing the economic and financial
environment as well as the developments in inflation
and the determinants and outlook for inflation, was
conducted and presented to the Governing Board
(see Annex).

**2. ANALYSIS AND RATIONALE BEHIND THE**
**GOVERNING BOARD’S VOTING**

**_International environment_**

**All members agreed that global economic activity**
**continued to recover heterogeneously across**
**countries and sectors. Some** members attributed
the recovery to the loosening of lockdown measures,
the vaccination process, and to the fiscal and
monetary stimuli. **One member added that those**
economies with the most support, mainly the
advanced ones, will reach pre-pandemic activity
levels in a shorter time period.

**Most members highlighted the improvement in**
**global** **growth** **forecasts.** **Some** members

mentioned the upward revision of OECD forecasts
for 2021 and 2022, to 5.6 and 4.0%, respectively. In
the case of the U.S., some members underlined that


the OECD forecast for 2021 was revised from 3.2 to
6.5%. **One member noted that, in contrast, the**
economies of the euro area, the United Kingdom and
Japan have observed a relatively weaker recovery.

**Most members considered that expectations of a**
**more** **vigorous** **recovery** **in** **the** **U.S.** **are**

**associated with the approval of the significant**
**fiscal stimulus and with progress in the**
**vaccination process. One member stated that the**
output gap in that economy is foreseen to be positive
before the year ends and that it will remain positive
during the next two years. **Another member**
considered that the fiscal package approval has
significantly affected the global economic outlook.
**Some members pointed out, as risks to the world**
economy, the evolution of the pandemic and possible
delays in the vaccination programs.

**Most members noted that commodity prices**
**rose. They highlighted that oil prices exhibited**
**significant increases and volatility. One** member
added that increases in those prices have moderated
in view of the OPEC’s decision to maintain its supply
of crude oil.

**Most members pointed out that global inflation**
**rose mainly due to the increase in energy prices,**
**highlighting** **that,** **in** **advanced** **economies**

**inflation remains at levels below their central**
**bank targets. One** member added that this also
reflected the impact of temporary factors and the end
of subsidies and tax cuts that had been implemented
in some countries in response to the pandemic.
**Some members mentioned that in most emerging**
economies inflation has risen recently. One member
considered that the exchange rate depreciation
contributed to the above. **Another member pointed**
out that in some of these economies inflation remains
close to or even below the targets of their respective
central banks.

**Most members stated that global inflation**
**expectations** **have** **been** **revised** **upwards,**

**particularly in the U.S., in light of a greater fiscal**
**stimulus and an outlook for a more vigorous**
**recovery. Some members noted that compensation**
for inflation and inflation risk in the medium term has
increased. **One member stated that, in the U.S.,**
inflation risk premia rose by 50 basis points this year
so far and that five-year, five-year forward inflation
expectations reached 2.4%. **Another member**
pointed out that fixed-income assets have begun to
incorporate the higher inflation expectations. **Some**
members added that the fiscal stimulus is foreseen
to enable higher growth without exerting significant

1


-----

pressure on prices. One member considered that this
assumes a small slope in the Phillips curve. Another
member recalled that inflation in said country has
been persistently low in recent years, and that thus it
is still to be seen if, on this occasion, the economic
recovery will have a sustained effect on prices.

**Most members mentioned that the central banks**
**of advanced economies reiterated their intention**
**to maintain accommodative monetary policy**
**stances. They underlined that the Federal**
**Reserve** **anticipates** **it** **will** **maintain** **an**

**accommodative policy stance for an extended**
**period and that said central bank considers**
**inflationary pressures in 2021 to be transitory,**
**and that for this reason, an increase in the federal**
**funds rate will not be necessary until 2023. One**
member emphasized that such central bank
maintained the range for its reference rate and its
asset purchase program for USD 120 billion,
although inflation pressures seem to be demandrelated. In this regard, **another member indicated**
that a first element of uncertainty over the Federal
Reserve’s monetary policy stance refers precisely to
the asset purchase program, which was designed for
an environment of weak demand, and that it is
currently in a juncture of increased public debt
issuances and high uncertainty in the mid- and longend of the yield curve. He/she noted that an eventual
announcement of a downward adjustment in asset
purchases could have a significant impact on
markets. **One member added that a greater**
tightening in financial conditions, stemming from a
possible reversal of the monetary stimulus, in a
context of historic levels of both public and private
debt, could pose a risk to global financial stability.
**Another member pointed out that the interest rate**
trajectory implied by market instruments indicates
that the reference rate will start to increase in 2022,
which differs from the Federal Reserve’s forecast.
He/she added that this discrepancy, as well as the
volatility observed in global markets, could be due to
a lack of understanding or confidence in the
implementation of the new monetary policy

framework. In this regard, he/she noted the highly
accommodative nature of monetary policy as a result
of the change in long-term targets announced by the
Federal Reserve last August. He/she mentioned that,
on the one side, the maximum employment goal is
more ambitious than before since it is now defined as
broad-based and inclusive. He/she pointed out that
said central bank has acknowledged that the benefits
of the economic recovery reach the most

disadvantaged only after several years of sustained
growth. He/she stated that, on the other hand, the
price stability goal is more lax than before given that


after inflation has remained below 2% for a certain
period, now it will be allowed to be slightly above 2%
for a certain time. He/she concluded that the latter
implies that monetary policy must remain

accommodative for a longer period than what the
past framework implied. He/she underlined that it
would be foreseeable that the discrepancy in the
trajectory of interest rates fades away insofar as the
Federal Reserve communicates its signals clearly
and consistently.

**Most members observed that some emerging**
**economies’ central banks have begun to**
**implement a less accomodative monetary policy**
**and have even increased their reference rates.**
**One member said that, in some cases, these actions**
were unexpected, and took place in a context of
inflationary pressures. Another member pointed out
that most central banks of these economies maintain
highly accommodative monetary policy stances.
He/she stressed that although it is true that some
central banks of these countries have recently raised
their reference rates, the idiosyncratic character of
these decisions needs to be highlighted, and
therefore no simplistic extrapolations of these
episodes should be made.

**All members highlighted the large fiscal stimulus**
**recently approved in the United States. Most of**
**them observed that such stimulus equals**
**approximately three times the US output gap in**
**2020. One** member pointed out that it represents
over 9% of 2020 GDP and it adds to the already
expected deficit for 2021 of around 10.35% of GDP.
He/she noted that a package of additional spending
in infrastructure is currently being evaluated in the
United States. He/she noted that it is not clear how
much of the large transfers that will increase
households’ disposable income will be spent, and in
which time-frame. He/she highlighted that in some
advanced economies transfers of this type have
been saved in greater magnitude than initially
foreseen, which increases the uncertainty

concerning the temporality of fiscal spending’s
impact on aggregate demand and its effect on
inflation. **Another member mentioned that while**
some specialists argue that this program would
cause an economic overheating and a de-anchoring
of inflation expectations, others consider that it would
not generate a persistent increase in inflation above
its target nor an early tightening in financial
conditions. He/she stated that in any case the
approval of the stimulus has had a significant effect
on the world economic outlook and on international
financial markets. **One member stated that, for**
emerging economies, this environment implies

2


-----

higher levels of external demand and therefore
higher growth –driven by the boost generated by a
more vigorous growth in the U.S. – but also tighter
financial conditions.

**All members agreed that global financial markets**
**exhibited volatility and that medium- and long-**
**term interest rates increased in the United States,**
**in view of the approval of a large fiscal stimulus**
**and prospects of higher growth. Most members**
**pointed that an adjustment in portfolios has been**
**observed. Some** members stated that, in general,
tighter global financial conditions have been
observed, with increases in all terms of the yield
curves. One member added that volatility in financial
markets is also due to various factors, such as: i) the
pandemic-related shock, whose origin is not
associated to the economic or financial cycle; ii) the
outlook of a heterogeneous global recovery across
countries, with significant differences in their yield
curves and with possible exchange rate adjustments
and adjustments in the external accounts; and iii) the
modification of the Federal Reserve’s monetary
policy strategy, which implies that there is no
available information to anticipate or extrapolate the
Federal Reserve’s possible actions or the

implementation of its new strategy.

**Most members mentioned that the US dollar**
**appreciated and that stock markets in advanced**
**economies registered moderate gains. Some**
members pointed out the positive effect of higher
growth prospects. One member mentioned that the
technology sector was the exception because of a
possible overvaluation of its assets. **Another**
member stated that risk asset prices have increased
in general due to excess liquidity, which implies a
latent risk of adjustments in their prices.

**Some members noted a less favorable environment**
for financial markets in emerging economies, which
incorporates the expectation of tighter global
financial conditions. **Most members stated that**
**negative** **capital** **flows** **were** **registered,**

**particularly to fixed-income assets. One member**
mentioned that inflows to equity assets continue,
mainly towards the Asian region. **Most members**
**highlighted the recomposition of capital flows**
**towards the Chinese economy, due to the**
**incorporation of their debt instruments in global**
**bond indices. Some** members pointed out that,
given the interest rate levels in China and the low
exchange rate risk in its instruments, the remaining
emerging economies face greater challenges to
attract capital flows. **One member added that the**
increase in medium- and long-term interest rates in


the United States also implies greater difficulties to
attract and retain capital, exchange rate adjustments,
and upward pressures on yield curves. He/she also
mentioned in addition to such challenges the
idiosyncratic effects of the pandemic on the
macroeconomic soundness and the recovery outlook
of emerging economies. **Another member pointed**
out that a slight increase in the country risk indicators
of these economies was also observed.

**Some members identified possible inflation surprises**
as a risk for financial markets. In this regard, one
member highlighted the case of the United States.
**Another member referred to the possibility of the**
monetary stimulus reverting in different economies
and expects the environment of uncertainty to prevail
until the effects of the fiscal stimulus on inflation and
on interest rates are clearer. **One member pointed**
out that global financial markets will continue to
benefit from the economic recovery prospects.
He/she added that the possibility of a reversion in
long-term interest rates should not be discarded, in
case market expectations start to align with the
Federal Reserves’ messages, although there could
be additional episodes of volatility as long as some
degree of uncertainty or mistrust regarding the future
trajectory of interest rates persists.

**_Economic activity in Mexico_**

**All members highlighted that domestic economic**
**activity decelerated in January and February.**
**Most members stated that the deceleration was**
**due to the intensification of the pandemic, the**
**implementation of new mobility restrictions, as**
**well as supply disruptions of certain inputs. They**
**underlined that some timely indicators point to a**
**contraction during the first quarter of 2021. One**
member stated that the Timely Indicator of Economic
Activity suggests an annual variation of-4% in the
Global Indicator of Economic Activity (IGAE, for its
Spanish acronym) in February. **Another member**
mentioned that the economic recovery is still in a
critical situation.

**Regarding demand, most members agreed that**
**the recovery has been driven mostly by the**
**external sector. One** member highlighted that in
January manufacturing exports surpassed their prepandemic levels. In this regard, he/she stressed that
external demand is expected to continue contributing
significantly to the economic recovery in Mexico.
He/she considered this to be the case, given the
upward revisions to US industrial production
forecasts for 2021. He/she added that the recovery
of exports and the weakness of imports have

3


-----

contributed to a large trade surplus. **Nevertheless,**
**most members noted that exports decelerated in**
**January. Some members underlined that the fall in**
Mexican exports was mainly due to a global shortage
of key inputs.

**Most members mentioned that investment and**
**consumption remain lackluster. One** member
pointed out that in the last months both components
have decelerated in response to the additional
distancing measures implemented, and highlighted
that investment has been significantly affected.
**Some members added that investment and its**
components remain below pre-pandemic levels, one
member noted that both domestic machinery and
equipment, and construction remain the most
affected sectors. Some members added that capital
imports, construction and sales of heavy vehicles
remain weak. As for consumption, **one member**
underlined that total sales reported by the National
Association of Self-Service and Department Stores
(ANTAD, for its Spanish acronym), domestic retail
sales of light vehicles and weekly spending via credit
and debit cards increased moderately, and are still at
levels below those recorded prior to the pandemic.
**Another member considered that job losses and the**
deterioration of consumer confidence suggest that
consumption will continue to recover at a slow pace,
despite the dynamism of remittances. One member
highlighted that remittances continue supporting both
consumption of over 1.7 million households and the
economic recovery.

**Regarding supply, all members underlined the**
**loss of dynamism in production at the beginning**
**of the year. They pointed out that this was mostly**
**due to the mobility restrictions implemented in**
**some states and to the temporary interruption in**
**the supply of some industrial inputs. Most**
**members highlighted that the manufacturing**
**sector, particularly the automotive industry, was**
**affected by the shortage of semiconductors. One**
member recalled the disruptions to the supply of
natural gas and of electric power in Mexico, which
derived from climatic events in the south of the U.S.
in mid-February.

**Most members pointed out that a gradual and**
**heterogeneous recovery across sectors and**
**regions is expected. One member underlined that**
the recovery has been differentiated and that the
economic subsectors, which continue registering a
contraction of over 5% in their monthly activity as
compared to their pre-pandemic levels, account for
around 26% of GDP. He/she added that, within the
industry, manufacturing has led the recovery, while


construction registers activity levels that are over
10% lower than those registered in early 2020.
He/she added that services have exhibited an even
more differentiated behavior, in which those provided
in person continue to be significantly affected.

**Most members noted that the recovery of the**
**labor market has lost strength and that some**
**indicators have deteriorated at the margin. One**
member mentioned that the national labor

participation rate stagnated in January due to a lower
urban participation rate. **Another member pointed**
out that, although up to February of this year 9.7 out
of the 12.5 million jobs lost between February and
April 2020 were regained, said recovery has lost
dynamism. He/she added that in February IMSSinsured jobs were 3.28% below the figure registered
during the same month of 2020. **One member**
mentioned that estimates of urban unemployment
were above 6.5% in January, and that the broadest
unemployment measure, which includes the

unemployed population, the underemployed

population and the population available to work,
increased by 900 thousand people between
December and January. Some members expressed
their concern about the deterioration of the labor
market being greater for women, which has widened
the gender gap. **One member indicated that**
differences between age groups have also

increased.

**Most members highlighted the increase in**
**growth expectations for the Mexican economy in**
**2021. They mentioned that this is mainly due to a**
**greater boost from external demand and to**
**prospects of progress in the vaccination**
**process. One** member added the better-thanexpected performance of economic activity during
the second half of 2020 and higher levels of activity
associated with the expenditure for the electoral
process of June 2021. Another member emphasized
that, starting from February 15, Mexico began the
national vaccination campaign among the senior
citizens. Some members pointed out that, as mobility
restrictions ease and greater progress is attained in
the vaccination process, the pace of recovery is
expected to accelerate in the second half of the year.
**The majority of members highlighted that in the**
**last weeks various sources have revised growth**
**expectations for 2021 upwards. One** member
considered it feasible for the economy to grow over
5% in 2021 despite weak investment. He/she also
underlined that said growth will not be sustainable or

4


-----

lasting in the absence of a significant recovery of
productive investment in the medium and long terms.

**The majority of members pointed out that**
**productive activity continues to operate under**
**ample slack conditions. One** member stated that
these slack conditions are shown by diferent
indicators, which reflect a considerable

underutilization of available resources in the
economy. He/she mentioned that the output gap
remained close to 7% and that the labor
underemployment rate lied at 15%, close to twice the
figure observed in normal times. **Another member**
mentioned that available information suggests that
slack conditions will remain significantly wide during
the first quarter of 2021. Most members stated that
**ample** **slack** **conditions** **are** **anticipated**

**throughout the forecast horizon.** **One** member
mentioned that the amount of slack might decrease
as the economic recovery becomes more vigorous.
**Another member added that slack conditions will be**
very different across sectors.

**Some members highlighted that the balance of risks**
for economic activity is biased to the downside. One
member underlined that, although this bias has
diminished due to an improved economic outlook,
challenges stemming from the weakness of demand
and the labor market, as well as from the evolution of
the pandemic, persist. Another member highlighted
that despite the improvement in the expected
recovery, the following risks stand out: i) an upsurge
in COVID-19 cases or delays in the vaccination
program; ii) negative effects of input shortages on
production; iii) volatility in financial markets; iv)
deterioration of credit portfolio quality; v) lower public
revenues, impacts on sovereign risk and on the
conditions of access to financial markets; and vi)
uncertainty affecting investment.

**_Inflation in Mexico_**

**All members mentioned the increase in annual**
**headline inflation. Some members noted that this**
increase was higher than expected. **One member**
pointed out that it was above the market consensus
and even above the highest expectations drawn from
the latest survey. He/she explained that the prices of
goods and services which are more sensitive to
pressures generated by energy prices and the
exchange rate, are the ones increasing the most.
**Another member pointed out that the pandemic has**
implied changes in relative prices, with upward
pressures on merchandise inflation and downward
pressures on services inflation. He/she added that in


addition there are pressures on the prices of certain
raw materials, mainly those that are energy-related.
He/she stated that all of the above reflects the shocks
to which inflation has been subject. **One** member
noted that although the level of inflation during the
first fortnight of March was above the interval
established by Banco de México, this should not be
interpreted as a generalized increase in prices.
He/she detailed that the proportion of goods and
services with significant monthly variations below
their historical averages is close to 50% and that the
percentage is higher if the components of core
inflation are the only ones considered. He/she stated
that this has not translated into lower inflation
because the intensive component of increases in
certain prices has prevailed over the extensive
component of decline in inflation of most prices.

**Most members pointed out that core inflation**
**increased during the first fortnight of March, with**
**some members highlighting the upward trend of the**
non-food merchandise component. **One** member
mentioned that this was mainly due to the increases
in the prices of furniture and household appliances,
clothing and footwear, entertainment material, and
vehicles and car accessories. He/she added that the
food merchandise component remained high. Some
members highlighted the slowdown in services
inflation and stated that the lower inflation of
educational services partly offset the pressures in
merchandise prices. One member noted the end of
the downward trend in services inflation that had
been observed since January. He/she highlighted
that its increase reflected the rise in

telecommunication and transportation services

prices. He/she highlighted that housing and

education prices continued registering lower

increases, thus suggesting the prevalence of
weakness in the domestic market. Another member
pointed out that super core inflation remains at
3.17%.

**The majority of members mentioned that annual**
**non-core inflation rose significantly during the**
**first fortnight of March, due to the increase in**
**energy prices. One member highlighted the faster**
increase in domestic gas prices. **Another member**
underlined the increase in agricultural and livestock
product prices, mainly in those of livestock.

**Some** members pointed out that headline inflation
expectations for the end of 2021 increased and that
those for the medium and long terms remained stable
at levels above the 3% target. **One member**
highlighted that those for the end of 2021 ended near
the upper limit of the variability interval of Banco de

5


-----

México's target. Some members mentioned that the
inflationary risk premium has increased at the
margin. **One member noted that annual inflation**
expectations drawn from market instruments

remained anchored at levels close to 3% for the 1-10
year average. **Another member noted that while**
these expectations remain below 3.2%, they have
increased at the margin, and so has the inflationary
risk premium. **One member pointed out that**
breakeven inflation rates increased marginally for the
10- and 30-year nodes, while those for the 3-year
term remained at 3.34%, still below their historic
average figures.

**All members mentioned that headline inflation is**
**expected to increase in the next months. The**
**majority pointed out that headline inflation will be**
**temporarily affected by the arithmetic effects**
**associated with last year’s fall in energy prices.**
**They stated that headline and core inflation are**
**still expected to converge to the 3% target as of**
**the second quarter of 2022. Some members noted**
that the projected short-term trajectories for inflation
are slightly higher than those published in the
Quarterly Report October-December 2020. **Some**
members mentioned that higher increases in energy
prices are expected due to the reactivation of the
world economy. **One member stated that higher**
annual core inflation levels are expected due to a
more depreciated trajectory for the exchange rate
and to the indirect effects of the increase in energy
prices. **Another member mentioned that both**
headline and core inflation are expected to begin
declining as of July and lie closer to the target during
the entire second half of 2021.

**As for upward risks for inflation, most members**
**mentioned possible episodes of exchange rate**
**depreciation. Some members added greater**
pressures on energy price benchmarks. **Some**
members pointed out greater inflationary pressures
worldwide and tensions in core inflation due to the
recomposition of spending towards merchandise.
**One member noted the uncertainty regarding the**
expected reduction in core inflation as of May, given
the persistence it has shown for several years.
He/she mentioned the risk of possible increases and
volatility in commodity prices in world markets and in
tourist services domestically. He/she added that
slack conditions could be insufficient to offset the
effects of supply shocks on inflation. **Another**
member considered that the low services inflation will
cease to offset merchandise inflation as activities
start to reopen in the country. As for downward risks,
**some members highlighted the slack conditions in**
the economy, greater social distancing measures,


and possible events of foreign exchange

appreciation.

**Some members pointed out that the balance of risks**
for inflation is biased to the upside. **One member**
pointed out that such bias is observed in the short
term. **Another member added that this occurs**
despite the amount of slack in the economy, since it
is foreseeable that core inflation pressures will
continue due to the recomposition of spending
derived from the pandemic, and that the low levels of
services inflation stops offsetting the high levels of
merchandise inflation as activities begin to reopen.
He/she also mentioned that more episodes of foreign
exchange depreciation can be expected due to
external and domestic factors and to a higher level of
inflation worldwide. One member considered that the
balance has deteriorated at the margin. **Another**
member highlighted that none of the inflation
determinants have deteriorated significantly to the
point of expecting upward pressures on prices given
that: i) ample slack conditions persist; ii) the peso
exchange rate has withstood episodes of volatility
and has depreciated only moderately; and iii) despite
the increases in international oil prices, their impact
on domestic prices is expected to be partially
mitigated by the federal government's pricing policy.
**One** member noted that both the global financial
environment and the increase and volatility in
international energy price benchmarks could

represent inflationary pressures that are difficult to
foresee.

**_Macrofinancial environment_**

**Regarding** **domestic** **financial** **markets,** **all**

**members mentioned that the Mexican peso**
**depreciated. Most members noted that its**
**behavior** **has** **been** **volatile.** **One** member

considered that this is due to volatility in the longterm US Treasury bond market and that exchange
rate tensions could be reinforced by downgrades of
the sovereign and/or Pemex ratings, the election
process to be held in June, and domestic policies that
generate uncertainty.

**Regarding the stock market, most members**
**highlighted that the IPC stock market index**
**registered gains.** **One member stated that this was**
due to the improvement in the growth outlook, which
allowed this indicator to register a gain of 8%, one of
the highest among emerging economy stock
markets.

**All members highlighted the increases in**
**medium- and long-term interest rates. Most**

6


-----

**members noted that these were due to the rise in**
**international interest rates generated by the**
**expected impact of the US fiscal package.** **Some**
members pointed out that the long end of Mexico's
yield curve has increased between 80 and 100 basis
points. One member mentioned that short-term rates
increased up to 20 basis points, resulting in a
significant steepening of the yield curve. He/she
noted that domestic markets have shown a
deterioration in trading conditions and an increase in
volatility, in line with developments in international
markets. Another member highlighted the possibility
that, given a greater convergence between market
expectations in the United States and the Federal
Reserve's actions and messages, a reduction in
medium- and long-term interest rates could be
observed, and even an appreciation of the Mexican
peso.

**Most members pointed out that the sovereign**
**risk premium increased due to a rise in global**
**risk aversion. One member mentioned the impact**
of idiosyncratic factors. Another member stated that,
despite the recent increase in the sovereign risk
premium, it remains low, similar to pre-pandemic
levels. He/she noted that this could be associated
with the fiscal discipline in Mexico. Some members
mentioned that a reduction in foreign holdings of
government bonds was observed. **Some members**
stated that Mexico has been affected by a
recomposition of capital flows. In this context, they
emphasized that it is important to monitor the effects
of the integration of the Chinese financial market into
international markets. **One member noted that,**
despite equity market inflows, there was a net
decrease in this position. **Another** member

considered that, looking ahead, domestic financial
markets could benefit from the favorable growth
outlook.

**Most members mentioned that financing to the**
**private** **sector** **contracted** **for** **the** **eighth**

**consecutive month. Some members noted that this**
contraction was observed for both large and smaller
firms, although one member stated that demand for
credit from SMEs has increased moderately. He/she
noted that this contraction confirms the expectation
of a tightening in credit approval for the first quarter
of 2021 that was observed in Banco de México’s
Survey on General Conditions and Standards in the
Banking Credit Market (EnBan, for its Spanish
acronym). In this context, **another** member

mentioned that the decrease in financing to the
private sector occurred due to both less debt
issuance and lower bank lending, in an environment
of tight lending conditions, despite the reduction in


interest rates. One member pointed out that business
loans contracted at a real annual rate of 5% in
January, while loans to SMEs decreased 8.2%.
He/she warned that this differs from what has been
observed in other economies, both advanced and
emerging, where credit to firms has continued to
expand, driven, among other factors, by real interest
rates lower than those prevailing in Mexico. **Some**
members noted that there was a high demand for
liquidity from firms and households. **One member**
pointed out that this was due to precautionary
motives and lower opportunity costs of holding low or
zero-yield assets.

**Another member warned that the risks for financial**
stability have increased. Some members noted that
firms and households register higher delinquency
rates. **One member added that this was observed**
even though most loans are established at variable
rates and are benefitted by an accommodative
monetary policy stance. He/she stated that low
interest rates tend to reduce the profitability of
financial institutions, especially smaller ones, which,
along with the aforementioned increase in

delinquency rates and the regulatory requirements,
can reduce the room for maneuver to expand credit
supply. This, in a context where an excess of global
liquidity has increased world investors’ risk taking,
which has affected both valuation and risk of financial
institutions’ market portfolios. **Another** member
noted that, although bank credit interest rates have
followed the dynamics of the funding rate,
intermediation margins continue to be at levels
higher than those observed prior to the pandemic.

**One** member warned about the Federal

Government's recently announced additional support
for Pemex, for an amount equivalent to 1% of GDP,
through a lower tax burden, greater capitalization and
debt amortization. He/she considered that, although
this support will not affect the public sector's budget
deficit, it will imply issuing debt in an environment of
higher interest rates. He/she added that in the next
years Pemex will face increasing maturities that will
be difficult to meet without a structural plan. In this
context, he/she mentioned that it is foreseeable that
this company will continue to require the support of
the Federal Government and exert pressure on
public finances. **Another member pointed out that**
fiscal discipline has distinguished Mexico from other
countries that have resorted to greater indebtedness.
He/she mentioned that it seems increasingly unlikely
that the sovereign debt will lose its investment grade
rating in the next few years.

7


-----

**Some members considered that macroeconomic**
fundamentals need to be strengthened to generate
confidence and promote an orderly adjustment of the
Mexican economy. **One member pointed out that**
idiosyncratic risks continue to increase, with
repercussions on the macroeconomic, institutional
and rule of law framework. He/she highlighted the
financial situation of Pemex and its implications for
the sovereign debt rating, as well as the uncertainty
related to the Electricity Sector Law. He/she stated
that the latter has generated a significant number of
legal proceedings that have so far resulted in more
than 20 definitive suspensions. He/she stated that in
addition to the negative effects for private investors,
this could lead to actions by several countries, which
would imply an environment of greater uncertainty,
lack of confidence and volatility.

**_Monetary policy_**

**Considering** **the** **abovementioned** **inflation**

**forecasts, the risks they are subject to, as well as**
**the need to consolidate a downward trajectory**
**for headline and core inflation to the 3% target,**
**all members agreed to maintain the target for the**
**overnight interbank interest rate at 4.00%.**

**All members highlighted that monetary policy**
**must** **ensure** **the** **anchoring** **of** **inflation**

**expectations, and that headline and core inflation**
**follow a downward trend. They pointed out the**
**importance of inflation converging to its target**
**within the time frame in which monetary policy**
**operates. Most members mentioned that this**
**pause in the easing cycle does not mean that**
**said cycle has ended, and that looking ahead**
**they will be aware in case the conditions allow for**
**continuing it. They stated that although monetary**
**policy might contribute to the recovery, it must**
**do so without jeopardizing price stability.**
**Furthermore, all members highlighted that**
**monetary policy implementation faces risks**
**associated, mainly, with the recent evolution of**
**financial markets, and mentioned the importance**
**of applying a prudent and cautious approach.**
**Finally, they pointed out that, looking ahead,**
**monetary policy implementation will depend on**
**the evolution of the factors that have an**
**incidence** **on** **inflation,** **on** **its** **foreseen**

**trajectories within the forecast horizon, and on**
**its expectations.**

**One member stated that emerging economies**
continue to be affected by pandemic-related shocks
and that now they are also facing the effects of the
US fiscal stimulus. He/she noted that said stimulus


will increase the demand for exports, thereby
supporting the recovery, but will also exert pressure
on global interest rates and increase the risks of
abrupt adjustments in financial markets. He/she
pointed out that in small and open emerging
economies, which need to complement their
domestic savings with external financing sources, it
is even more important to maintain a stable
macroeconomic environment that attracts capital and
fosters an orderly adjustment in the economy. In this
regard, he/she considered that monetary policy
should contribute to maintain inflation low and around
its target, containing increases in risk premia and
medium- and long-term interest rates, as well as
exchange rate adjustments. He/she noted that the
pandemic has implied a significant economic
contraction and major changes in relative prices.
This, in a context of an exchange rate depreciation,
pressures on fiscal revenues, challenges regarding
the sovereign credit rating, and recent increases in
external interest rates. He/she pointed out that in
addition to the above, the prices of some
commodities, mainly energy-related, have increased.
He/she mentioned that in view of the challenges
described above, monetary policy must foster an
orderly adjustment of relative prices and prevent an
impact on price formation and inflation expectations,
in order to maintain low inflation on a sustained basis.
He/she added that the risks to which domestic
financial markets and inflation are subject to have
increased. He/she highlighted that the latest
information shows a greater persistence of

inflationary pressures on core inflation. Although it is
foreseen that such pressures will be transitory, it is
necessary to maintain a prudent monetary policy
stance that leads to a decreasing trajectory for
headline and core inflation towards the 3% target.

**Another member pointed out that headline inflation**
is expected to rebound during the second quarter of
the year, due to two factors that will generate an
increase in the non-core component. He/she pointed
out that one factor is the arithmetic effect related to a
low annual comparison base and the other has to do
with the increases in energy prices that are already
taking place due to the reactivation of the world.
He/she stated that, in principle, both factors are
generated by supply shocks that are transitory and
that give rise to changes in relative prices or to firstround adjustments in inflation. On the other hand,
he/she mentioned that since the last meeting, greater
volatility in financial markets and a reversion of
capital flows have been observed. He/she

considered it prudent to make a pause in the
monetary easing cycle and pointed out that this
should not be considered as the end of such cycle,

8


-----

but rather a pause that will allow to validate
expectations of a downward trajectory of the core
component. He/she highlighted the need to evaluate
the presence of second-round effects that affect
inflation expectations, the effects of the fiscal
stimulus in the United States, the conditions in which
international financial markets operate, and the slack
conditions. He/she underlined that on previous
occasions the conditions were appropriate to act
concurrently with the easing cycle, but that now it
was necessary to monitor the available information
carefully to evaluate whether there is another
opportunity to support the economic recovery without
jeopardizing price stability and without compromising
the anchoring of medium- and long-term inflation
expectations.

**One member underlined that in the case of Mexico**
there is statistically significant evidence that the rise
in long-term interest rates in the United States
increases sovereign risk indicators, which in turn
affects the exchange rate. He/she stated that the
recent evolution of international financial markets
suggests acting prudently, and therefore the
monetary policy decision should consider the
probability of a more depreciated exchange rate, in
order to anticipate more objectively the trajectory of
inflation’s convergence to the target within the
forecast horizon. He/she added that said decision
should take into account the beginning of the
normalization of reference rates in emerging
economies and the fact that despite the amount of
slack, the balance of risks for inflation is biased to the
upside. He/she added that the tightening in financial
conditions and a low margin of fiscal support reduce
the room for maneuver for monetary policy. Given the
complex environment, he/she considered it essential
that monetary policy is conducted prudently and
cautiously, in order to promote an orderly adjustment
of financial markets and the sustained convergence
of inflation to the 3% target.

**Another member stated that, since the last decision,**
the window of opportunity for further monetary easing
has closed. This, as a result of serious doubts about
the forecasted trajectory of inflation’s convergence to
the target, especially in the short term; the possibility
of further external financial shocks; the stability of the
financial system; the evolution of the pandemic and
the vaccination campaign; and the limits faced by a
low reference rate. He/she acknowledged that, while
it has been confirmed that the economic recovery
remains fragile and needs as much monetary support
as possible, there are considerations that imply a
pause in monetary easing. He/she pointed out an
increase in inflation, a steepening of the yield curve,


a greater depreciation of the Mexican peso, an
increase in risk aversion, certain impacts on macrofinancial stability, and the possibility of more external
shocks of a financial nature. He/she noted that this
scenario is largely the result of the approval of the
fiscal package in the United States. He/she
highlighted that in order to be able to maintain low
rates to support the economic recovery, the existing
room for maneuver should be managed with caution,
as we are near the lower limit of the reference rate.
Thus, the accommodative cycle should resume only
when the circumstances allow for it and better
opportunities are present again. He/she pointed out
that the highly volatile external circumstances have
reduced the room for maneuver of the relative
monetary policy stance. On the other hand, the
space offered by the absolute policy stance can be
reduced due to higher inflation rates and to an
increase in the short-term neutral rate. He/she
warned that Banco de México’s sphere of action is
limited by domestic and external economic-financial
aspects that evolve rapidly and in directions difficult
to detect. In particular, economic policy faces many
unknowns that will have to be resolved. He/she
stated that the dilemma for monetary policy is that the
economy is in recession with a temporary increase in
inflation and a core component that is not
decreasing. Consequently, he/she considered that
given the extraordinary conditions of the pandemic
and the lag with which monetary policy operates, it is
time to cautiously assess monetary policy’s room for
maneuver in order to avoid in the future a position of
vulnerability that may affect the credibility of the
Central Bank, as well as the anchoring of inflationary
expectations. He/she emphasized that monetary
support should continue, especially in the absence of
fiscal support, which implies that monetary policy
continues being the only available tool, even when
this is not ideal. He/she therefore stated the need for
a monetary support such as domestic and external
financial conditions allow. He/she pointed out that
this pause does not mean that monetary easing has
ended, but that windows of opportunity should be
carefully determined to continue supporting the
economic recovery while reinforcing Banco de
México's commitment to monetary stability.

**One member mentioned that a pause will allow for**
strengthening the message of the Central Institute's
commitment to price stability at a time of various
concerns due to both domestic and external factors.
Looking ahead, he/she considered that there is still
room for additional interest rate cuts, which, if they
materialize, could contribute to the recovery of the
Mexican economy without jeopardizing the price
stability objective. He/she pointed out that Mexico,

9


-----

unlike other countries, has maintained solid
macroeconomic fundamentals that could allow
implementing an accommodative policy stance for a
prolonged time, without the need to anticipate the
adjustments the Federal Reserve will eventually
make. He/she mentioned that fiscal discipline has
contributed to reduce domestic absorption and,
therefore, to improve the current account, which in
turn contributes to reduce pressures on the
exchange rate. He/she also stated that fiscal
discipline relieves pressure on the sovereign risk
premium and prevents capital outflows related to
concerns about default. He/she highlighted that the
origin of the recent episode of volatility in global
markets is the prospect of a rapid economic recovery
of our most important trading partner, so that the
current situation does not essentially imply a
negative shock. He/she mentioned that, from his/her
point of view, most of the volatility stems from the
inadequate perception of the role that central banks
will play in the recovery process, which he/she
considered will be resolved if the Federal Reserve
remains clear and consistent in its policy messages
and actions, as it has been doing so far. He/she
considered that additional interest rate cuts would be
beneficial for several reasons: i) the economy will
continue to operate with an ample amount of slack
for an extended period; ii) an unfavorable

performance is observed in those areas where
monetary policy has a direct impact, such as credit to
households and firms, consumption and investment;
iii) the current account surplus reflects that the
monetary policy stance is still restrictive for the
current economic conditions; and iv) Mexico's real
interest rate continues to be above that observed in
most emerging economies. He/she expressed that
there could be a window of opportunity to continue
with the monetary easing process as long as the rest
of the macroeconomic policies continue being a
factor of stability and price anchoring, and once the
current uncertainty in financial markets is resolved.


**3. MONETARY POLICY DECISION**

In a highly uncertain environment, the risks for
inflation, economic activity and financial markets
pose major challenges for monetary policy. It is
necessary to enable an orderly adjustment of
financial conditions and a change in relative prices,
without affecting price formation and inflation
expectations. Considering the abovementioned
inflation forecasts, the risks they are subject to, as
well as the need to consolidate a downward
trajectory for headline and core inflation to the 3%
target, with the presence of all its members, the
Governing Board decided unanimously to maintain
the target for the overnight interbank interest rate at
4.00%. Looking ahead, monetary policy

implementation will depend on the evolution of the
factors that have an incidence on inflation, on its
foreseen trajectories within the forecast horizon, and
on its expectations.

The Governing Board will take the necessary actions
based on incoming information in order for the policy
rate to be consistent with the orderly and sustained
convergence of headline inflation to the 3% target
within the time frame in which monetary policy
operates. It is necessary to safeguard the institutional
framework, strengthen the macroeconomic

fundamentals and adopt the necessary actions on
both monetary and fiscal policy fronts, to enable a
better adjustment of domestic financial markets and
of the economy as a whole.

**4. VOTING**

Alejandro Díaz de León-Carrillo, Galia Borja-Gómez,
Irene Espinosa-Cantellano, Gerardo Esquivel
Hernández and Jonathan Ernest Heath-Constable
voted in favor of maintaining the target for the
overnight interbank interest rate at 4.00%.

10


-----

**ANNEX**

The information in this Annex was prepared for this
meeting by the staff of Banco de México’s General
Directorate of Economic Research and General
Directorate of Central Bank Operations. It does not
necessarily reflect the considerations of the
members of the Governing Board as to the monetary
policy decision.

**A.1. External conditions**

**A.1.1. World economic activity**

The world economy continued to recover at the
beginning of 2021, although heterogeneously across
countries and sectors. This reflected, among other
factors, the lockdown measures implemented in
several countries in response to the upsurge in
COVID-19 cases at the end of 2020 and the
beginning of 2021, the economic policy measures
adopted, as well as differences in the sectoral
structure of economies (Chart 1). Thus, while
economic activity in the United States has continued
to recover at a vigorous pace, the euro area, the
United Kingdom and Japan have exhibited a
relatively weaker growth. Leading and higher
frequency indicators suggest that world economic
activity could strengthen in response to the easing of
lockdown measures, progress in the vaccination
process, and the fiscal stimuli approved for this year
in various major economies. However, risks for this
recovery persist, such as those associated with the
evolution of the pandemic, delays in vaccination
programs and a greater tightening of global financial
conditions.

In the main advanced economies, headline inflation
and its expectations recently registered increases,
reflecting the rise in energy prices, as well as the
effects of some transitory factors and the end of
subsidies and tax cuts implemented in some
countries in response to the impact of the pandemic.
Nevertheless, inflation remains below their central
banks’ targets. In this environment, the authorities
have maintained an accommodative monetary policy
stance and, in some cases, have extended their
fiscal stimuli to mitigate the adverse effects of the
pandemic. In this context, financial markets
registered volatility and increases in interest rates of
medium- and long-term government bonds,

particularly in the United States.

|Chart 1 bal: Purchasing Managers’ Index (PMI) Production Component Diffusion index, s. a.|Col2|
|---|---|
|||
|Manufacturing Manufacturing (excl. China) Services Services (excl. China)|February|


s. a. / Seasonally adjusted figures.
Source: Markit.

In the United States, available indicators suggest
that economic activity continued to recover at a
vigorous pace at the beginning of the first quarter of
2021, driven by the fiscal package approved last
December, by progress in containing the pandemic
and in the vaccination process, and by the approval
of a new large fiscal stimulus program. Looking
ahead, private consumption and investment are
expected to continue to be supported by the
monetary and fiscal stimuli as well as the continuing
recovery of consumer and business confidence
(Chart 2).

US industrial production continued to recover in
January 2021, registering a monthly growth of 1.1%,
which reflected the continued expansion of mining
and manufacturing activity. However, in February, it
registered a monthly contraction of 2.2% due to
frosts in several regions of the country that led to
weakness in mining activity and in some

manufacturing industries, and due to a shortage of
supplies for the automotive industry. Some leading
indicators, such as the Purchasing Managers’ Index
(PMI) of the manufacturing sector, suggest that
activity in this sector might resume its growth rate in
the short term.

11


60

55

50

45

40

35

30

25

20


**Global: Purchasing Managers’ Index (PMI)**

**Production Component**

Diffusion index, s. a.

Manufacturing

Manufacturing (excl. China)

Services

Services (excl. China)

February

2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021


-----

**Chart 2**

**United States: Real GDP and its Components**

Quarterly percentage change and

contributions in percentage points, s. a.


10

8

6

4

2

0

-2

-4

-6

-8

-10

-12


50

45

40

35

30

25

20

15

10


2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021

s. a. / Seasonally adjusted figures.
Source: Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA) and Blue Chip (March 2021).

After having contracted in December 2020 due to the
reimposition of social distancing measures, the US
labor market exhibited an improvement in January
and February 2021. The unemployment rate
decreased from 6.3% in January to 6.2% in
February. The non-farm payroll increased by
379,000 new jobs in February, reflecting

improvements in the items of accommodation and
food services and arts, entertainment and recreation,
which had been strongly affected by the lockdown
measures. Despite the partial recovery at the margin,
employment is still 9.5 million below pre-pandemic
levels.

In mid-March 2021, a new $1.9 trillion fiscal support
package was approved in the United States to face
the health, economic and social impact of the
COVID-19 pandemic. This package includes, among
other measures, support for workers and families
through direct financial assistance, the extension of
supplemental unemployment insurance payments,
the expansion of fiscal credits, and support for the
payment of rent, mortgages and energy services.
Supports for small firms and state and local
governments, several health care and COVID-19
response measures, as well as others focused on
education and transportation were also approved.

In the euro area, some available and higher
frequency indicators suggest that social distancing
measures and a slower vaccination process than in
other advanced economies have continued to affect

1 In seasonally adjusted annualized terms, euro area GDP was 
2.6% during the fourth quarter of the year.

2 In seasonally adjusted annualized terms, UK GDP grew 81.9%

during the third quarter of the year and 4.0% during the fourth.


economic activity so that a weak recovery is
expected during the first quarter of 2021, after having
contracted at a seasonally adjusted quarterly rate of
0.7% during the fourth quarter of 2020.[1] The
Purchasing Managers' Index of the manufacturing
sector, however, registered a strong rebound in
February. The unemployment rate remained

unchanged at 8.1% between December and
January. Looking ahead, the recent reimposition of
lockdown measures may extend the weakness of
some economies in this region.

In the United Kingdom, after having grown 16.1%
during the third quarter of 2020, GDP grew at a
seasonally adjusted quarterly rate of 1.0% during the
fourth.[2] This moderate growth reflected the

imposition of new lockdown measures in most parts
of the country since November. Available indicators
to the first quarter of 2021 suggest a weakening of
the economy, mainly in services, due to the
aforementioned measures. In addition, international
trade figures have started to reflect the negative
impact of the greater trade barriers resulting from the
United Kingdom’s exit from the European Union. In
this environment, the unemployment rate decreased
from 5.1% in the three months ending in December
2020 to 5.0% in the three months ending in January
2021.

In Japan, after having grown 5.3% during the third
quarter of 2020, GDP grew at a seasonally adjusted
quarterly rate of 3.0% during the fourth.[3] The growth
in activity was driven by business investment and net
exports and, to a lesser extent, by private
consumption. However, some indicators available to
the first quarter of 2021, such as retail sales and
machinery orders, point to a slower recovery of the
economy. As for production, industrial activity
continued to be driven by higher global demand.
Regarding the labor market, the unemployment rate
decreased moderately, from 3.0% in December to
2.9% in January.

In emerging economies, available indicators suggest
that economic growth has been heterogeneous
during the first part of 2021. In China and in the rest
of Asian emerging economies, timely indicators
show that they continued to expand at the beginning
of 2021, although at a slower pace than in the fourth
quarter of 2020. Particularly in China, the loss of
dynamism seems to be associated with a more
moderate growth of consumption and investment

3 In seasonally adjusted annualized terms, Japan GDP grew

22.8% during the third quarter of the year and 11.7% during
the fourth.

.

12

|50|Col2|Col3|Col4|Col5|Col6|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|50 45 40 35 30 25 Private consumption expenditures 20 Residential investment Change in private inventories 15 Net exports Nonresidential investment 10 Government consumption expenditures 5 Total||||||
|0 I II III IV 2016|I II III IV 2017|I II III IV 2018|I II III IV 2019|I II III IV 2020|I 2021|


-----

due to the gradual withdrawal of certain stimuli
policies. In contrast, exports have continued to
expand at a high pace, favoring the performance of
industrial activity. In Eastern Europe and Latin
America, economic performance has been more
heterogeneous, as Chile and Russia would appear
to have continued expanding at a moderate rate,
while others, such as Hungary and Brazil, may have
registered a contraction as a result of the
intensification of the COVID-19 health crisis.

Since México’s previous monetary policy decision,
international commodity prices overall increased,
although in some cases registering volatility. Oil
prices were driven by several factors. One was the
suspension of US oil production due to the strong
frosts that occurred in February. Another was the
agreement between OPEC members and other
producers to continue cutting oil production until
April, and Saudi Arabia’s decision to maintain its
voluntary cut of 1 million barrels daily. Expectations
of higher world growth given the approval of new
fiscal stimuli in some of the major economies was
also a factor. Industrial metal prices increased during
February due to the recovery of global industrial
activity and the optimism generated by the eventual
approval of a new fiscal stimulus package in the
United States. However, in March, prices have
declined due to concerns about a more moderate
pace of recovery of China's economic activity.
Finally, grain prices remained relatively stable
throughout the period, even though unfavorable
weather conditions have affected crops, especially in
the United States and South America.

**A.1.2. Monetary policy and international financial**
**markets**

In the main advanced economies, headline inflation
increased recently (Chart 3), reflecting the rise in
energy prices as well as the effects of some
temporary factors and the end of subsidies and tax
cuts implemented in some countries in response to
the pandemic. Nevertheless, headline inflation
remains below their central banks’ targets. Inflation
expectations for some of these economies have
risen. This has been more evident in the United
States.


**Chart 3**

**Selected Advanced Economies: Headline**

**Inflation**

Annual percentage change

3.5

United States

3.0 Euro area

Japan

2.5 Canada

United Kingdom

2.0

1.5

1.0

0.5

0.0

-0.5

-1.0

February

-1.5

2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021

Source: Bureau of Labor Statistics, Eurostat, Bank of Japan, Statistics
Canada, Office of National Statistics.

In emerging economies, headline inflation has
continued to show a heterogeneous behavior,
although it has recently increased in a large number
of them. On the one hand, in economies such as
Brazil, Russia and Turkey, headline inflation has
continued to rise, reflecting increases in food and
energy prices, as well as the effects of the
depreciation of their currencies. On the other hand,
in countries such as Chile, Indonesia and Peru,
headline inflation has decreased at the margin.

The central banks of the major advanced economies
maintained their reference interest rates at

historically low levels. They also continued to use
their balance sheets, with adjustments in the pace of
asset purchases in some cases, to preserve
favorable financing conditions and, thus, support the
provision of credit, boost economic activity and seek
the convergence of inflation to their respective longterm targets. They also reiterated that they will
maintain accommodative monetary policy stances
until inflation reaches their targets in a sustained
manner. In this context, expectations drawn from
market instruments continue to anticipate that these
central banks will maintain highly accommodative
monetary policy stances, although they are starting
to incorporate expectations of a moderate rise of
interest rates by some central banks in a longer
horizon. In particular, in the case of the United
States, during the past weeks there was an increase
in the trajectory implied by financial instruments for
the federal funds rate in the next years, which was
associated with the approval of a large fiscal stimulus
package and expectations of higher growth in this
country (Chart 4).

13


-----

**Chart 4**

**Reference Rates and Implied Trajectories in**

**OIS Curves[1/]**

**Percent**


that purchases under the pandemic emergency
purchase program (PEPP) are expected to be made at
a significantly higher pace during the first months of the
year, due to the recent sharp increase in long-term
interest rates. Thus, this central bank pointed out that
purchases will be made in a flexible manner according
to market conditions and to avoid an unexpected
tightening of financial conditions.


3.0%

2.5%

2.0%

1.5%

1.0%

0.5%

0.0%

-0.5%


**― US Federal Reserve 2/**
**― Bank of England**
**― Bank of Japan**
**― Bank of Canada**

|Col1|Col2|Col3|Col4|Col5|Col6|Col7|Col8|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|||||||||
|||||||||
|||||||||
|||||||||
|||||||||
|||||||||
|||||||||
|||||||||


End of End of End of

-1.0% 2020 2021 2022

2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023


End of
2023


1/ OIS: Fixed floating interest rate swap where the fixed interest rate is
associated to the effective overnight reference rate.
2/ For the observed reference rate of the U.S. the average interest rate of
the target range of the federal funds target range (0.0% - 0.25%) is used.
Source: Banco de México with data from Bloomberg.

Among the recent monetary policy decisions, the
following stand out:

i) In its March meeting, the Federal Reserve left its range

for the federal funds rate unchanged at 0-0.25% and
reiterated that it will be appropriate to maintain it until
labor market conditions have reached levels consistent
with its maximum employment estimate and inflation
has increased to 2% and is on track to moderately
exceed this target for some time. It also stated that it
will maintain the current pace of its asset purchase
program at least until substantial progress has been
made towards its maximum employment and price
stability goals. In this context, the medians of forecasts
by the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC)
published in March reflect expectations of greater
growth and higher inflation for this year, although the
increase in inflation is expected to be transitory. As to
the reference rate, the median of forecasts suggests
that it will remain unchanged until at least 2023,
although the number of members expecting upward
adjustments during 2022 increased from one to four
and the number of those expecting said adjustments
during 2023 increased from five to seven. The
Chairman of the Fed’s Board of Governors pointed out
that a transitory increase in inflation above 2%, such as
that foreseen for this year, would not meet the
conditions established for adjusting the interest rate.

ii) In its March meeting, the European Central Bank

maintained its refinancing rate, key deposit facility rate
and key lending facility rate at 0.0, -0.5 and -0.25%,
respectively. It reiterated that these interest rates are
expected to remain at or below their current levels until
inflation forecasts converge robustly to a level
sufficiently close but below the 2% inflation target, and
that this convergence has been consistently reflected
in core inflation dynamics. It also maintained its asset
purchase programs unchanged, although it pointed out


iii) In its March meeting, the Bank of Japan left its short
term policy interest rate unchanged at -0.1% and its
long-term interest rate (indexed to its 10-year bond) at
around 0%. It also published the findings of the review
of its monetary policy framework, based on which, it
pointed out that, in order to reach its inflation target, it
will continue the monetary easing in a sustained
manner and it will provide fast and effective answers.
In this regard, it announced a series of actions, among
which the following stand out: a new interest rate
scheme to promote lending, the widening of the range
of 10-year Japanese government bond (JGB) yield
fluctuations to +/- 0.25% from the target level, and the
introduction of fixed-rate purchase operations for
consecutive days to set an upper limit on interest rates
when necessary. Said central bank also pointed out
that it will continue to purchase exchange-traded funds
(ETFs) and Japan real estate investment trusts (JREITs) as necessary, with upper limits of about 12
trillion yen and about 180 billion yen per year,
respectively, even after the COVID-19 pandemic
subsides. In his press conference, the Chairman of
said central bank ruled out that the announced
measures are the prelude to the end of several years
of a highly accommodative monetary policy.

iv) In its March meeting, the Bank of England kept its

reference interest rate unchanged at 0.10%, the
amount of its asset purchase at £875 billion, and the
stock of sterling non-financial investment-grade
corporate bond purchases at £20 billion. In the minutes
of said meeting, the Monetary Policy Committee noted
that news on economic activity in the short term have
been positive, although it is not clear to what extent
they may modify the medium-term outlook, as it
remains uncertain. The Committee reiterated that it has
no intention to tighten its monetary policy stance at
least until there is clear evidence that significant
progress is being made in eliminating the excess slack
in the use of productive capacity and in achieving a 2%
inflation target in a sustained manner.

Since Banco de México’s previous monetary policy
decision, most central banks of the main emerging
economies left their reference interest rates
unchanged, except for Indonesia, which lowered it,
and Brazil, Turkey and Russia, which increased
them. Likewise, the central banks of these
economies decided to maintain measures to provide
credit, supply liquidity and foster the well-functioning
of financial markets.

14


-----

In the context of world economic activity described
above, international financial markets registered
volatility and increases in long-term interest rates of
advanced and emerging economies. These

episodes were mainly associated with the significant
increase of medium- and long-term interest rates in
the United States due to the approval of a large fiscal
stimulus and expectations of higher growth.
Concerns about the high valuations of some financial
assets, especially in the technology sector, led to
some episodes of losses in the stock markets of
some of the main advanced and emerging
economies during the period since Mexico’s last
monetary policy decision. In foreign exchange
markets, the US dollar strengthened against most of
the currencies of both advanced and emerging
economies (Chart 5). In this environment, since
Mexico’s last monetary policy decision, most
emerging economies registered capital outflows of
fixed income assets, while inflows to equity assets
continued, mainly in the Asian region (Chart 6).

In addition to the aforementioned risks to world
growth, there are other risks to international financial
markets’ stability. One of them is a higher-thananticipated increase in inflation that might be
reflected in a significant rise in interest rates,
particularly in the United States, which could lead to
tighter financial conditions worldwide. There are still
concerns associated with the high valuations of
certain financial assets, which may lead to a sharp
adjustment of their prices. The abovementioned
factors may intensify the problems of business
insolvency and bankruptcies, as well as the
vulnerabilities associated with the high levels of
public and private borrowing accumulated in recent
years.


**Chart 5**

**Change in Selected Financial Indicators from**

**February 5 to March 19, 2021**

Percent, basis points Percentage, basis points


20%

15%


100

75


10%

5%


50

25


0%

-5%


0

-25


1/ The MSCI Emerging Markets Index consists of 24 countries. 2/ DXY: a
weighted average estimated by the Intercontinental Exchange (ICE) of the
nominal exchange rate of the main six currencies operated globally with the
following weights: EUR 57.6%, JPY: 13.6%, GBP: 11.9%, CAD: 9.1%, SEK:
4.2%, and CHF: 3.6%. 3/ J.P. Morgan index is constructed with the
weighted average by the nominal exchange rate of emerging economies’
currencies with the following weights: TRY: 8.3%, RUB: 8.3%, HUF: 8.3%,
ZAR: 8.3%, BRL: 11.1%, MXN: 11.1%, CLP: 11.1%, CNH: 11.1%, INR:
11.1% and SGD: 11.1%.
Source: Bloomberg and ICE.

**Chart 6**

**Selected Emerging Economies: Financial**

**Assets Performance from February 8, 2021**

Percent, basis points


Note: Interest rates correspond to swap rates at the specified terms, except Note: Interest rates correspond to interes rate swaps for 2-year/10-year maturities,
for Hungary, where government securities with 3-year (instead of 2-year)
maturities where used as a reference. For Colombia and the Philippines, a
2-year swap rate is used.
Source: Bloomberg.

15


-----

**A.2. Current situation of the Mexican economy**

**A.2.1. Mexican markets**

Since Banco de México’s previous monetary policy
decision to date, the prices of financial assets in
Mexico showed a negatively biased behavior (Chart
7). This occurred in an environment in which markets
incorporated expectations of a faster recovery in
some developed countries and an incipient increase
of inflation and its expectations.

As to the Mexican peso, it fluctuated in a range
between 19.95 and 21.49 pesos per dollar, ending
the period with a depreciation of 1.77% (Chart 8).
This occurred in a context in which both spot and
forward trading conditions remained deteriorated.

In line with the swap mechanism established
between Banco de México and the Federal Reserve
on March 19, 2020, on March 1, 2021, the Foreign
Exchange Commission instructed Banco de México
to renew maturities for a total of USD 1.5 billion, for
which the amount allocated was USD 400 million.

**Chart 7**

**Mexican Markets’ Performance**

Percent, MXN/USD and index


2020 2021

Source: Prepared by Banco de México.

Interest rates of government securities exhibited
negative adjustments (Chart 9), with increases of up
to 103 basis points in the medium- and long-term
part of the yield curve. As a result, the 3 year – 30
year spread increased by 34 basis points. The yield
curve of real rate instruments also exhibited a
negative dynamic, albeit of a lower magnitude than
that observed in nominal rates. In this context,
breakeven inflation and inflation risk premia implicit
in the spreads between nominal and real market
instruments registered mixed adjustments as

compared to February’s monetary policy decision,
with increases in the 10- and 30-year nodes (Chart
10). Such adjustments took place in an environment
where trading conditions deteriorated considerably
with respect to those observed in the period of the
previous monetary policy decision.


**Chart 8**

**Mexican Peso Exchange Rate**

**with Moving Averages**

MXN/USD


8.0

7.0


50,000

48,000

46,000

44,000

42,000

40,000

38,000

36,000

34,000

32,000


6.0

5.0


4.0


26.0

25.0

24.0

23.0

22.0

21.0

20.0

19.0

18.0


M Bond


3.5

3.0

2.5

2.0

1.5

1.0

0.5

0.0

Inflation indexed bonds


Range in year Range since last monetary policy decision 08-feb-21 19-mar-21

Source: Prepared by Banco de México.


**Chart 9**

**Nominal Yield Curve of Government Securities**

Percent, basis points

7.75 120

7.25 100

6.75 80

6.25 60

5.75 40

5.25 20

4.75 0

4.25 -20

3.75 -40

Feb-8th 2021 Mar-19th 2021 Change (Feb-8th 2021 to Mar-19th 2021)

Source: PIP.


Range in year Range since last monetary policy decision 08-feb-21 19-mar-21


16


-----

**Chart 10**

**Breakeven Inflation and Inflation Risk Implicit in**

**Government Securities’ Interest Rate Curves**

Basis points

500

475

450

425

400

375

350

325

300

3-year

275 10-year

250 30-year

225 3-year average

10-year average

200

30-year average

175

150

J        M        S        J        M       S        J

2019                             2020        2021

Source: PIP.

Regarding the measures announced by Banco de
México on April 21, several adjustments to said
measures were announced on February 25. In
particular, the extension until September 30, 2021 of
the extraordinary liquidity provision measures, of the
measures for the provision of resources for credit
institutions to channel credit to micro, small- and
medium-sized firms and individuals affected by the
pandemic, and of the financing facility to multiple
banking institutions guaranteed with bank credit
assets for the financing of micro, small- and mediumsized enterprises. As to the instruments for
conducting monetary policy and promoting the
orderly functioning of the money, debt and foreign
exchange markets in Mexico, Banco de México
announced that it will consider the possibility of using
them whenever it deems necessary to comply with
its objectives of ensuring the stability of the peso’s
purchasing power, promoting the healthy

development of the financial system, and fostering
the well-functioning of payment systems.

As to expectations regarding the trajectory of the
monetary policy rate, information implied by the
Interbank Equilibrium Interest Rate swaps curve
(TIIE, for its Spanish acronym) discounts with a 24%
probability that the target rate will decrease by 25
basis points for the monetary decision of March
(Chart 11). In a related manner, the median of the

4 Refers to the value of merchandise exports in current US
dollars. This value differs from that reported for goods exports by
Mexico’s System of National Accounts (SCNM, for its acronym in


consensus of forecasters surveyed by Citibanamex
expect the reference interest rate to lie at 3.75%. For
the end of 2021, market variables anticipate a level
of 4.42% for the target rate, while the median of the
aforementioned survey among forecasters lies at
3.75%.

**Chart 11**

**Banxico’s Overnight Interbank Rate Implied in**

**TIIE IRS Curve**

Percent

8.50
8.25
8.00
7.75
7.50
7.25
7.00
6.75
6.50
6.25
6.00
5.75
5.50
5.25
5.00 Banxico overnight rate
4.75 (policy rate)
4.50 Latest figure (03-19-2021)
4.25
4.00 Previous monetary policy
3.75 decision (02-11-2021)
3.50

J   M M   S   N   F   M   J   O   D   M   J   A   N

2019                   2020                  2021

Source: Prepared by Banco de México with Bloomberg data.

**A.2.2. Economic activity in Mexico**

During the fourth quarter of 2020, economic activity
continued to recover, although at a more moderate
rate than in the third (Chart 12). Available indicators
for the first quarter of 2021 suggest that the
weakness observed at the end of 2020 persisted
through January and February, partly reflecting the
upsurge of the pandemic, new restrictions

implemented in different states –although these
have been easing as the number of cases has
decreased gradually– as well as some temporary
disruptions to the automotive supply chain and to the
supply of natural gas in February.

As for external demand, after having recovered
significantly during the second half of 2020, exports
slightly decelerated in January 2021. This

performance was associated with a decline in nonautomotive exports, as automotive exports grew
(Chart 13).[4]

Spanish), given that the latter represents the value added,
measured in constant pesos.

17


-----

**Chart 12**

**Gross Domestic Product**

Quarterly percentage change, s. a.


16

12

8

4

0


-4

-8


-12

-16

-20 Q-IV

I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV

2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020


s. a. / Seasonally adjusted figures.
Source: Mexico’s System of National Accounts (SCNM, for its Spanish
acronym), INEGI.

**Chart 13**

**Total Manufacturing Exports**


Indexes 2013 = 100, s. a.


180

160

140

120

100

80

60

40

20


0


J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J

2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021

s. a. / Seasonally adjusted series and trend series based on data in nominal
US dollars. The former is represented by a solid line and the latter by a
dotted line.
Source: Prepared by Banco de México with data from the Tax
Administration Service (SAT, for its Spanish acronym), the Ministry of the
Economy (SE, for its Spanish acronym), Banco de México, the National
Institute of Statistics and Geography (INEGI, for its Spanish acronym).
Mexico’s Merchandise Trade Balance, and the National System of
Statistical and Geographical Information (SNIEG, for its Spanish acronym).

According to its monthly indicator, in December 2020
private consumption slowed the moderate recovery
exhibited between June and November, partly
reflecting the rebound in the upsurge of COVID-19
cases in the country and the new measures to
contain it. Timely indicators suggest that private
consumption continued to show some weakness at
the beginning of 2021. In particular, in January, sales
reported by the National Association of Self-Service
and Department Stores (ANTAD, for its Spanish
acronym) showed a sharp contraction once again,
although it reversed in February. During the first two
months of the year, light vehicle sales grew at a
moderate pace, remaining at low levels. In


December 2021, gross fixed investment partially
reversed the increase observed in previous months
and remained well below its pre-pandemic levels.
Within this indicator, the slow recovery of both
investment in construction and spending on
machinery and equipment was halted.

As for production, in December 2020 and January
2021 the pace of growth of productive activity slowed
down (Chart 14). In particular, although tertiary
activities continued to recover in December 2020,
they did it at a slower pace than in previous months
and heterogeneously across sectors. Wholesale and
retail sales; transportation, warehousing and

information services; professional, scientific and
technical services; management of companies and
enterprises; and accommodation and food services
contributed to the growth of this sector. In contrast,
finance and insurance; public administration; arts,
entertainment and recreation, as well as other
services (except public administration) had negative
contributions. The low dynamism of industrial activity
in January 2021 reflected the fall in manufacturing,
which was largely associated with the contraction of
transportation equipment. The latter can be
explained partly by the initial effect of the global
shortage of semiconductors that extended into
February and the beginning of March. In turn,
construction maintained a slow reactivation trend,
with levels far below those observed prior to the
health emergency, while mining remained weak
(Chart 15).

**Chart 14**

**Economic Activity Indicators**


s. a. / Seasonally adjusted and trend series. The former is represented by
a solid line and the latter by a dotted line.
Source: Mexico’s System of National Accounts (SCNM, for its Spanish
acronym), INEGI.

18


Indexes 2013 = 100, s. a.


120

115

110

105

100

95

90

85

80

75

70

65

60


140

130

120

110

100

90

80

70

60

50

40

30

20


J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J

2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021


-----

**Chart 15**

**Industrial Activity Indicators [1/]**

Indexes 2013 = 100, s. a.


130

120

110

100

90

80 Total

Mining (22.3%)

70 Manufacturing (49.7%)

Construction (23.3%)

60

Utilities (4.7%)

January

50

J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J

2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021


**Chart 16**

**Output Gap Estimates [1/]**

**Excluding Oil Industry [4/ ]**

Potential output percentages, s. a.


s. a. / Seasonally adjusted and trend series. The former is represented by
a solid line and the latter by a dotted line.
1/ Figures in parenthesis correspond to their share in the total in 2013.
Source: Mexico’s System of National Accounts (SCNM, for its Spanish
acronym), INEGI.

As to the economy’s cyclical position, slack
conditions remained considerably wide at the end of
2020 (Chart 16) and are anticipated to continue
registering similar levels at the beginning of 2021.
Some labor market indicators showed some
improvement in February 2021. In particular, both
the national and urban unemployment rates
decreased at the margin (Chart 17), in a context in
which the Economically Active Population (EAP) and
employed population grew with respect to previous
months. In addition, the underemployment rate
decreased in its monthly comparison, although it
remained well above its level of March 2020.
Similarly, the creation of IMSS-insured jobs
continued to exhibit some recovery in February,
although it grew at a slower pace than in the last
months of 2020. Finally, at the beginning of 2021,
unit labor costs in the manufacturing sector showed
a slight increase, thus remaining above the level
registered prior to the health emergency (Chart 18).


8

4

0

-4

-8

-12

-16

-20 Global Economic Activity Indicator 2/

Gross Domestic Product 2/

-24 95% Confidence interval 3/

Q-IV

December

-28

J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M SD

2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020


s. a. / Calculations based on seasonally adjusted figures.
1/ Output gap estimated with a tail-corrected Hodrick-Prescott filter; see
Banco de México (2009), “Inflation Report, April-June 2009”, p.74.
2/ GDP figures as of the fourth quarter of 2020. IGAE figures as of
December 2020.
3/ Output gap confidence interval calculated with a method of unobserved
components.
4/ Excludes both oil and gas extraction, support services for mining, and
petroleum and coal products’ manufacturing.
Source: Prepared by Banco de México with INEGI data.

**Chart 17**

**National and Urban Unemployment Rates**

Percent, s. a.

8.5

National unemployment rate

8.0

7.5 Urban unemployment rate

7.0

6.5

6.0

5.5

5.0

4.5

4.0

3.5

3.0

February

2.5

J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J F

2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021

s. a. / Seasonally adjusted series and trend series. The former is
represented by a solid line and the latter by a dotted line.
Source: Prepared by Banco de México with data from ENOE, ETOE (from
April to June 2020), and ENOE new edition (ENOE[N]) from July to date.

19


-----

**Chart 18**

**Productivity and Unit Labor Cost in the**

**Manufacturing Sector [1/]**

Indexes 2013 = 100, s. a.


170

Unit labor costs

160

Productivity

150

140

130

120

110

100

90

January

80

J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J

2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021


s. a. / Seasonally adjusted and trend series. The former is represented by
a solid line and the latter by a dotted line.
1/ Productivity based on hours worked.
Source: Prepared by Banco de México with seasonally adjusted data of teh
Montly Manufacturing Industry Survey and industrial activity indicators of
Mexico’s System of National Accounts (Sistema de Cuentas Nacionales de
_México,SCNM, INEGI._

In January 2021, domestic financing to firms
contracted at an annual rate for eight consecutive
months, extending the loss of dynamism that has
been observed since May 2020. This was partly due
to a reduction in bank lending both to smaller firms –
segment that decreased in annual terms since the
first quarter of 2019–, and to large firms –segment
that during the fourth quarter of the year continued to
show weakness in the demand for this type of
financing vis-à-vis the level observed at the
beginning of the pandemic–. Lending conditions
remained tight for the two segments of firms as
compared to the beginning of the pandemic.
Corporate debt issuance continued to show a lower
dynamism vis-à-vis the third quarter of 2020. As to
credit to households, the housing portfolio exhibited
positive annual variations once again, driven by
significant increases in mortgage loan issuance,
reaching in December 2020 higher levels than those
registered prior to the pandemic. Performing bank
credit portfolio for consumption continued

contracting in all segments in a context in which
credit granting conditions to households remain tight.

Interest rates of bank credit to firms have generally
followed the dynamics of the bank funding rate.
Similarly, while the margins of intermediation remain
at levels above those observed prior to the
pandemic, at the margin these have shown an
incipient trend to decrease. In December 2020,
interest rates of mortgages were at levels around
their historical lows, while those of credit cards
decreased. As to portfolio quality, corporate and
mortgage loan delinquency rates showed an
incipient increase, despite remaining at low levels,


while those for consumption remained at high levels
and increased for the fourth consecutive month, after
having declined during the previous months.

**A.2.3. Development of inflation and inflation**
**outlook**

Between January and the first fortnight of March
2021, annual headline inflation increased from 3.54
to 4.12% (Chart 19 and Table 1). The core and noncore components contributed 18 and 40 basis points,
respectively, to the increase of annual headline
inflation. Core inflation rose mainly due to the higher
levels of non-food merchandise inflation. Non-core
inflation rose in response to the evolution of energy
prices.

**Chart 19**

**Consumer Price Index**

Annual percentage change

13

12 CPI

11 Core

10

Non-core

9

8

7

6

5

4

3

2

1

0

-1

-2

-3 F1 March

J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J

2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021

Source: Prepared by Banco de México and INEGI data.

Annual core inflation registered levels of 3.84 and
4.09% in January and in the first fortnight of March
2021, respectively. Within it, annual inflation of
merchandise prices rose from 5.41 to 5.81% during
the same period (Chart 20 and Table 1). This
increase is explained by the higher levels of inflation
that non-food merchandise continued to show,
moving from 4.37 to 5.06%, while inflation of food
merchandise prices rose from 6.36 to 6.50% (Chart
21). The annual inflation of services prices increased
from 2.13% to 2.22% during the same period,
although its components showed a heterogeneous
behavior. On the one hand, inflation of services other
than education and housing rose from low levels,
due mainly to increases in the annual price variation
of tourism services. On the other hand, education
and housing continued to exhibit lower inflation
levels, due to the COVID-19 pandemic.

20

|CPI Core Non-core|Col2|Col3|
|---|---|---|
||||
||||
|F|||


-----

**Chart 20**

**Merchandise and Services Core Price Sub-index**

Annual percentage change

7

Merchandise

6 Services

5

4

3

2

1

F1 Mar.

0

J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J

2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021

Source: Banco de México and INEGI.

**Chart 21**

**Merchandise Core Price Sub-index**

Annual percentage change

8

7

6

5

4

3

2

1

Food, beverages and tobacco Non-food merchandise F1 Mar.

0

J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J

2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021


**Chart 22**

**Non-core Price Sub-index**

Annual percentage change


20

15

10

5

0

-5 Non-core

Agricultural and livestock products

Energy and government-authorized prices

-10

-15 F1 Mar.

J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J

2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021


Source: Banco de México and INEGI.

Between January and the first fortnight of March
2021, annual non-core inflation rose from 2.63 to
4.19% (Chart 22 and Table 1), a result that is mainly
associated with the increase in energy price inflation,
which rose from 2.66 to 9.45%, driven by the higher
annual variations in gasoline and domestic L.P. gas
prices. In contrast, the annual inflation of livestock
and agricultural products decreased from 2.64 to
0.07% during the same period, with the reduction in
fruits and vegetables inflation standing out, while
inflation of livestock products maintained an upward
trend.


Source: Banco de México and INEGI.

As for inflation expectations drawn from Banco de
México’s Survey of Private Sector Forecasters,
between January and February, the median for
headline inflation for the end of 2021 increased from
3.66 to 3.90%, while that for core inflation rose from
3.57 to 3.58%. The medians for headline and core
inflation expectations for the medium and long terms
remained around 3.50%. Finally, breakeven inflation
and inflation risk increased slightly since the previous
monetary policy decision.

The anticipated paths for headline and core inflation
in the short term are slightly above those foreseen in
the last Quarterly Report, although they are still
expected to converge to the 3% target as of the
second quarter of 2022. Over the next months,
headline inflation will be temporarily affected by the
arithmetic effects generated by last year’s fall in
energy prices. These forecasts are subject to risks.
On the upside: i) a recomposition of spending
towards merchandise or cost-related pressures; ii)
episodes of exchange rate depreciation; and iii)
external inflationary pressures. On the downside: i)
effects stemming from the negative output gap; ii)
greater social distancing measures; and iii) foreign
exchange appreciation.

21


-----

**Table 1**

**Consumer Price Index and Components**

Annual percentage change

**1st fortnight**

**Item** **January 2021** **February 2021**
**March 2021**

**CPI** **3.54** **3.76** **4.12**

**SubyacenteCore** **3.84** **3.87** **4.09**

**Merchandise** **5.41** **5.54** **5.81**

Food, beverages and tobacco 6.36 6.34 6.50

Non-food merchandise 4.37 4.66 5.06

**Services** **2.13** **2.06** **2.22**

Housing 1.94 1.85 1.81

Education (tuitions) 1.59 1.16 1.12

Other services 2.42 2.44 2.83

**No SubyacenteNon-core** **2.63** **3.43** **4.19**

**Agricultural and livestock products** **2.64** **0.66** **0.07**

Fruits and vegetablesFruits abd vegetables -3.89 -8.57 -10.39

Livestock productsLivestock 8.42 9.01 9.68

**Energy and government-authorized prices Energéticos y Tarifas Aut. por Gobierno** **2.62** **5.50** **7.30**

Energy productsEnergy 2.66 6.83 9.45

Government-authorized pricesTarifas Autorizadas por Gobierno 2.54 2.38 2.27

Source:INEGI.

22


-----

-----

-----

