-----

-----

**FOREWARNING**
This document is provided for the reader’s convenience
only. The translation from the official Spanish version was
made by Banco de México’s staff. Discrepancies may arise
between the original document in Spanish and its English
translation. For this reason, the original Spanish version is
the only official document.


**1. PLACE, DATE, AND PARTICIPANTS**

**1.1 Place:** Meeting held by virtual means.

**1.2. Date of Governing Board meeting:** May 12,
2021.

**1.3. Participants:**
Alejandro Díaz de León-Carrillo, Governor.
Galia Borja-Gómez, Deputy Governor.
Irene Espinosa-Cantellano, Deputy Governor.
Gerardo Esquivel-Hernández, Deputy Governor.
Jonathan Ernest Heath-Constable, Deputy
Governor.
Gabriel Yorio-González, Undersecretary of Finance
and Public Credit.
Elías Villanueva-Ochoa, Secretary of the Governing
Board.

Prior to this meeting, preliminary work by Banco de
México’s staff analyzing the economic and financial
environment as well as the developments in inflation
and the determinants and outlook for inflation, was
conducted and presented to the Governing Board
(see Annex).

**2. ANALYSIS AND RATIONALE BEHIND THE**
**GOVERNING BOARD’S VOTING**

**_International environment_**

**The majority noted that global economic activity**
**continues to recover heterogeneously across**
**countries, associated with vaccine availability**
**and the amount of stimulus spending. Some**
members added structural factors of each economy.
**One member mentioned that most timely indicators**
of global economic activity show significant
rebounds. **Some members noted that economic**
activity and labor markets in various countries and
regions are still affected by social distancing
measures.

**Most members highlighted the increase in global**
**growth expectations, particularly in the United**
**States, given its significant fiscal stimulus. Some**
members mentioned that the International Monetary
Fund (IMF) growth expectation for that country in


2021 is 6.4%. **Some members added that, among**
advanced economies, the US economy is expected
to be the only one with a positive output gap in 2021
and 2022. One member added that this will allow it
to reach its pre-pandemic output level towards the
end of this year. **Another member underlined that**
additional support packages are being evaluated,
with infrastructure spending for up to 10 years, which
also include tax increases to partially offset the
higher levels of spending. **Some members pointed**
out that the recovery is expected to be weaker in the
euro area and Japan. One member stated that it is
expected that it will take until 2023 for many
emerging economies to regain their pre-pandemic
levels.

**Among the risks to global economic activity,**
**most members highlighted those associated with**
**the** **pandemic** **and** **a** **higher-than-expected**
**increase in inflation. Some** members mentioned
that there could be disruptions in production and
supply chains. **One member emphasized the**
importance of ensuring a broad and inclusive
distribution of vaccines that would contribute to an
orderly reestablishment of these chains. He/she
warned that, otherwise, the recovery will continue to
be heterogeneous and would favor the emergence of
disruptions in the provision of inputs or commodities,
with unfavorable effects on output and prices.
**Another member added the uncertainty about the**
type of inflationary pressures that may arise in the
United States as a risk. **As for the risks for**
**emerging economies, most members pointed out**
**those associated with the vaccination process,**
**more** **restrictive** **financial** **conditions,** **and**
**idiosyncratic factors.**

**All members pointed out that global inflation rose**
**due to recent pressures on commodity prices,**
**especially energy-related ones, and to base**
**effects,** **and** **cost-related** **pressures.** **Most**
**members added that supply chain disruptions**
**and the economic recovery process also exerted**
**an influence. Some members stated that pressures**
on world inflation are anticipated to be limited and
transitory due to economic and labor market
weakness and the fading of base effects. **One**
member mentioned that the most recent forecasts by
international organizations suggest that price
pressures will be short-lived, due to the wide slack
conditions in most economies, and to the gradual
fading away of base effects. **Another member**
highlighted the impact of the recovery of economies
of systemic importance such as China and the United
States. One member added supply factors, including
poor harvests and precautionary stockpiling. **Some**

1


-----

members noted that in most advanced economies,
headline and core inflation remain below their
targets, except for the United States, Canada and the
United Kingdom. **One member noted that in these**
countries the increases in inflation have been
considered to be transitory. **Most members**
**mentioned that higher levels of inflation are**
**expected in the United States. One member stated**
that the positive output gap that is expected for the
US economy could exert upward pressures on
inflation and interest rates. Regarding emerging
economies, he/she noted that in most of them
inflation has increased recently due to the increase
in commodity prices, to supply shocks, and to
exchange rate depreciations.

**Most members mentioned that greater pressures**
**on prices could arise as a result of disruptions in**
**production and supply chains. Some members**
noted that due to the effects derived from the
pandemic, these chains are less resilient and have
less capacity to absorb increases in demand without
exerting pressures on prices. **One** member

mentioned that world inflation is expected to be
higher than at the beginning of the year. He/she
noted that several global companies have warned
about the possibility of raising their prices in 2021
and 2022 due to higher input costs, and he/she
considered that the balance of risks for global
inflation has deteriorated. **Another member added**
that it is foreseeable that the supply of raw materials
will tend to increase, thus contributing to lower
inflationary pressures. He/she considered that since
pressures on prices are transitory, longer-term
inflation expectations should not be affected. He/she
considered that for emerging economies, it will be
important to monitor that the increase in inflation is
indeed transitory and pointed out that inflation
expectations for 2022 reveal, in general, lower levels
than those anticipated for 2021. He/she added that
the fact that some of the main economies have made
progress with the vaccination and containment of the
pandemic, has led to more favorable growth
expectations and increases in the demand for
various inputs. He/she considered that, in a context
of global disruptions in supply chains, it is logical that
the heterogeneous economic recovery process is
also resulting in some bottlenecks in the provision of
inputs. He/she stated that these price increases,
however, should be understood as associated to
supply factors. He/she added that as the

normalization of activities progresses, supply chains
are foreseen to begin to realign and prices will adjust
to levels compatible with those prevailing prior to the
pandemic.


**Most members mentioned that central banks in**
**advanced economies reiterated their intention to**
**maintain** **accommodative** **monetary** **policy**

**stances. Some members pointed out that, in its**
latest policy decision, the Federal Reserve

considered that there is still some way to go before
achieving its targets. **One member added that the**
Fed reinforced its expectation of a moderate increase
in inflation, with no increases to its reference rate
until 2023. Another member argued that the Federal
Reserve has been very emphatic regarding the
importance of fully understanding the character and
the implications of the recent inflationary pressures.
He/she recalled that, in its latest decision, that
institution highlighted the transitory nature of the
increase in inflation, explaining that inflation is
expected to exceed 2%, and making it clear that such
result is due to the low comparison base and to
bottlenecks that limit the response of supply given
the recovery of spending. He/she mentioned that the
president of the Federal Reserve explicitly

recognized that this temporary increase in inflation
does not meet the conditions to begin a reduction in
the monetary stimulus. He/she pointed out that it is
necessary to remember the highly accommodative
nature of the new monetary policy strategy adopted
by the Federal Reserve. He/she noted that, because
inflation has remained persistently below 2% in the
past, such institution will now allow inflation to remain
moderately above 2% for some time. He/she
considered that this implies that the Federal Reserve
will not increase its interest rates, nor will it reduce
the level of its asset purchases in a mechanical way
when inflation increases beyond 2%. He/she added
that the Fed pointed out that labor market conditions
are not close to meeting its definition of maximum
employment.

**Some members mentioned that central banks in**
some emerging economies have started to reduce
their monetary stimulus. They argued that in those
economies the monetary policy stance had been
relaxed aggressively, leading to exchange rate or
inflationary pressures. One member pointed out that
the currencies of some of these economies have
exhibited a significant cumulative depreciation during
the year. He/she added that the rebound in inflation
prompted some central banks in emerging

economies to conclude their monetary easing cycle
and begin increasing their reference rates. He/she
mentioned that the expectation of a tighter monetary
policy in economies facing inflationary pressures
persists. **Another member considered that such**
pressures are strictly local and that they should not
be extrapolated to economies that have acted in a
more cautious and prudent manner, such as Mexico.

2


-----

He/she added that the majority of central banks in
emerging economies still maintain strongly

accommodative monetary policy stances and are
expected to continue doing so at least for the rest of
2021, and that for these reasons, they continue to
register negative ex-ante real interest rates.

**Most members mentioned that financial markets**
**exhibited a more stable behavior. They noted**
**that, after having increased significantly due to**
**the expectation of higher inflation in the United**
**States, longer-term interest rates in that country**
**have stabilized. They pointed out that the main**
**stock markets registered gains, some of them**
**reaching historically high levels. They added that**
**the US dollar appreciation was contained. One**
member noted that this environment is explained by
factors such as the consistency in the Federal
Reserve's announcements regarding the

continuation of the monetary stimulus and the
economic recovery. He/she considered that looking
ahead, these factors will continue to support financial
markets.

**Some members mentioned that, since the last**
monetary policy decision, financial markets in
emerging economies exhibited a more orderly
behavior. These members noted that capital flows to
these economies continued. **One member pointed**
out that flows to fixed-income assets continued and
that those to equities continued to be channeled
mainly to the Chinese economy. **Another member**
pointed out that equity markets in emerging
economies registered gains, while interest rates on
government bonds remained relatively stable,
although with some fluctuations.

**Most members agreed that one of the risks for**
**financial markets is the evolution of inflation,**
**particularly in the United States. One member**
mentioned that global financing conditions could
suddenly tighten as a result of an inflationary surprise
in that country. In this regard, **another member**
emphasized the uncertainty about whether

inflationary pressures in the United States will be
moderate and transitory, or of considerable

magnitude and more persistent. He/she pointed out
that the eventual reduction in asset purchases by the
Federal Reserve is a risk factor for fixed-income
markets. Meanwhile, **one** member considered that
the lack of confidence in the market regarding the
possibility that the Federal Reserve adopts a less
accommodative policy, while still manifesting itself in
recent days, has begun to decline given the
consistency in the actions and the rhetoric of that
institution. **Some members added the risk of**


adjustments in the prices of certain financial assets.
**One member added that public and private debts,**
which have reached record highs, might not be
sustainable.

Regarding emerging economies, **another member**
stated that the global environment implies both the
benefits of a higher external demand and the risks of
tighter and more volatile financial conditions. He/she
specified that the fiscal stimulus in the US economy
will support the recovery, which is especially
important for economies that are more integrated to
that economy and have smaller spending stimulus
programs. Nevertheless, he/she considered that
should a greater-than-expected increase in US
inflation take place, interest rates would be under
pressure at a global level. He/she pointed out that to
the extent that this occurs, emerging economies will
face greater difficulties in attracting and retaining
capital, possible exchange rate adjustments, and
upward pressures on yield curves. In the same vein,
he/she added the challenges associated with the
inclusion of China in several global fixed income
indices. He/she detailed that an environment of high
uncertainty prevails in financial markets due to the
interaction of several unprecedented factors: i) a
health-related shock, unrelated to the economic or
financial cycles; ii) a highly differentiated fiscal
stimulus; iii) the negative impact on global and
domestic supply chains; iv) the change in the Federal
Reserve's monetary policy strategy, for which
financial markets do not have direct precedents to
extrapolate possible monetary policy actions, making
the adjustment more volatile; and v) a heterogeneous
global recovery across countries and sectors, with
differences in yield curves, exchange rates, and
external accounts.

**_Economic activity in Mexico_**

**All members agreed that economic recovery in**
**Mexico has been heterogeneous across sectors**
**and regions. Most members mentioned that the**
**pace of recovery decelerated during the first**
**quarter of the year, due to higher levels of**
**contagion and reimposed mobility restrictions in**
**early 2021, as well as supply disruptions of**
**certain inputs. Some** members emphasized that
economic activity showed a higher growth rate
towards the end of the first quarter of the year. Some
members attributed the improvement in different
activity indicators following an easing of mobility
restrictions to a lower number of contagions and to
greater advance in the vaccination process. **One**
member highlighted that a positive quarterly growth
was registered during said period despite the halting

3


-----

of business activity and the aforementioned supply
chain disruptions.

**Regarding demand, most members agreed that**
**the recovery continues to be driven by the**
**external sector. One** member pointed out that
during the first quarter of the year non-automotive
manufacturing exports to the United States stood out,
given that automotive exports contracted in January
and February. He/she highlighted that forecasts for
industrial production in the United States increased
as a result of the approved fiscal stimulus, and that
therefore external demand is foreseen to continue
contributing significantly to Mexico’s recovery.
He/she added that the external accounts reflected
the relative strength of exports and the lag in the
recovery of imports that led to a large trade surplus,
which is estimated to decrease over the following
quarters.

**Most** **members** **mentioned** **that,** **although**

**consumption has recovered slightly, it remains**
**below pre-pandemic levels. They highlighted that**
**consumption has been supported by the higher**
**level** **of** **remittances** **and** **that** **consumer**

**confidence has been improving. One** member
pointed out that the recovery was faster in
nondurable consumption goods, spurred by

remittances, the wage bill and government transfers.
He/she pointed out that, in contrast, both services
consumption and consumption of domestic durable
goods still show a strong contraction. **Another**
member considered that latest data on remittances
and the consumer confidence index suggests that
the process of recovery of private consumption will
continue over the next months. **Some members**
highlighted the improvement, at the margin, of timely
indicators related to commercial activity and
consumption. **Most members highlighted that**
**investment continues to show lack of dynamism.**
**One** member stated that in February it was 7.42%
below the level registered at the beginning of 2020,
and that it has been weak for several years. Another
member emphasized that the government has not
done enough to offset the sense of uncertainty
prevailing in the business sector regarding the
respect for the rule of law, and that for this reason a
vigorous recovery in investment is not anticipated.

**As for supply, all members highlighted the**
**heterogeneous pace of recovery across sectors.**
**One** member underlined that the subsectors that
continue showing a contraction of over 5% in their
monthly activity with respect to pre-pandemic levels
account for around 27.8% of GDP. He/she stated that
in March industrial production accumulated ten


months of positive monthly changes. **Some**

members emphasized the impact of the shortage of
semiconductors on the automotive industry. **One**
member pointed out that this has diminished the
performance of the industrial sector and of exports.
**Another member mentioned that, after leading the**
recovery, manufacturing contracted in January and
February, although in March it performed better.
He/she added that in March construction was still at
levels of monthly activity that were over 8% lower
than those recorded in early 2020. **Most members**
**highlighted the weakness in the services sector**
**and the differentiated performance among its**
**subsectors. Some members pointed out that face-**
to-face services continue to be significantly affected.

**Most members noted that the labor market has**
**been recovering, although it still exhibits**
**deterioration with respect to pre-pandemic**
**levels. One member mentioned that, despite the fact**
that the National Survey on Occupation and
Employment (ENOE, for its Spanish acronym) of
March shows that the labor participation rate has
recovered to 58% of the population, after having
fallen below 48% during the pandemic, it is still below
the levels recorded in early 2020. Another member
pointed out that both formal and informal

employment, which between February and April
2020 contracted by 12.5 million workers, by March
2021 had recovered 10.5 million workers, and one
million of them were added during the first quarter of
the year. He/she added that by April, IMSS-insured
jobs were at levels 2.6% lower than those registered
in February 2020. **Some members noted that the**
asymmetric recovery across sectors and types of
jobs has been unfavorable in terms of gender,
affecting women to a greater extent than men. One
member argued that the sectors that expanded the
most are related to industry, which has allowed
employment among men to recover, while the
slowdown in services has made the labor recovery
among women more difficult. He/she detailed that,
since educational activities remain in distancelearning format, the unpaid workload for women has
increased, which could considerably amplify labor
gender inequality.

**Most members pointed out that there is still slack**
**in the economy. Some** members pointed out that
the underemployment rate is 14%, a figure twice the
level normally observed. **One member highlighted**
that the output gap is estimated to be of around 6%.
**Another member underlined that slack conditions in**
January and February are estimated to have
widened slightly, and to have resumed a decreasing
trajectory as of March. He/she added that slack in the

4


-----

labor market remains ample and, over the following
months, additional direct and indirect effects will be
incorporated as a result of the reform to the Federal
Labor Law on the subject of outsourcing. **Some**
members noted that, considering the economic
contraction of 2020, ample slack conditions are
foreseen for the economy as a whole, with significant
differences across sectors. **One member argued**
that, due to the pandemic’s impact, measuring
economic slack poses significant challenges, given
that estimates of potential GDP and the Nonaccelerating Inflation Rate of Unemployment

(NAIRU) rate could be distorted. He/she considered
that, in view of a considerable economic contraction,
potential GDP is probably overestimated, which
suggests a less negative output gap. Similarly,
he/she noted that the open unemployment rate could
be an inadequate indicator to illustrate a labor
imbalance. Indeed, estimating the natural

employment rate using the open unemployment rate
has turned it into an irrelevant and dangerously
mistaken reference. With an economy that is
extremely weak it would seem that the open
unemployment rate lies below the level of the natural
unemployment rate, which is counterintuitive after
observing the situation of economic activity. He/she
stated that, in order to adequately calibrate the labor
market’s pressures onto prices, a metric is needed
which corrects for the structural changes

experienced by the population that is economically
inactive but available for work, as a result of the
pandemic.

**Most members highlighted that higher growth is**
**foreseen for the year and that growth forecasts**
**for 2021 have been adjusted upwards. They**
**mentioned that this stems from the fact that the**
**recovery rate is anticipated to accelerate driven**
**by the strength of external demand. Some**
members mentioned advances in the vaccination
process. One member noted the gradual reopening
of economic activities and **another member added**
that recently the economy has performed better than
expected.

**Most members agreed that the balance of risks**
**for growth has improved and that it is now more**
**equilibrated. Among risks to the upside, they**
**mentioned a possible increase in external**
**demand, given the improved outlook for world**
**growth. One** member added the possibility of
observing greater revenues from remittances.
He/she added that a greater external demand
combined with the United States-Mexico-Canada
Agreement (USMCA) could stimulate investment.


**Some members underlined the possibility of greater**
progress in the vaccination program.

**Among risks on the downside, most members**
**highlighted those related to the evolution of the**
**pandemic, along with possible delays in the**
**vaccination campaign. One** member added the
volatility in financial markets and the negative impact
on input supply chains. Another member mentioned
the risk associated with the next electoral process
due to a renewed environment of risk aversion.

**_Inflation in Mexico_**

**All members mentioned that annual headline**
**inflation increased significantly and more than**
**expected,** **reaching** **6.08%** **in** **April.** **They**

**highlighted that this increase mainly resulted**
**from the effect of a low comparison base for**
**energy prices. Most members added that**
**pressures on commodity prices and cost-related**
**pressures also contributed to the above. One**
member highlighted the outsized increase in the
prices of some specific products and emphasized
that the increase in inflation does not imply a
generalized increase in all prices. **Most members**
**pointed out that an increase in inflation had**
**already been anticipated. One member noted that**
the level of April had not been recorded since
December 2017. **Some members considered that**
inflation continues to be impacted by pandemicrelated effects. One member stated that changes in
the consumption basket have implied that there are
distortions in the measurement of inflation.

**Most members mentioned that the component**
**which exerted the most pressure on headline**
**inflation in April was non-core inflation, which**
**registered 12.3%. One member underlined that this**
level is the highest since late 2017. Another member
emphasized that it is the second highest on record in
the last 20 years. He/she noted that between January
2019 and June 2020 this component registered
atypically low values, below the mean of the last ten
years, and that a reversal had thus been anticipated
for some time. **Most members highlighted the**
**arithmetic effect of energy prices. Some members**
emphasized a greater-than-estimated increase in
these goods’ prices. **One member noted that,**
between April 2020 and April 2021, gasoline prices
rose 35%, mainly due to a low comparison base.
**Another member pointed out the disproportionate**
increase in LP gas prices and in the prices of certain
agricultural and livestock product prices.

5


-----

**Most members noted that in April the core**
**component registered 4.13%. Some** members
underlined that it exceeded the upper limit of the
variability interval. **Regarding its components,**
**most members indicated that merchandise**
**inflation remains the main source of pressure,**
**particularly non-food merchandise inflation.**
**Some** members mentioned that food merchandise
inflation decreased, although **one member stated**
that it remained high. Another member pointed out
the economy confronts an acceleration in the prices
of non-food merchandise, mainly those sensitive to
energy prices and to the exchange rate. **Most**
**members noted that services inflation has**
**increased. One member highlighted that, although**
tourism services’ inflation and food related services
inflation rose in light of a certain reopening of
activities, housing and education services’ inflation
continued to decline. **Another member mentioned**
the pressures on merchandise prices, which were
only partially offset by the lower pressures on
services prices.

**Some members mentioned that super core inflation**
remains around 3%, suggesting that pressures on
prices do not derive from the cyclical position of the
economy. One member added that indicators which
exclude extreme price variations show that price
increases of a wide range of products are being
contained by the economic slack. He/she noted that
the median of core inflation in April was below 3.25%
and therefore half of the products that make up this
index registered inflation rates below said level.
He/she added that 30% of goods and services in the
Consumer Price Index (CPI) registered inflation rates
below 2%. He/she thus considered that inflation is
contained and that its recent increases do not imply
a generalized increase in prices, but rather they
respond to contextual factors or to specific goods.

**Another member considered that a measurement**
problem is being confronted, which leads to a loss of
perspective about the inflationary phenomenon and
the slack conditions. The weak response of inflation
to economic slack that is observed in the data could
be the result of distortions in the estimation of
potential output and the output gap. If the potential
output is overestimated, in reality the output gap is
less negative than is suggested by the gap measured
in the traditional way, and slack conditions are not as
ample as they seem. He/she added that if that were
so then the gap, as traditionally measured, and core
inflation are not consistent with each other. He/she
warned that this explains, in part, the weak response
of prices to the phase of the economic cycle.
Moreover, he/she added that the distortions in the


estimation of the NAIRU based on the open
unemployment rate lead to the equivocal conclusion
that the open unemployment rate lies below the
estimate of the natural unemployment rate, which
would imply inflationary pressures. **Some members**
mentioned that the pandemic generated significant
adjustments in price formation. They highlighted the
reassignment of household spending, which enabled
a change in relative prices in favor of goods and
against services. **One member added that the**
shutdown of the economy led to problems in supply
chains and generated additional costs for firms that
had to adapt in an environment of greater social
distancing. He/she added the historical fall in energy
prices that has resulted in the base effect observed
in 2021. He/she considered that even though these
supply shocks continue to affect domestic inflation,
they are expected to be transitory.

**Most** **members** **pointed** **out** **that** **inflation**

**expectations for 2021 rose and those for the**
**medium and long terms remained stable at levels**
**above the 3% target.** **One member noted that this is**
in line with the transitory nature of the recent increase
in inflation. He/she mentioned several surveys in
which inflation expectations for the following 12
months and for the end of 2022 remain at around 3%.
**Another** member highlighted that expectations for
the end of 2021 are above the 3% target and those
for 12 months and the end of 2022 remain stable and
below the levels observed in other inflationary
episodes. He/she added that during such episodes,
short-term expectations had been more susceptible
to being affected by inflationary shocks, because,
due to their nature, they are highly sensitive to
observed data, which does not necessarily imply a
de-anchoring of inflation expectations. One member
underlined that inflation expectations for 2022
collected by Banco de México have remained above
3.5% for nine consecutive months. Most members
**stated that inflation expectations drawn from**
**market instruments are at levels close to 3%.**
However, **some members noted that they have**
increased at the margin. **One member mentioned**
that, for the 1-10 year average, inflation expectations
were at 3.1%. **Another** member stated that
breakeven inflation premia decreased marginally for
the 10- and 30-year nodes, which suggests that the
market also estimates that the current pressures are
transitory.

**All members pointed out that the revised**
**forecasts for headline and core inflation display**
**short-term levels above those published in the**
**Quarterly Report October-December 2020, but**
**emphasizing that both are still expected to**

6


-----

**converge to the 3% target starting in the second**
**quarter of 2022. Most members pointed out that**
**inflationary pressures are expected to be**
**transitory.** **One member emphasized that the**
arithmetic effects associated with the fall in energy
prices last year, will continue to affect annual inflation
rates for some time. He/she added that, although the
most recent annual variations have been above the
expected, a turning point in the evolution of inflation
is foreseen in April. **Another member stated that a**
higher non-core inflation is anticipated due to
adjustments in the inflation trajectories of livestock
and agricultural products as well as energy products.
He/she added that a higher core inflation is also
expected due to the increase in merchandise and
services prices, which should be partially offset by a
greater appreciation of the Mexican peso. **One**
member noted that core inflation is expected to start
decreasing as of the third quarter of the year.
**Another member considered that the expected**
trajectory of this component remains highly

uncertain.

**Among the upward risks to inflation, most**
**members highlighted the possibility of external**
**inflationary pressures, cost-related pressures or**
**a reallocation of spending, as well as possible**
**episodes of exchange rate depreciation. One**
member pointed out that increases in transportation
costs and logistics issues in production chains
contribute to increase the prices of imported inputs.
**Some** members mentioned the significant

persistence of core inflation. **One member pointed**
out that this has been observed despite the tight
monetary policy stance implemented prior to the
pandemic and ample slack conditions during the
COVID-19 emergency. Some members pointed out
the rise in commodity prices as an additional risk.
**One** member noted that expectations of an
appreciation of the Mexican peso appear to be
optimistic and may be reversed due to external and
internal factors, which would generate pressures that
could further divert the foreseen trajectory of inflation.
Likewise, he/she pointed out that the foreseen
trajectory for core inflation remains highly uncertain,
given that the impact on the composition of
expenditure may persist to the extent that the
pandemic continues and mobility restrictions are
maintained.

**Most members warned about the impact of**
**droughts** **on** **livestock** **and** **agricultural**

**production, which would exert upward pressure**
**on non-core inflation.** **Some members foresee**
inflationary pressures on services prices as health
restrictions are lifted. **One member added that this**


would lead to the fading of the favorable effect that
services inflation has had in offsetting the high levels
of merchandise inflation. **Another member added**
the risk of the deterioration of inflation expectations
hindering the accelerated decline in inflation and its
convergence to the target in the time frame
envisaged. He/she considered that upward risks will
be present in the short and medium terms. **One**
member expressed his/her view that the delay of said
convergence could lead to a de-anchoring of inflation
expectations, which are already above the upper limit
of the variability interval.

**Regarding** **risks** **on** **the** **downside,** **most**

**mentioned the effects stemming from the**
**negative output gap. One member highlighted the**
risk of greater social distancing measures and the
possibility of an exchange rate appreciation. Another
member noted that the risk of exchange rate
depreciation has decreased due to the improvement
in financial markets. He/she added that gasoline
prices have stabilized in line with the federal
government's pricing policy and that, therefore,
looking ahead, their contribution to inflation will be
more limited.

**Most members considered that the balance of**
**risks that might affect the anticipated path for**
**inflation within the forecast horizon is biased to**
**the upside. One member stated that this bias is**
clear given the behavior of inflation and its
expectations. He/she added that the risks for noncore inflation are also biased to the upside due to: i)
the possibility of supply shocks associated with a
lower availability of fuels; ii) negative impact on
livestock and agricultural production; and iii)
demand-related pressures, driven by the increase in
consumption and the reactivation of the US
economy. **Another member mentioned that the**
balance of risks for headline inflation has

deteriorated. **One member considered that, on**
balance, beyond the increase that can be anticipated
for the end-of-year figure, inflation risks are relatively
stable.

**_Macrofinancial environment_**

**Most** **members** **mentioned** **that** **domestic**

**financial markets have exhibited a more stable**
**behavior. One** member considered that this is due
to improved expectations for economic growth in
Mexico and worldwide. Another member stated that
the Federal Reserve has been categorical in
conveying its monetary policy message, contributing
to an orderly adjustment of markets. He/she added
that the risks for financial markets observed at the

7


-----

time of the previous monetary policy decision have
been dissipating.

**The majority of members noted that the Mexican**
**peso** **appreciated** **slightly.** **One** member

considered that this reflects a greater appetite for risk
worldwide and the greater weakness of the US dollar.
He/she highlighted that the Mexican currency
performed more favorably than other emerging
market currencies. He/she added that in some
economies aggressive monetary easing cycles have
put their exchange rates under stress, which required
substantial interventions to stabilize their value.
Despite this, he/she noted that some of these
currencies have depreciated significantly this year.
He/she stated that, in contrast, the Mexican peso has
shown less volatility, a moderate cumulative
depreciation, and has not required exchange-rate
interventions. He/she considered that this should be
attributed to a responsible macroeconomic

framework and a prudent approach to monetary
policy. However, he/she pointed out that the positive
behavior of the Mexican peso could be affected by
episodes of volatility stemming from the dynamics of
the US long-term bond market or the upcoming
electoral process in Mexico.

**Most members mentioned that foreign investors'**
**holdings of government bonds continued to**
**decline. Some members noted that foreign investors**
have shown preference for Asian economies’ assets.
**One** member pointed out that, over the past
eighteenth months, China has absorbed two-thirds of
the fixed-income flows to emerging economies.
He/she considered that while this adjustment
associated with China’s inclusion in global fixedincome indices may be transitory, while weights in
investment portfolios are recalibrated, the lack of
participation of foreign investors in Mexico’s primary
auctions for government securities continues to
stand out. **Another** member noted that nominal
government bond yields increased, in a context of
deteriorated trading conditions and limited interest for
this type of assets by foreign and local investors, who
have shown caution given the external and domestic
conditions. In this regard, he/she highlighted the
uncertainty about the monetary policy actions that
the Federal Reserve may take and, at the margin, a
decrease in the liability management operations by
the Ministry of Finance (SHCP). **One member**
mentioned that a steepening of the yield curve has
been observed, given expectations of higher inflation
in the United States. He/she argued that this has
been reflected in lower risk appetite and in capital
outflows. He/she noted that so far these outflows
have occurred under conditions that have allowed for


an orderly adjustment of rates and the exchange
rate. He/she added that the surplus observed in the
balance of payments’ current account has served to
accommodate the outflows, while the banking sector
has absorbed the reduction in foreigners' holdings
due to the search for investment options to replace
the lower credit placement. He/she considered that
this situation may change in view of the expected
reversal of the current account surplus and the limits
of banks' absorption capacity, especially in view of an
eventual improvement in credit placement. Another
member stated that the equity market continued to
show capital inflows and that, in view of the greater
stability of financial markets, the sovereign risk
premium decreased. He/she pointed out that the
yield curve in Mexico exhibited a mixed behavior,
with a decrease in the short end and increases in the
medium and long ends. One member added that the
interest rate on 10-year bonds registered

fluctuations, reaching levels below 6.5%. Regarding
**the stock market, most members noted that the**
**Mexican IPC index registered gains.** **One member**
stated that this was due to a positive balance in the
corporate reporting season.

**The majority of members noted that financing to**
**the private sector continues to decline and that**
**credit standards have worsened. Some members**
stated that credit to firms continues to decrease and
expressed concern regarding this situation. **One**
member mentioned that this has been observed for
four consecutive quarters. He/she added that, in
terms of its annual variation, consumer credit has
fallen in practically all of its segments. **Some**
members stated that only housing credit showed
positive growth. One member pointed out that in
March, credit to Small and Medium-sized Enterprises
(SMEs) decreased by 12% at an annualized rate.
He/she added that according to Banco de México’s
Survey on General Conditions and Standards in the
Banking Credit Market (EnBan, for its Spanish
acronym), it has become more difficult to obtain
credit from commercial banks. **Another member**
noted that the intermediation margins of interest
rates to firms remain at higher levels than prior to the
pandemic. One member mentioned that delinquency
rates remain at relatively low levels. He/she stated
that, in terms of resource use, public sector financing
dominates, while credit to the private sector remains
deteriorated, despite the decline in interest rates.
**Some members pointed out that firms' and**
households' demand for liquidity persists. **One**
member considered that this is due to precautionary
reasons. **Another member added that domestic**
sources continued to expand, while external sources
continue showing lack of dynamism.

8


-----

**_Monetary policy_**

**All members agreed to maintain the target for the**
**overnight interbank interest rate at 4.00%. This,**
**considering the inflation forecasts, the risks they**
**are subject to, as well as the need to consolidate**
**a downward trajectory for headline and core**
**inflation to the 3% target. They highlighted that**
**the recent shocks that have affected the**
**evolution of inflation pose challenges for the**
**implementation of monetary policy, so that the**
**adjustment in relative prices takes place in an**
**orderly manner, and so that an impact on the**
**price** **formation** **process** **and** **on** **inflation**

**expectations** **is** **avoided.** **The** **majority** **of**

**members emphasized that in a highly uncertain**
**environment such as the current one, a prudent**
**approach is required. Finally, they reiterated that,**
**looking ahead, monetary policy implementation**
**will depend on the evolution of the factors that**
**have an incidence on inflation, on its foreseen**
**trajectories within the forecast horizon, and on**
**its expectations.**

**One member highlighted the complex environment**
for monetary policy. He/she pointed out that the
effects of supply, demand and financial shocks
associated with the pandemic are still being
confronted. In this context, he/she considered that in
small open emerging economies, which need to
supplement their domestic savings with external
sources of financing, it is even more important to
maintain a solid macroeconomic environment that
attracts capital and fosters an orderly adjustment in
the economy. In this regard, he/she mentioned that
monetary policy should contribute to such adjustment
by maintaining inflation low and around its target,
containing increases in risk premia and in mediumand long-term interest rates, as well as the exchange
rate adjustment. He/she pointed out that the recent
shocks that have affected inflation imply greater
challenges for monetary policy implementation, in
order to ensure that the adjustment of relative prices
is orderly and to avoid affecting the price formation
process and inflation expectations. For this reason, it
is necessary for Banco de México to maintain a
prudent monetary policy stance that favors a
downward trajectory for headline and core inflation
towards the 3% target.

**Another member stated that, despite the significant**
progress in counteracting the pandemic and its
effects on the economy, important risks and
challenges prevail. He/she noted that the supply
shocks that have occurred are expected to be
transitory. Consequently, he/she emphasized that it


is important to reflect on monetary policy’s response
capacity to this type of events, especially when
inflationary pressures do not seem to arise from
aggregate demand. In this context, he/she

mentioned that the central bank needs to ensure that
inflation expectations remain anchored so that these
shocks do not lead to second-round effects. In this
regard, he/she pointed out that although very shortterm inflation expectations have deteriorated,

medium- and long-term expectations remain stable,
which indicates that, as a whole, they are anchored.
Finally, he/she emphasized the importance of paying
special attention to the evolution of commodity and
services prices, with the aim of guaranteeing the
convergence of inflation to its goal.

**One member stated that for this monetary policy**
decision, in addition to the economic and financial
information available, there are other factors that
gain relevance, such as the high sensitivity of
Mexican assets to financial conditions in the United
States, the decline of government bond holdings by
the foreign sector, which has affected local market
conditions, and a more intense competition for
investor’s resources, who have revealed a growing
interest in Asian markets. He/she added that
domestic factors could compromise the convergence
of inflation towards the target within the horizon in
which monetary policy operates. In this regard,
he/she referred to the risks for headline and non-core
inflation. He/she argued that the observed tightening
in financial conditions, despite the reduction in the
reference rate and weak fiscal support, reduces the
room for maneuver for monetary policy. He/she
stated that the monetary policy statement should
communicate clearly that with this decision there will
be space to update the projections based on
available information and take the necessary actions
to achieve a downward, sustained and convergent
inflation trajectory. This is due to the risk that since
the last monetary policy decision, inflation

expectations could be contaminated, which could
affect the effectiveness of monetary policy and
undermine the credibility of the commitment to price
stability. He/she noted that the prudent monetary
policy approach that has been followed, allows the
Mexican economy to be in a better position to face
the challenges of the economic recovery.

**Another** **member noted that the current economic**
cycle is not a traditional one, with unusual effects for
decision making. He/she mentioned that several
unobservable indicators, such as the output gap, the
NAIRU rate, and the neutral real rate are biased and
present challenges for their adequate interpretation.
He/she stated that the real neutral rate was

9


-----

estimated to be around 2.6%, but because of the
pandemic, it probably decreased, and thus the space
for lowering the reference rate would be larger than
currently considered. However, he/she added that
there is uncertainty regarding this indicator and that
it is necessary to wait for sufficient information in
order to be able to make reliable estimates and act
with certainty. He/she pointed out that there is an
inconsistency in the level of the real interest rate,
since if it is very high, it should, by inhibiting
economic activity, have a beneficial effect on
inflation. However, if the negative output gap is less
wide than estimated, a higher real rate would be
needed to lower core inflation. He/she mentioned
that this is somewhat contradictory considering
Mexico’s current situation. For this reason, it is
necessary to be more analytic and careful of the
current circumstances and of its implications for
monetary policy. Given all of the above, he/she
pointed out that a pause is necessary to unravel the
distortions in the economic information and to act
with greater certainty. He/she argued that given the
passivity of fiscal support in the face of the severe
economic recession, monetary support is more than
necessary. However, he/she considered that due to
the adverse outlook for inflation, with a balance of
risks biased to the upside, and to the uncertainty in
the economic parameters, the reference rate should
be maintained at its current levels for as long as
necessary. The above in order to guarantee the
convergence, recompose expectations and reaffirm
the priority mandate of price stability, since otherwise
it will be difficult to grant greater stimuli.

**One member mentioned that it is important to**
understand that global and domestic inflationary
pressures are mainly of a transitory nature, which
implies that monetary policy stances should not
necessarily be tightened in light of such pressures,
but rather they should focus on avoiding inflation
expectations from becoming contaminated or

second-round effects on price setting from taking
place. He/she added that the global economy is very
fragile after more than a year of being affected by the
pandemic. He/she considered that the economic
recovery is still incipient and cannot be jeopardized,
since this could deteriorate the growth and financial
indicators’ outlook. He/she stated that interrupting
the global or domestic economic recovery could
result in significant and lasting damage. For this
reason, he/she considered it important to maintain,
as far as possible, an accommodative monetary
policy stance for as long as necessary. He/she
mentioned that in the case of Mexico this would allow


for the recovery of consumption and investment,
which are the most affected aggregate demand
components. He/she pointed out that this would also
allow maintaining appropriate conditions for the
recovery of credit, especially to SMEs, which are the
entities that require it the most in order to survive or
expand. In this regard, he/she emphasized that the
message that this Central Institute should send is
one of caution and at the same time, it should
contribute to reassure the markets through a better
understanding of the nature of the current economic
situation.

**3. MONETARY POLICY DECISION**

In a highly uncertain environment, the risks for
inflation, economic activity and financial markets
pose major challenges for monetary policy. Given the
recent shocks that have affected inflation, it is
necessary for the adjustment in relative prices to take
place in an orderly manner so that an impact on price
formation and inflation expectations is avoided. With
the presence of all its members, the Governing Board
decided unanimously to maintain the target for the
overnight interbank interest rate at 4.00%. This,
considering the abovementioned inflation forecasts,
the risks they are subject to, as well as the need to
consolidate a downward trajectory for headline and
core inflation to the 3% target. Looking ahead,
monetary policy implementation will depend on the
evolution of the factors that have an incidence on
inflation, on its foreseen trajectories within the
forecast horizon, and on its expectations.

The Governing Board will take the necessary actions
based on incoming information in order for the policy
rate to be consistent with the orderly and sustained
convergence of headline inflation to the 3% target
within the time frame in which monetary policy
operates. It is necessary to safeguard the institutional
framework, strengthen the macroeconomic

fundamentals and adopt the necessary actions on
both monetary and fiscal policy fronts, to enable a
better adjustment of domestic financial markets and
of the economy as a whole.

**4. VOTING**

Alejandro Díaz de León-Carrillo, Galia Borja-Gómez,
Irene Espinosa-Cantellano, Gerardo Esquivel
Hernández and Jonathan Ernest Heath-Constable
voted in favor of maintaining the target for the
overnight interbank interest rate at 4.00%.

10


-----

**ANNEX**

The information in this Annex was prepared for this
meeting by the staff of Banco de México’s
Directorate General of Economic Research and
Directorate General of Central Bank Operations. It
does not necessarily reflect the considerations of the
members of the Governing Board as to the monetary
policy decision.

**A.1. External conditions**

**A.1.1. World economic activity**

Global economic activity continued to recover at a
heterogeneous pace across countries, according to
their vaccine availability and stimulus spending
programs. Recovery has also been heterogeneous
across sectors, with an initial greater rebound of
industrial production, world trade and the

manufacturing sector, and, subsequently, of

services, (Chart 1). Global inflation increased,
reflecting recent pressures on commodity prices,
especially energy-related, as well as base effects
and some cost-related pressures. In most advanced
economies, headline and core inflation remain at low
levels. In some of these economies, inflation
expectations were revised upwards recently. The
main central banks reiterated that they will maintain
accommodative monetary stances, while some
advanced countries, particularly the United States,
have announced additional fiscal stimuli proposals.
After exhibiting a more stable behavior since the
second half of March, by mid-May financial markets
once again registered fluctuations, albeit within a
narrow range, due to a greater-than-expected
increase in US inflation. Looking ahead, among the
risks to world economic activity and to the stability of
global financial markets, those associated with the
pandemic and a sustained and higher-than-expected
increase in inflation stand out.

1 Expressed in annualized terms, US seasonally adjusted GDP grew at a
rate of 4.3% during the fourth quarter of 2020 and of 6.4% during the first
quarter of 2021.


**Global: Purchasing Managers’ Index (PMI)**

**Production Component**

Diffusion index, s. a.

60

55

50

45

40

35

Manufacturing

30 Manufacturing (excl. China)

Services

Services (excl. China)

25

April

20

2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021

s. a. / Seasonally adjusted figures.
Source: Markit.

In the United States, economic activity accelerated
its rate of expansion by growing from a seasonally
adjusted quarterly rate of 1.1% during the fourth
quarter of 2020 to 1.6% during the first quarter of
2021 (Chart 2).[1] This growth reflected the expansion
of private consumption, public spending and
investment. This occurred in an environment of
significant advances in the vaccination process, of
easing of certain lockdown measures, and of a large
fiscal stimulus. Net exports contributed negatively as
a result of a significant expansion of imports.
Business expectations also improved after the
announcement at the end of March of an additional
stimulus proposal for USD 2.65 trillion, known as the
American Jobs Plan, that is still under discussion and
that considers aspects such as investment in
infrastructure, tax credits and spending on research
and development, to which the American Families
Plan proposed at the end of April would be added.

11

|Chart 1 bal: Purchasing Managers’ Index (PMI)  Production Component Diffusion index, s. a.|Col2|
|---|---|
|||
|Manufacturing Manufacturing (excl. China) Services Services (excl. China)|April|


-----

**United States: Real GDP and its Components**

Quarterly percentage change and contributions in

percentage points, s. a.

10

8

6

4

2

0

-2 Private consumption expenditures

Residential investment

-4 Change in private inventories

-6 Net exports

Non-residential investment

-8 Government consumption expenditures

-10 Total

-12 0

I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV I

2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021

s. a. / Seasonally adjusted figures.
Source: Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA) and Blue Chip (March 2021).

After having contracted in February due to the
negative impact of frosts in several regions of the
country, US industrial production resumed its
expansion in March, growing at a monthly rate of
1.4%. Within it, manufacturing activity and mining
expanded at monthly rates of 2.7 and 5.7%,
respectively, as a result of the normalization of
weather conditions. Timely indicators, such as the
Purchasing Managers' Index (PMI) of the

manufacturing sector, suggest that the recovery of
manufacturing activity may continue during the
second quarter of the year. However, looking ahead,
the prevailing shortage of semiconductors could
continue to negatively affect global manufacturing
activity.

The US labor market continued to recover during
March and April. The non-farm payroll registered
monthly increases of 770,000 and 266,000 jobs in
March and April, respectively. Improvement in the
items of accommodation and food services, arts,
entertainment and recreation, education and public
administration stood out. Despite this recovery,
employment figures were still 8.2 million below prepandemic levels. The unemployment rate declined
from 6.2% in February to 6.1% in April. Initial
unemployment insurance claims continued to
moderate, reaching 498,000 new claims during the
week ending on May 1, the lowest level since the
beginning of the pandemic.

2 In seasonally adjusted terms, euro area GDP registered a quarter-onquarter annualized variation of -2.7% during the fourth quarter of 2020
and of -2.5% during the first quarter of 2021.


In the euro area, after having contracted 0.7% at a
seasonally adjusted quarterly rate during the fourth
quarter of 2020, GDP decreased 0.6% during the
first quarter of this year.[2] This reflected the fall
registered in most of the region's main economies,
as a result of the impact of new cases of infections
and the reimposition of social distancing measures
in several countries on consumption and investment,
as well as the high uncertainty associated with
delays in the vaccination process. As for the labor
market, the unemployment rate decreased from
8.2% in February to 8.1% in March. Timely
indicators, such as consumer and business
confidence indicators and Purchasing Managers'
Indices, suggest that activity may reactivate during
the second quarter of the year in view of
expectations of an acceleration in the vaccination
process and the use, in some countries, of resources
from the European Union's pandemic recovery fund.

In the United Kingdom, after having grown at a
seasonally adjusted quarterly rate of 1.3% during the
last quarter of 2020, economic activity contracted
1.5% during the first quarter of 2021.[3] This
deterioration reflected the implementation of

measures to contain the resurgence of infections,
which mainly affected services, such as education,
retail sales, food and accommodation. In this
environment, the unemployment rate declined from
5.0% in January to 4.9% in February. Purchasing
Managers' Indices for both the manufacturing and
services sectors suggest that this economy began to
recover by the end of the first quarter, in line with the
easing of containment measures, the advances in
the vaccination process, and a decline in the number
of COVID-19 cases.

In Japan, available indicators suggest that economic
activity weakened during the first quarter of this year,
after having expanded at a seasonally adjusted
quarterly rate of 2.8% during the fourth quarter of
2020.4 This reflected a deterioration in services
consumption due to the COVID-19 state of
emergency announced during the first quarter of
2021, although consumption of durable goods
maintained its dynamism. Industrial activity

continued to be supported by the recovery of
external demand, which has favored the sound
performance of exports. As for the labor market, the
unemployment rate decreased from 2.9% in
February to 2.6% in March. Looking ahead, although

3 In seasonally adjusted terms, UK GDP contracted at a quarter-onquarter annualized rate of 5.9% during the first quarter of 2021, after
having grown 5.2% during the fourth quarter of 2020.
4 In seasonally adjusted terms, Japan GDP grew at a quarter-on-quarter
annualized rate of 11.7% during the fourth quarter of 2020.

12

|Chart 2 nited States: Real GDP and its Components uarterly percentage change and contributions in percentage points, s. a.|Col2|Col3|Col4|Col5|Col6|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|Private consumption expenditures Residential investment Change in private inventories Net exports Non-residential investment Government consumption expenditures Total||||||
|0 I II III IV 2016|I II III IV 2017|I II III IV 2018|I II III IV 2019|I II III IV 2020|I 2021|


-----

leading indicators point to a recovery, the extension
of the state of emergency in some regions of Japan
due to the increase in the number of COVID-19
cases may continue to affect economic activity.

In the main emerging economies, available

indicators suggest a slowdown and, in some cases,
possibly a contraction during the first quarter of the
year. This reflects relatively slower advances in the
vaccination process and smaller stimulus programs.
In Asian emerging countries, timely information
indicates that economic activity continued to grow at
the beginning of 2021, albeit at a more moderate
pace than in the fourth quarter of 2020. In particular,
China's quarterly GDP growth moderated, by
decreasing from 3.2% during the fourth quarter of
2020 to 0.6% during the first quarter 2021. This
mainly reflected the tighter restrictions to mobility
across regions and the partial withdrawal of certain
economic stimulus measures. In Latin America and
Emerging Europe, available indicators suggest a
contraction of economic activity in several

economies at the beginning of the year, as a result
of the significant upsurge of COVID-19 cases,
especially in Peru, Brazil, Hungary and the Czech
Republic, while the economies of Ecuador, Israel
and Russia have continued to recover at a moderate
pace.

International commodity prices continued to increase
since Mexico’s previous monetary policy decision,
although with episodes of volatility. In particular, oil
prices were driven by several factors, such as a
renewed optimism in global economic recovery and
the gradual reopening of certain economies. This
partly offset the downward pressures associated
with the announcement by OPEC and other
producers in early April of a gradual increase in their
production and the latent risks for oil demand due to
the resurgence of the COVID-19 pandemic in India.
More recently, during the first weeks of May, oil
prices were affected by temporary disruptions in the
fuel transportation system in the East Coast of the
United States. Industrial metal prices rose,

especially iron prices, as a result of a greater
demand due to the recovery of global industrial
activity and the optimism generated by the eventual
approval of new fiscal stimulus packages in the
United States and disruptions in global supply
chains. Lastly, grain prices resumed their upward
trend due to an increase in global demand and
adverse weather conditions that affected crops,
especially in the United States and South America.


**A.1.2. Monetary policy and international financial**
**markets**

World inflation increased, reflecting recent pressures
on commodity prices, mainly energy-related, base
effects and some cost-related pressures. In most of
the main advanced economies, headline and core
inflation remain at low levels, although recently in the
United States and Canada headline inflation was
above their central banks’ targets (Chart 3). Inflation
expectations implied by financial instruments

somewhat stabilized in April, after having registered
an upward adjustment during the first quarter of the
year. However, by mid-May, inflation expectations
for the United States rose once more due to a higherthan-expected increase of inflation in that country in
April.

In the main emerging economies, most countries
registered inflationary pressures due to higher
commodity prices, arithmetic effects, supply shocks,
and the effects of the depreciation of their currencies.
However, in some economies, such as Peru and
India, headline inflation decreased, mainly due to a
slowdown in their food price inflation.

**Chart 3**

**Selected Advanced Economies: Headline**

**Inflation**

Annual percentage change

3.5

United States 1/

3.0 Euro area 2/

Japan

2.5 Canada

United Kingdom

2.0

1.5

1.0

0.5

0.0

-0.5

-1.0 March

April

-1.5

2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021

1/ Refers to the personal consumption expenditures deflator.
2/ April figure is a preliminary estimate.
Source: Bureau of Labor Statistics, Eurostat, Bank of Japan, Statistics
Canada, Office of National Statistics.

The central banks of the major advanced economies
maintained their reference rates unchanged at levels
around zero. They also continued to use their
balance sheets, adjusting the pace of asset
purchases in some cases, to preserve favorable
financing conditions and, thus, support the provision
of credit, boost economic activity, and seek the
convergence of inflation to their respective long-term
targets. Central banks also reiterated that they will

13


-----

maintain accommodative monetary policy stances
until inflation reaches their respective targets in a
sustained manner. In this context, expectations
drawn from market instruments continue to

anticipate that these central banks will maintain
highly accommodative monetary policy stances,
although for a longer-term horizon they incorporate
expectations of a moderate increase in interest rates
by some central banks (Chart 4).

**Chart 4**

**Reference Rates and Implied Trajectories in**

**OIS Curves[1/]**

Percent


rate unchanged during 2021 and 2022, although
financial instruments incorporate expectations of
a moderate increase for longer horizons.

ii) In its April meeting, the European Central Bank

maintained its refinancing rate, key deposit facility
rate and key lending facility rate at 0.0, -0.5 and
-0.25%, respectively. It reiterated that these
interest rates are expected to remain at or below
their current levels until inflation forecasts
converge robustly to a level sufficiently close but
below the 2% inflation target, and until this
convergence is consistently reflected in core
inflation dynamics. It also left its asset purchase
programs unchanged and noted that, in line with
the adjustment made in the previous meeting,
purchases under the Pandemic Emergency
Purchase Program (PEPP) are expected to
continue at a significantly higher pace than in the
first months of the year.


3.0%

2.5%


**― US Federal Reserve 2/**
**― Bank of England**
**― Bank of Japan**
**― Bank of Canada**


2.0%

1.5%


1.0%

0.5%


0.0%

-0.5%

|Col1|Col2|Col3|Col4|Col5|Col6|Col7|Col8|Col9|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
||||||||||
||||||||||
||||||||||
||||||||||
||||||||||
||||||||||
||||||||||
||||||||||
||||||||||
||||||||||


End of
2022


End of
2020


End of
2021


-1.0% 2020

2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023


End of
2023


1/ OIS: Fixed floating interest rate swap where the fixed interest rate is
associated to the effective overnight reference rate.
2/ For the observed reference rate of the U.S. the average interest rate of
the target range of the federal funds rate (0.0% - 0.25%) is used.
Source: Banco de México with data from Bloomberg.

Among the recent monetary policy decisions, the
following stand out:

i) In its April meeting, the Federal Reserve (Fed) left

its target range for the federal funds rate
unchanged at 0-0.25% and reiterated that it
would be appropriate to maintain it until labor
market conditions have reached levels consistent
with its maximum employment estimate and
inflation has increased to 2% and is on track to
moderately exceed this target for some time. It
also stated that it will maintain the current pace of
its asset purchase program until substantial
progress has been made towards its maximum
employment and price stability goals. In this
regard, the Chairman of the Fed’s Board of
Governors pointed out that the economy is still
very far from meeting these goals and that
achieving substantial improvements will probably
take some time. In this context, both the
consensus of private forecasters and the implied
trajectory of federal funds rate futures suggest
that said central bank will maintain its reference


iii) In its April meeting, the Bank of Japan left its

short-term policy rate unchanged at -0.1% and its
long-term interest rate (indexed to its 10-year
bond) at around 0%, reiterating that it will
continue with its asset purchase program. It also
mentioned that it will continue to support the
financing of firms and the stability in financial
markets through the special program to support
financing in response to COVID-19, an ample
provision of liquidity, both in domestic and foreign
currency, and purchases of Exchange-traded
Funds (ETFs) and Japan Real Estate Investment
Trusts (J-REITs). This central bank ratified that it
will not hesitate to adopt additional easing
measures if necessary and that it expects interest
rates to remain at or below their current levels.
.

iv) In its May meeting, the Bank of England kept its

reference rate unchanged at 0.10%, the stock of
sterling non-financial investment-grade corporate
bond purchases at £20 billion, and the target for
its asset purchase at £875 billion. In the minutes
of said meeting it was pointed out that, as
expected since the announcement of its current
program of government bond purchases in
November 2020, the pace of these purchases will
slow down from £4.4 billion to £3.4 billion per
week. In this regard, it specified that this
operational decision should not be interpreted as
an adjustment to the monetary policy stance. The
Bank of England reiterated that it does not intend
to tighten its monetary policy stance, at least until
there is clear evidence that significant progress is
made in eliminating excess slack in productive

14


-----

capacity and in reaching its 2% inflation target in
a sustained manner.

Since Banco de México’s previous monetary policy
decision, the central banks of the main emerging
economies left their reference rates unchanged,
except for Russia and Brazil, which raised it. They
also maintained their measures to provide liquidity
and foster the well-functioning of financial markets.

In the global environment described above and
following Mexico’s previous monetary policy

decision, international financial markets exhibited a
more stable behavior (Chart 5 and Chart 6).
Moderate gains were registered in most of the main
stock indices, while in foreign exchange markets the
US dollar weakened slightly against most currencies
of both advanced and emerging economies,
although some currencies, such as those of
Argentina, Colombia and Turkey, depreciated. Longterm government bond interest rates fluctuated
within a narrow range during the period. Most
emerging economies registered net capital inflows,
albeit at a more moderate rate than at the beginning
of this year.

Considering the features of the health and economic
crises, along with the adjustments in the monetary
policy framework of some of the main central banks
in advanced economies, there is still a high level of
uncertainty regarding the evolution of international
financial markets during the recovery phase. In this
regard, there are several risks to international
financial market stability. These include the
possibility that the recovery of some advanced
economies with large fiscal stimuli or greater
disruptions of supply chains give way to a more
sustained and higher-than-anticipated increase in
inflation in some advanced economies, leading to
abrupt increases in interest rates and to an early
withdrawal of monetary stimuli that may tighten
global financial conditions. There are also concerns
regarding possible distortions in some financial
assets’ valuations, which could lead to a sudden
adjustment in their prices. The above factors may
intensify problems of business insolvency and
bankruptcies in the sectors most affected by the
pandemic as well as the vulnerabilities associated
with the high levels of public and private debt
accumulated in recent years. Emerging economies
will also face considerable challenges due to the
greater absorption of financial resources by the
public sectors of countries with large fiscal stimulus
programs and the greater participation of China in
emerging economies fixed-income assets as a result
of its inclusion in the main global investment indices.


Note: Interest rates correspond to swap rates at the specified terms, except
for Hungary, where government securities with 3-year (instead of 2-year)
maturities where used as a reference. For Colombia and the Philippines, a
2-year swap rate is used.
Source: Bloomberg.

15


**Chart 5**

**Change in Selected Financial Indicators from**

**March 19, 2021 to May 7, 2021**

Percent, basis points Percentage, basis points


20%

15%


100

75


10%

5%


50

25


0%

-5%


United Japan 0
States United

SpainFrance CanadaKingdom
United United
Kingdom States -25


1/ The MSCI Emerging Markets Index consists of 24 countries. 2/ DXY: a
weighted average estimated by the Intercontinental Exchange (ICE) of the
nominal exchange rate of the main six currencies operated globally with the
following weights: EUR 57.6%, JPY: 13.6%, GBP: 11.9%, CAD: 9.1%, SEK:
4.2%, and CHF: 3.6%.3/ J.P. Morgan index is constructed with the weighted
average by the nominal exchange rate of emerging economies’ currencies
with the following weights: TRY: 8.3%, RUB: 8.3%, HUF: 8.3%, ZAR: 8.3%,
BRL: 11.1%, MXN: 11.1%, CLP: 11.1%, CNH: 11.1%, INR: 11.1% and
SGD: 11.1%.
Source: Bloomberg and ICE.

**Chart 6**

**Selected Emerging Economies: Financial**

**Assets Performance from March 19 to**

**May 10, 2021**

Percent, basis points


-----

**A.2. Current situation of the Mexican economy**

**A.2.1. Mexican markets**

Since Banco de México’s previous monetary policy
decision to date, the prices of financial assets in
Mexico exhibited a mixed behavior (Chart 7). This
occurred in an environment characterized by a
stabilization of interest rates in the United States and
other advanced economies, as well as a slight
weakening of the US dollar.

The Mexican peso fluctuated between 19.82 and
20.95 pesos per dollar, ending the period with an
appreciation of 2.0% (Chart 8). This occurred in a
context in which both spot- and forward-trading
conditions improved.

**Chart 7**

**Mexican Markets’ Performance**

Percent, MXN/USD and index


to 27 basis points along the yield curve. The yield
curve of real rate instruments also followed a
negative dynamic, registering increases of up to 30
basis points in the long-term part. In this context,
breakeven inflation and inflation risk premia implicit
in spreads between nominal and real interest rates
of market instruments ended the period with declines
since the previous monetary policy decision (Chart
10). These adjustments occurred in an environment
where trading conditions continued to deteriorate
during the reference period.

**Chart 9**

**Nominal Yield Curve of Government Securities**

Percent, basis points


8.0

7.0


52,000

50,000

48,000

46,000

44,000

42,000

40,000

38,000

36,000

34,000

32,000


6.0

5.0


Trading range over the period


4.0


26.0

25.0

24.0

23.0

22.0

21.0

20.0

19.0

18.0


M Bond


4.0

3.5

3.0

2.5

2.0

1.5

1.0

0.5

0.0

Inflation indexed bonds


Range in year Range since last monetary policy decision 19-Mar-21 07-May-21


Source: PIP.

**Chart 10**

**Breakeven Inflation and Inflation Risk Implicit in**

**Government Securities’ Interest Rate Curves**

Basis pointsBasis points


Range in year Range since last monetary policy decision 19-Mar-21 07-May-21


Source: Prepared by Banco de México.

**Chart 8**

**Mexican Peso Exchange Rate**

**with Moving Averages**

MXN/USD


500


26.00
25.50
25.00
24.50
24.00
23.50
23.00
22.50
22.00
21.50
21.00
20.50
20.00
19.50
19.00
18.50
18.00
17.50
17.00


2020 2021

Source: Prepared by Banco de México.

Interest rates of government securities exhibited
negative adjustments (Chart 9), with increases of up


Source: PIP.

As for expectations regarding the trajectory of the
monetary policy rate, information implied by the
Interbank Equilibrium Interest Rate (TIIE, for its
Spanish acronym) swaps assigns an 80% probability
to the reference rate remaining unchanged for the

16


-----

monetary decision of May (Chart 11). In a related
manner, the median of the consensus of forecasters
surveyed by Citibanamex anticipates the reference
interest rate to be at 4.00% in the next monetary
policy decision. For the end of 2021, market
variables anticipate a level of 4.27% for the target
rate, while the median of the aforementioned survey
among forecasters lies at 4.00%.

**Chart 11**


rest of exports during the quarter, although the latter
rebounded in March (Chart 13).[5] By destination,
exports to the United States contracted slightly
during the first quarter, while those to the rest of the
world exhibited a lack of dynamism.

**Chart 12**

**Gross Domestic Product**

Quarterly percentage change, s. a.


16


2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021

s. a. / Seasonally adjusted figures.
1/ Figure of Q1 2021 refers to the timely estimate of quarterly GDP
published by INEGI.
Source: Mexico’s System of National Accounts (SCNM, for its Spanish
acronym), INEGI.


Source: Prepared by Banco de México with Bloomberg data.

**A.2.2. Economic activity in Mexico**

According to Mexico’s GDP flash estimate published
by INEGI, during the first quarter of 2021 overall
economic activity continued to recover, albeit at a
slower pace (Chart 12). This was the result of various
events that occurred during the first two months of
the year due to the intensification of the pandemic
since the end of last year and new restrictions
implemented in certain states to contain it, in addition
to some temporary disruptions in supply chains.
Available information suggests that, although input
shortages persisted in some industries in March, the
reduction in the number of infections together with
advances in the vaccination process has allowed for
a gradual loosening of pandemic restrictions and for
a more noticeable reactivation of economic activity
as of that month.

As for external demand, during the first quarter of
2021 manufacturing exports decreased with respect
to the previous quarter as a result of a reduction in
automotive shipments and a certain slowdown in the

5 Refers to the value of merchandise exports in current US dollars. This
value differs from that reported for goods exports by Mexico’s System of


National Accounts (SCNM, for its acronym in Spanish), given that the latter
represents the added value measured in constant pesos.

17


0

J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J M

2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021

s. a. / Seasonally adjusted series and trend series based on data in nominal
US dollars. The former is represented by a solid line and the latter by a
dotted line.
Source: Prepared by Banco de México with data from the Tax
Administration Service (SAT, for its Spanish acronym), the Ministry of the
Economy (SE, for its Spanish acronym), Banco de México, the National
Institute of Statistics and Geography (INEGI, for its Spanish acronym).
Mexico’s Merchandise Trade Balance, and the National System of
Statistical and Geographical Information (SNIEG, for its Spanish acronym),
Information of national interest.

According to its monthly indicator, the pace of
recovery of private consumption slowed during the
January-February period, remaining below February
2020 levels. As for its components, consumption of


-----

both national and imported goods performed more
favorably, while that of services exhibited a lack of
dynamism, remaining at low levels. Timely indicators
suggest that private consumption continued to
recover by the end of the first quarter and the
beginning of the second quarter of the year. In
particular, between February and April sales levels
by the National Association of Self-Service and
Department Stores (ANTAD, for its Spanish
acronym) reversed the losses experienced in
December and January, while in February and
March light vehicle sales continued to recover,
although in April they decreased. During the first two
months of 2021, gross fixed investment reversed the
decline observed at the end of the previous year,
although it still remains below pre-pandemic levels.
Within this indicator, both investment in construction
and spending on machinery and equipment
continued to gradually recover.

As for production, in January and February, tertiary
activities decreased, while the weakness of the
sector and the heterogeneity across its subsectors
persisted (Chart 14). Transportation services and
mass media information, financial and real estate
services, commerce and temporary accommodation
and food and beverage preparation services
contributed negatively to the growth of this sector. In
contrast, professional, corporate and business
support services, government activities, and

educational and health services made positive
contributions. Nevertheless, according to information
derived from the GDP flash estimate, services
overall seem to have resumed a greater pace of
recovery in March. Meanwhile, industrial activity
showed an increase during the first quarter of the
year, thus continuing its recovery. In March,
manufacturing activity reversed the contractions
observed during the first two months of 2021 due to
the effects of various input shortages, particularly in
the automotive sector. At the same time,

construction halted its recovery at the margin, while
mining reversed the rebound recorded in February
and still remained weak (Chart 15).


s. a. / Seasonally adjusted and trend series. The former is represented by
a solid line and the latter by a dotted line.
1/ Figures in parenthesis correspond to their share in the total in 2013.
Source: Mexico’s System of National Accounts (SCNM, for its Spanish
acronym), INEGI.

As to the economy’s cyclical position, slack
conditions remained considerably wide in January
and February, even exhibiting a slight loosening
when compared to the end of last year (Chart 16).
Available information suggests that by the end of the
first quarter, this indicator resumed a trend of gradual
reduction. Various labor market indicators continued
to improve moderately in March. In particular,
although both national and urban unemployment
rates remained at relatively high levels (Chart 17),
labor participation and the employed population
continued to expand gradually, in a context in which
the underemployment rate decreased as compared
to the previous month. Similarly, in March and April
the creation of IMSS-insured jobs continued to show
a moderate recovery, although in April it was still

18


**Chart 14**

**Global Indicator of Economic Activity**

Indexes 2013 = 100, s. a.


120

115

110

105

100

95

90

Total

85 Secondary activities

80 Tertiary activities

Primary activities

75

70

65 January

February

60

J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J F

2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021


140

130

120

110

100

90

80

70

60

50

40

30

20


s. a. / Seasonally adjusted and trend series. The former is represented by
a solid line and the latter by a dotted line.
Source: Mexico’s System of National Accounts (SCNM, for its Spanish
acronym), INEGI.

**Chart 15**

**Industrial Activity [1/]**

Indexes 2013 = 100, s. a.

130

120

110

100

90

80 Total

Mining (22.3%)

70 Manufacturing (49.7%)

Construction (23.3%)

60

Utilities (4.7%)

March

50

J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J M

2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021


-----

close to 540 thousand jobs below its pre-pandemic
levels. Finally, in February, unit labor cost in the
manufacturing sector increased, largely reflecting
the decline in labor productivity associated with the
contraction of the transportation equipment

subsector due to the shortage of various inputs
(Chart 18).

**Chart 16**

**Output Gap Estimates [1/]**

**Excluding Oil Industry [4/ ]**

Potential output percentages, s. a.

8

4

0

-4

-8

-12

-16

-20 Global Economic Activity Indicator 2/

Gross Domestic Product 2/

-24 95% confidence interval 3/

Q-I

March

-28

J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M

2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021

s. a. / Calculations based on seasonally adjusted figures.
1/ Output gap estimated with a tail-corrected Hodrick-Prescott filter; see
Banco de México (2009), “Inflation Report, April-June 2009”, p.74.
2/ GDP timely figures as of Q1 2021, and IGAE figures as of March 2021,
in line with said timely figure.
3/ Output gap confidence interval calculated with a method of unobserved
components.
4/ Excludes both oil and gas extraction, support services for mining, and
petroleum and coal products’ manufacturing.
Source: Prepared by Banco de México with INEGI data.

**Chart 17**

**National and Urban Unemployment Rates**

Percent, s. a.

8.5

National unemployment rate

8.0

7.5 Urban unemployment rate

7.0

6.5

6.0

5.5

5.0

4.5

4.0

3.5

3.0

March

2.5

J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M

2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021


**Chart 18**

**Productivity and Unit Labor Costs in the**

**Manufacturing Sector [1/]**

Indexes 2013 = 100, s. a.


170

Unit labor costs

160

Productivity

150

140

130

120

110

100

90

February

80

J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J F

2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021


s. a. / Seasonally adjusted series and trend series. The former is former is
represented by a solid line and the latter by a dotted line.
Source: Prepared by Banco de México with data from ENOE, ETOE (from
April to June 2020), and ENOE new edition (ENOE[N]) from July to date.


s. a. / Seasonally adjusted and trend series. The former is represented by
a solid line and the latter by a dotted line.
1/ Productivity based on hours worked.
Source: Prepared by Banco de México with seasonally adjusted data of the
Montly Manufacturing Industry Survey and industrial activity indicators of
Mexico’s System of National Accounts (Sistema de Cuentas Nacionales de
_México, SCNM), INEGI._

In March 2021, domestic financing to firms registered
a contraction at an annual rate for the fourth
consecutive quarter. This has been partly the result
of a reduction in bank lending to both smaller firms
–a segment that has decreased in annual terms
since the first quarter of 2019– and large firms –a
segment that continues to show a lower demand for
bank loans compared to the levels observed at the
beginning of the pandemic–. Lending conditions for
firms in general remain tight as compared to the
beginning of the pandemic. On the other hand, net
corporate debt issuance by issuing firms has been
moderately negative since January of this year. As
for credit to households, in line with its high level of
demand, the housing portfolio continued to exhibit
positive annual variations, although its growth
moderated during the first quarter of 2021. At the
same time, the performing portfolio of bank credit for
consumption continued to contract in all segments,
in a context where lending conditions for households
remained tight.

Interest rates of bank credit to firms have generally
followed the dynamics of the bank funding rate.
Intermediation margins remained above pre
pandemic levels, although exhibiting reductions in
the last two quarters. In turn, during the first quarter
of 2021, housing credit interest rates halted the
downward trajectory observed in 2020, although
they remained at levels around their historical lows.
Meanwhile, credit card interest rates maintained the
downward trend shown since October of last year.
Intermediation margins, however, have increased

19


-----

given the larger reductions to the reference rate.
Regarding portfolio quality, in March corporate loan
delinquency rates remained relatively stable and at
low levels, while those of mortgage loans continued
to increase, although also remaining at low levels.
Lastly, consumer loan delinquency rates continued
at high levels and did not register significant changes
for the second consecutive month, after having
increased in previous months.

**A.2.3. Development of inflation and inflation**
**outlook**

Annual headline inflation increased from 4.67 to
6.08% between March and April 2021 (Chart 19 and
Table 1). This result is mainly explained by the
performance of the non-core component, which
contributed with 136 basis points to this increase,
while the core component did so with 5 basis points.
The increase in non-core inflation reflected the
higher incidence of gasoline inflation, due, in turn, to
the arithmetic effect derived from the significant price
reductions registered in April 2020 in the context of
the onset of the pandemic.

**Chart 19**

**Consumer Price Index**

Annual percentage change

13

12 CPI

11 Core

10

Non-core

9

8

7

6

5

4

3

2

1

0

-1

-2

-3 April

J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J

2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021

Source: Banco de México and INEGI.

Annual core inflation was 4.12 and 4.13% in March
and April 2021, respectively. Within it, annual
merchandise inflation decreased from 5.79 to 5.59%
(Chart 20), as a result of the reduction from 6.48 to
5.88% of food merchandise, which contrasted with
the increase from 5.04 to 5.28% of non-food
merchandise. The latter due to cost-related
pressures, such as increases in commodity prices or
in inputs in general, the effects on production chains,
and the evolution of the exchange rate (Chart 21).
During the referred months, annual services inflation
rose from 2.30 to 2.53%, a behavior associated with
the higher inflation of services other than education
and housing, which increased from 3.02 to 3.55%.


Within this category, the higher annual price
variations in services related to food, tourism and
entertainment stood out, possibly in the context of
the reopening of these activities.

**Chart 20**

**Merchandise and Services Core Price Sub-index**

Annual percentage change

7

Merchandise

6 Services

5

4

3

2

1

April

0

J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J

2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021

Source: Banco de México and INEGI.

**Chart 21**

**Merchandise Core Price Sub-index**

Annual percentage change

8

7

6

5

4

3

2

1

Food, beverages and tobacco Non-food merchandise April

0

J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J

2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021


Source: Banco de México and INEGI.

Between March and April 2021, annual non-core
inflation rose from 6.31 to 12.34% (Chart 22 and
Table 1). This result was mostly associated with the
increase from 14.55 to 28.02% in annual energy
inflation. This increase mainly reflected the higher
annual variation in gasoline prices, which escalated
from 11.13 to 34.94% in the aforementioned period.
This rise is mainly explained by an arithmetic effect
of a low base of comparison, since in April 2021 the
significant reductions in gasoline prices that took
place in April of the previous year in the context of
the beginning of the COVID-19 health crisis did not
happen again. Annual inflation of livestock and
agricultural products, on the other hand, also
increased between March and April 2021, from 0.64
to 4.08%, as a result of higher annual variations in

20

|Chart 19 Consumer Price Index Annual percentage change|Col2|Col3|
|---|---|---|
|CPI Core|||
|Non-core|||
||||


-----

the prices of fruits and vegetables, which registered
rates of -8.82 and -0.83%, while those of livestock
products fell from 9.10 to 8.20%.

**Chart 22**

**Non-core Price Sub-index**

Annual percentage change

25

20

15

10

5

0

Non-core

-5 Agricultural and livestock products

Energy and government-authorized prices

-10

-15 April

J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J

2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021


Source: Banco de México and INEGI.

As for inflation expectations drawn from Banco de
México’s Survey of Private Sector Forecasters,
between February and April, the median for headline
inflation for the end of 2021 increased from 3.90 to


4.56%, while that for core inflation rose from 3.58 to
3.74%. In turn, those for the end of 2022 were
revised from 3.51 to 3.60% for headline inflation and
from 3.50 to 3.51% for core inflation. On the other
hand, the medians for headline and core inflation
expectations for the medium and long terms
remained around 3.50%. Finally, breakeven inflation
and inflation risk decreased since the last monetary
policy decision.

The revised forecasts for headline and core inflation
display short-term levels above those published in
the last Quarterly Report. Nevertheless, both are still
expected to converge to the 3% target starting in the
second quarter of 2022. These forecasts are subject
to risks. On the upside: i) external inflationary
pressures; ii) cost-related pressures or a reallocation
of spending; iii) persistence of core inflation; and iv)
exchange rate depreciation. On the downside: i)
effects stemming from the negative output gap; ii)
greater social distancing measures; and iii) foreign
exchange appreciation. The balance of risks that
might affect the expected trajectory for inflation
within the forecast horizon is biased to the upside.


**Table 1**

**Consumer Price Index and Components**

Annual percentage change

**Item** **February 2021** **March 2021** **April 2021**

**CPI** **3.76** **4.67** **6.08**

**SubyacenteCore** **3.87** **4.12** **4.13**

**Merchandise** **5.54** **5.79** **5.59**

Food, beverages and tobacco 6.34 6.48 5.88

Non-food merchandise 4.66 5.04 5.28

**Services** **2.06** **2.30** **2.53**

Housing 1.85 1.79 1.73

Education (tuitions) 1.16 1.12 1.12

Other services 2.44 3.02 3.55

**No SubyacenteNon-core** **3.43** **6.31** **12.34**

**Agricultural and livestock products** **0.66** **0.64** **4.08**

Fruits and vegetablesFruits abd vegetables -8.57 -8.82 -0.83

Livestock productsLivestock 9.01 9.10 8.20

**Energy and government-authorized prices Energéticos y Tarifas Aut. por Gobierno** **5.50** **10.73** **19.30**

Energy productsEnergy 6.83 14.55 28.02

Government-authorized pricesTarifas Autorizadas por Gobierno 2.38 2.16 2.21

Source: INEGI.

21


-----

-----

