-----

-----

**FOREWARNING**
This document is provided for the reader’s convenience
only. The translation from the official Spanish version was
made by Banco de México’s staff. Discrepancies may arise
between the original document in Spanish and its English
translation. For this reason, the original Spanish version is
the only official document.


**1. PLACE, DATE, AND PARTICIPANTS**

**1.1. Place: Meeting held by virtual means.**

**1.2. Date of Governing Board meeting: November**
10, 2021.

**1.3. Participants:**

Alejandro Díaz de León, Governor.
Galia Borja, Deputy Governor.
Irene Espinosa, Deputy Governor.
Gerardo Esquivel, Deputy Governor.
Jonathan Heath, Deputy Governor.
Rogelio Eduardo Ramírez, Secretary of Finance and
Public Credit.
Gabriel Yorio, Undersecretary of Finance and Public
Credit.
Elías Villanueva, Secretary of the Governing Board.

Prior to this meeting, preliminary work by Banco de
México’s staff analyzing the economic and financial
environment as well as the developments in inflation
and the determinants and outlook for inflation, was
conducted and presented to the Governing Board
(see Annex).

**2. ANALYSIS AND RATIONALE BEHIND THE**
**GOVERNING BOARD’S VOTING**

**_International environment_**

**The majority mentioned that global economic**
**activity continued to recover during the third**
**quarter,** **although** **at** **a** **slower** **pace** **and**

**heterogeneously across countries, associated**
**with the evolution of the pandemic and with**
**spending programs. Some** members pointed out
that the recent increase in the number of infections
negatively affected economic activity in several
economies. In this regard, **one member noted the**
lower job creation. Another member pointed out the
slower recovery of the services sector. He/she
delved into the shortage of inputs slowing down
production in certain sectors, which is uncommon
during an early upward stage of the economic cycle.
He/she added that this can be observed in the longer


delivery times of manufacturing products and in the
increase in ocean freight costs.

**Most** **members** **highlighted** **the** **downward**

**revision in global growth forecasts. Some**
members underlined the heterogeneity of those
revisions across regions and countries. They noted
the upward adjustments for 2021 for the euro area
and Latin America, and the downward adjustments
for the United States, Japan, the United Kingdom and
some emerging economies in Asia. **One member**
pointed out that, according to the International
Monetary Fund, advanced economies are expected
to recover the growth trajectory exhibited prior to the
pandemic, while emerging economies, with the
exception of China, are foreseen to continue growing
below pre-pandemic forecasts, even until 2024.
**Some members pointed out that there is concern**
about the economic recovery. **One member**
considered that, given the persistence of negative
effects, there are still doubts about the velocity of the
recovery. He/she added that the heterogeneity
across the growth outlooks is a cause for concern.
**Another member emphasized that the adjustment in**
the outlook indicates fragility in the recovery and
suggests risks to the economic activity.

**Among global risks, most members mentioned**
**those associated with the pandemic, inflationary**
**pressures, and adjustments in monetary and**
**financial conditions. Some** members pointed out
the imbalances between supply and demand, as a
result of the reopening of economies, economic
stimuli programs, the change in consumption
patterns, and the disruption in global supply chains.
**One member noted that the atypical nature of the**
recovery is causing frictions, which have detonated
risks to growth and inflation.

**Another** member highlighted the role of the
pandemic in inflationary pressures, which can be
divided in two stages. First: i) unprecedented shocks
with forecast errors in economic activity and inflation;
ii) the abrupt shutdown of activities prompted
businesses to lower their costs, inventories,
investment and their workforce; iii) social impact and
political tensions, which contributed to the

implementation of large spending stimuli in advanced
economies; iv) a reallocation of household

expenditure from services towards merchandise; and
v) a profound impact in the labor market. Second, i)
a faster recovery and a considerable increase in
fiscal support programs in the United States,
generating bottlenecks and pressures on world trade
and on durable goods’ prices; ii) the recovery of the
services’ sector as a result of vaccine availability; iii)

1


-----

limitations in production; and iv) a high leverage after
a long period of historically low interest rates, which,
in addition to fiscal expansion, poses challenges to
financial stability. As to the lack of flexibility in
production, he/she pointed out that the impact on
supply chains, the lack of investment in

hydrocarbons due to the energy transition, and the
end of the negative effect on manufacturing prices
that had been observed with China’s increasing
participation in world trade. As to the labor market,
he/she mentioned that the pandemic accelerated the
outflow of certain workers from the labor force and
generated lower participation in others. Similarly, it
produced a change in relative wages as a result of
risks of contagion. He/she expressed that,

considering all of the above, world inflation dynamics
responds both to the direct impact on production and
to pressures due to the reallocation of spending and
to spending programs.

**Most members mentioned that world inflation**
**continued to be pressured by bottlenecks in**
**production, the reallocation of spending towards**
**merchandise, the rise in food and energy prices,**
**the reopening of certain services, and by**
**imbalances between supply and demand. One**
member added the impact of stimulus spending, the
increase in ocean freight costs, and pressures on
consumer durables. He/she emphasized the high
annual change of the US producer price index, which
registered 8.6% in September and October, and the
pressures on consumer durables, for which inflation
reached 6.96% in August 2021, as compared
to -1.54% in February 2020. He/she also highlighted
that said economy stands out for having had the
largest spending stimulus programs implemented
and for registering the highest inflation pressures in
a broad range of products, as well as the highest
levels of CPI inflation since 1990 (6.2%). He/she
pointed out that these have contributed to raise
inflation expectations of business and consumers, as
well as expectations implicit in fixed-income markets.
**Another member stated that spot and future prices**
of different commodities continued increasing

significantly. **One member pointed out that the**
increase in international commodity prices is also
due to climate-related factors. He/she added that the
origin of all these factors is directly linked to the
pandemic, and thus their effects will not last forever.
**Another member noted that in most economies, with**
a few exceptions, such as Japan, inflation is above
the respective central bank targets.

**Most members mentioned that the adverse**
**effects of global inflationary pressures are**
**expected to be mainly transitory. One member**


added that there is no consensus on this matter.
**Some members pointed out that pressures are**
anticipated to dissipate by the end of next year,
depending on progress towards containing the
pandemic. One member noted that some pressures,
such as those on international prices of food and
industrial inputs, have already started to dissipate.
**The majority highlighted that the horizon in**
**which the pressures could affect inflation is**
**uncertain and the risk of them affecting the price**
**formation process. One** member stated that it
would be reflected in higher inflation expectations
and in an earlier-than-anticipated or a faster
withdrawal of monetary stimuli. He/she added that
information from surveys in advanced economies
suggests an increase in short-term expectations,
while expectations drawn from longer-term financial
instruments show moderate increases. **Another**
member highlighted the magnitude of inflationary
pressures and the broad range of products being
affected. He/she added that the deterioration in the
inflation outlook and the challenge it implies have
been acknowledged by all central banks and that
most of them have taken measures to address the
issue.

**Most members pointed out that the central banks**
**in** **the** **main** **advanced** **economies** **have**

**maintained** **accommodative** **policy** **stances.**

**Some** members noted that in these economies
financial markets anticipate increases in interest
rates in 2022. **One member considered that the**
continuing stimulus in a significant number of central
banks implies to some extent the recognition that
increases in interest rates are not useful in solving
supply problems, which are leading to the current
levels inflation, and that they could indeed have a
negative impact on the recovery. **Another member**
noted that some central banks have already started
to reduce their asset-purchase programs. **One**
member mentioned that monetary conditions have
started to become less accommodative. **Another**
member highlighted that, despite the plans to
gradually withdraw stimuli, there is still uncertainty
over the duration of inflation pressures and the
adjustment of markets.

**All members indicated that the Federal Reserve**
**announced the reduction in its asset-purchase**
**program. Some members noted that said institution**
also stated that the conditions to increase the federal
funds rate have not yet been met. **One member**
added that the Federal Reserve has made it clear
that the start of the reduction in its asset purchases
does not imply an imminent increase in rates. He/she
added that this central bank stated that it would

2


-----

remain patient in view of the inflationary pressures,
which it expects to be transitory, and given the
evolution of the economic recovery, which is still
incomplete. The majority pointed out that markets
**anticipate the first interest rate increase in 2022.**
**One member pointed out that markets anticipate the**
first rate increase to take place in the last quarter of
2022. He/she stated that market expectations are
consistent with expectations of the members of the
Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC), thus both
foresee that the monetary stimulus will continue
being significant for a long time. **Another member**
underlined that, although FOMC expectations still
point to an increase in interest rates in 2023, those
drawn from financial instruments indicate that it could
occur in 2022. **Some members pointed out that**
Federal Reserve communications have mitigated the
risk of a monetary policy surprise.

**One member argued that the larger monetary space**
in the United States and in other advanced
economies, where inflation and inflation expectations
had been below their targets for many years, allows
them to be more patient, although they face the risk
of undermining their credibility if it is perceived that
they tolerate high levels of inflation. On the other
hand, he/she mentioned that, in emerging

economies, and in Mexico in particular, price
formation can become rapidly contaminated by the
shocks that have affected inflation. He/she also
pointed out that open emerging economies are highly
exposed to global pressures and that those that are
highly integrated to international financial markets
will be affected to a larger extent by tighter monetary
and financial conditions.

**Most members stated that the central banks of**
**emerging economies continue reducing their**
**monetary stimulus. Some members noted that**
higher increases in reference rates have been
observed in economies with macroeconomic

imbalances. One member mentioned that the central
banks of emerging economies have reacted
heterogeneously, although the majority of them have
maintained accommodative monetary policy stances
and negative ex-ante real rates. He/she mentioned
that although some central banks have reacted to
inflationary pressures with more significant interest
rate increases, he/she clarified that these are
countries that implemented highly expansionary
fiscal policies and which now require more
conservative monetary policies. **Another member**
pointed out that only in those cases where inflation
has taken place along with various macroeconomic
imbalances, and there has been a higher elasticity of
inflation expectations to the shocks from the


pandemic, it has been necessary to remove the
stimuli implemented last year. Additionally, he/she
pointed out that, according to certain estimates, this
has been the case among Latin American

economies, where about one third of the inflation
variance would be explained by idiosyncratic factors,
and an additional one-third, by inflation expectations.

**Some** members mentioned that, since the last
monetary policy meeting, international financial
markets exhibited some volatility. Some pointed out
that interest rates, especially short-term ones,
increased. **One member noted that this reflects to**
some extent the recent inflationary pressures.
He/she considered that foreign exchange and stock
markets registered a mixed behavior and moderate
variations in asset prices. **Some** members

highlighted that markets benefitted from the Federal
Reserve’s announcement. In this regard, **one**
member pointed out that long-term interest rates in
advanced and emerging economies decreased
despite the beginning of the reduction in the Federal
Reserve’s asset-purchase program. He/she

mentioned that short-term interest rates also moved
downwards, although in a differentiated manner,
given the varied expectations of the trajectory of each
economy’s monetary policy. He/she added that,
toward the end of the period, some volatility was
registered after the release of unfavorable inflation
figures in the United States.

**Another** member stated that, in emerging

economies, financial markets exhibited a mixed
performance, with a negative bias due to higher risk
aversion. He/she added that considerable capital
outflows from fixed-income markets were registered,
while capital inflows to equity assets continued. One
member added that, following the Federal Reserve
announcement, most emerging market currencies
appreciated against the US dollar. **Some members**
mentioned that, looking ahead, these economies will
face risks derived from tighter global financial
conditions, a possible reallocation of investment
portfolios, and from idiosyncratic factors.

**_Economic Activity in Mexico_**

**All** **members** **mentioned** **that** **preliminary**

**information indicates that the Mexican economy**
**contracted during the third quarter and that**
**sectors continue evolving heterogeneously.**
**They highlighted that the contraction was due to**
**the increase in the number of infections, to**
**persistent disruptions in supply chains, and to**
**the effect of the new labor outsourcing regulation**
**on services. One member** pointed out that, with
respect to the previous quarter, GDP contracted

3


-----

0.2% during the third quarter, when it was expected
to grow 0.8%. **Another member stated that, even**
without accounting for the effect of the labor
outsourcing reform, the economy is facing a
significant deceleration. Meanwhile, **one member**
stated that the weakness of economic activity shows
the fragility of the recovery, which is still far from
complete.

**On the supply side, all members highlighted the**
**contraction of services during the third quarter,**
**partly reflecting the new regulation on labor**
**outsourcing. Some pointed out that the new**
regulation implied a fall in professional services. One
member added that the latter represent about 9% of
tertiary activities. **On the other hand, most**
**mentioned** **that** **industrial** **production** **has**

**continued to recover, although heterogeneously**
**among its components. They mentioned that**
**non-automotive manufacturing has performed**
**better, while automotive manufacturing has**
**suffered from the shortage of inputs. One**
member pointed out that the technical shutdowns,
due to the lack of inputs, affected negatively the
production and export of light vehicles throughout the
whole year, and recently that of heavy vehicles.
He/she added that, from a longer-term perspective,
industrial production has begun to stabilize at low
levels.

**On the demand side, all members highlighted the**
**weakness of consumption and of automotive**
**exports. Some members noted that, in contrast,**
non-automotive exports continued to recover. **One**
member pointed out that, in September, automotive
exports were 12% below their February 2020 levels,
while non-automotive exports were 12% above.
**Another member highlighted that, in August,**
consumption registered three consecutive month-tomonth contractions. **One member noted that**
consumption of durable and semi-durable goods has
been the most affected. **Another** member

highlighted that leading indicators, such as credit
card spending, retail sales and light vehicle
purchases, show lack of dynamism. He/she added
that, in contrast, ANTAD sales and consumer
confidence increased at the margin. Some members
noted that remittances and the wage bill have
increased. **Regarding** **investment,** **most**

**mentioned that it has recovered slightly since**
**July.** **One member pointed out that this was**
supported by construction. **Another** member

mentioned that investment has remained virtually
stagnant over the past six months and is 15% below
its maximum level reached in 2018.


**Most members acknowledged that while the**
**labor market continues to recover, labor market**
**conditions are still weak.** **One member pointed out**
that formal employment has already recovered to the
level observed in January 2020. **Another** member
noted that the unemployment rate has been
declining. **One** member stated that the

underemployment rate remains stagnant at levels
that almost double those observed in normal times
and shows no signs of improvement. **Some**
members mentioned that the rate that includes
underemployed, unemployed and inactive people
available for work increased in September. **One**
member pointed out that it represented 26.6% of the
extended Economically Active Population (PEA, for
its acronym in Spanish) while **another member**
mentioned that it is above pre-pandemic levels. One
member highlighted that the recovery of the labor
market continues to be uneven in terms of gender.

**All members agreed that slack conditions persist**
**in the economy. Some members noted that during**
the third quarter of the year, the output gap even
widened at the margin. One member pointed out that
the Global Indicator of Economic Activity (IGAE, for
its acronym in Spanish) is 5% below its maximum
level. Another member mentioned that, considering
the GDP flash estimate for the third quarter, the
economy is about 2.5 percentage points below its
pre-pandemic levels. **Some members noted that**
economic activity has deviated about 10% from the
trend that it would have followed in the absence of
the pandemic. **Looking ahead, most members**
**mentioned that slack conditions are expected,**
**with marked differences across sectors. One**
member said that, in view of the expected economic
recovery, a reduction in slack conditions is
anticipated.

**Some members indicated that economic activity is**
expected to resume its recovery starting in the fourth
quarter. One member stated that this will be driven
by external demand and the recovery of domestic
spending. He/she pointed out that the latter would be
supported by advances in the vaccination program,
the increase in the wage bill, and remittances.
However, he/she highlighted that the GDP flash
estimate for the third quarter will imply a downward
revision of growth estimates for the entire year.
**Another member mentioned that, due to Mexico's**
insertion in global value chains, the terms of trade
have started to be affected, particularly regarding
non-automotive non-oil exports, which poses an
external restriction to economic growth. He/she
added that the speed of the economic recovery will
probably begin to normalize towards the historical

4


-----

growth rate average. He/she estimated that, if the
economy grows at its average level of the last 15
years, it would not be possible to reach the level of
activity that would have otherwise been registered in
the absence of COVID-19 before 2025. **Some**
members pointed out that the environment for
economic activity remains uncertain. **One member**
stated that the balance of risks to growth has
deteriorated and is biased to the downside.

**_Inflation in Mexico_**

**All members mentioned that world and domestic**
**inflationary** **pressures** **continue** **affecting**

**headline and core inflation. The majority stated**
**that, so far this year, inflation has been affected**
**by disruptions in production chains, generalized**
**increases in commodity and food prices, as well**
**as changing consumption patterns. One member**
pointed out that, regarding external pressures, the
challenge is to understand the magnitude of the
disruptions in production chains and production
costs, given the expectation that inflation will be less
transitory and more difficult to revert. Regarding
internal pressures, he/she pointed out that the
contamination of these shocks onto the price
formation process must be monitored. Another
member added the effect of the reversion to the trend
in the prices of some goods and services. **Most**
**members indicated that, due to the deep**
**economic integration with the United States, the**
**higher levels of inflation in that country have**
**contributed to the rebound in inflation in Mexico.**
**One member highlighted that this has particularly**
affected food commodity prices. He/she considered
this to be relevant, since in Mexico the food
component has a high weight in the consumption
basket, which extends its effect on headline and core
inflation.

**Some members indicated that inflationary pressures**
have recently been observed in a variety of goods
and services and no longer appear to be reflecting
only transitory changes in relative prices. **One**
member stated that a phenomenon of generalized
and sustained increases is being faced, since the
prices in most major components have increased
significantly. He/she pointed out that annualized
monthly increases were observed in more than 50%
of the major class items comprising headline
inflation. **Another member mentioned that, in**
October, more than 75% of the major class items
registered a monthly annualized inflation rate above
3%, while a year ago this percentage was around
50%. One member pointed out that 54% of the major
class items of the headline inflation component


register an annual variation above 4%, and, of these,
91% register a variation of more than 5%. He/she
added that something similar is observed in the case
of the core inflation component, and even to a greater
extent among merchandise prices.

**Most members noted that headline inflation in**
**October registered a high annual variation,**
**mainly explained by an increase in the core**
**component. Some members noted the high level of**
the inflation gap. One member added that this is one
of the largest within emerging economies. **Another**
member underlined that annual inflation reached the
highest level in almost four years, above analysts'
and Banco de México's forecasts. **One member**
stated that it is very important to distinguish between
annual figures which incorporate information of
accumulated shocks in the past, from figures at the
margin, which provide information on the most recent
dynamics. In this regard, he/she considered that
pressures at the margin on general and core inflation
decreased between August and September, while in
October some pressure was registered once more
due to the decrease in the number of infections and
the reactivation of spending. **Another member**
indicated that monthly inflation in October was above
expectations and registered the highest level for an
October month since 1998. One member pointed out
that from March to date, monthly inflation growth has
been significantly above historical averages. He/she
added that this sustained increase in inflation is
taking place in the face of an incomplete, fragile and
difficult recovery. He/she highlighted that the
widening of the negative output gap and the ample
slack conditions have not been able to offset
inflationary pressures caused by the continuation of
so many shocks. **Another member noted that the**
trimmed mean indicator for headline inflation is
5.22% and that the one for core inflation is 4.69%.
He/she highlighted that, in October, the producer
price index registered an annual variation of 8.6%.

**Most members pointed out that core inflation was**
**affected significantly by the higher pressures on**
**merchandise prices. One member highlighted that**
core inflation has increased for 11 consecutive
months. He/she mentioned that annual merchandise
inflation was the highest since 2009, when there
were exchange rate depreciations of up to 26.9%
annually. Another member noted that recently, food
merchandise inflation rose to levels close to 8% and
non-food merchandise inflation close to 7%. **One**
member indicated that pressures on food

merchandise prices have started to ease, in line with
the stability observed in international food commodity
prices. He/she added that non-food merchandise

5


-----

continues to be under pressure at the margin,
consistent with supply constraints and changing
consumption patterns. **Most members mentioned**
**the recent increase in services inflation. One**
member expressed that service prices have
continued with a reversal-to-trend process, which
responds to a decline in the number of infections.
He/she added that annualized two-year services
inflation remained at 3%, and thus there does not
seem to be a new shock or an additional source of
pressure in this component. **Another member**
highlighted that inflation of services other than
education and housing is above 5%. He/she stated
that, despite the slack conditions in the economy,
supercore inflation shows a strong upward trend.

**Some members mentioned that non-core inflation**
has also been subject to pressures. **One member**
noted that the biggest inflation surprises with respect
to Banco de México's forecasts have concentrated in
this component, mainly on the side of energy and
some livestock products. **Another member pointed**
out that energy prices remained stable at the margin,
while certain pressures were registered in the
agricultural and livestock products’ component,
although he/she considered that these tend to be
corrected in a relatively short period of time.

**Most members noted that expectations for**
**headline and core inflation for 2021, for the next**
**12 months, and for the end of 2022, increased**
**again, while longer-term inflation expectations**
**have remained stable at levels above 3%. One**
member pointed out that expectations for 2022 are
very close to the upper limit of the variability interval.
He/she added that while expectations for 2023 and
beyond have not deteriorated, it cannot be assumed
that the divergence between short- and long-term
expectations will be maintained, given the

continuation of the current bubble and the difficulty in
fighting it. **Another member argued that the**
increasing inflation levels observed at least during
the last 11 months have led to second-round effects,
and they are contaminating short-term expectations
and have begun to affect medium-term expectations.
**One member pointed out that inflation expectations**
drawn from market instruments for the short term
have deteriorated. **Another member said that**
inflation expectations for the next 6-10 years have
continued to be anchored around 3%. **Some**
mentioned that implied expectations in medium- and
long-term bonds have increased. **One member**
indicated that compensation for inflation and
inflationary risk implied by 10-year bonds

accumulated an increase of more than 100 basis
points during the year, while the inflation risk


premium was above the observed peak in January
2017.

**Most members pointed out that forecasts for**
**headline and core inflation were revised upward,**
**in particular for the short term. Some members**
mentioned that this was due to additional inflationary
pressures. **One member said that high levels of**
inflation are expected in November as a result of last
year's low base effects, the result, among other
things, of a longer-lasting discount program in 2020.
**Some members noted that headline inflation at the**
end of this year would reach its highest level in 20
years. They added that core inflation could be around
6%. One member noted that this last figure would be
the highest one since the fourth quarter of 2001.
**Another member stated that headline and core**
inflation are expected to decline further in a year.
He/she added that the speed of inflation

convergence has shown to be uncertain and that
inflation expectations will be key in shaping this
trend. One member noted that, although the negative
output gap will prevail through most of 2022, it is not
expected to offset the price pressures. He/she added
that, although fiscal pressure in Mexico is lower than
in other countries, it will also not mitigate any supplyand external-related pressures on domestic prices.

**Most members highlighted that the shocks that**
**have affected inflation are mainly transitory. One**
member stated that these should begin to fade as
health control measures advance. He/she added that
while it has been difficult to estimate the duration and
severity of the shocks, they are expected to decline
by the second half of 2022. He/she added that
medium- and long-term expectations remain

anchored, consistent with the transitory nature of the
pressures. He/she indicated that there are signs that
some components of inflation have started to ease.
**Another member noted that at the beginning of the**
year, the pressures were associated with base
effects, changes in consumption patterns, and with
an adjustment in relative prices that resulted from a
supply shock which had the characteristic of being
asymmetric. He/she added that in the middle of the
year, the economic reopening, the recovery of the
prices of several services, the renewed tensions in
energy prices, and the persistence in merchandise
inflation also played a role. He/she pointed out that in
September there were additional increases in food
merchandise prices due to a higher imported
inflation, which affected headline and core inflation
given the importance of food items in the
consumption basket. Thus, the number of shocks
increased during the second half of the year, mainly
due to supply effects that are not permanent. **One**

6


-----

member considered that although there is the
argument that current pressures are basically due to
supply shocks that will revert as the global supply
chains operations normalize, said argument does not
take into account that those pressures are also due
to an expansion of demand generated by the stimuli
implemented worldwide and to a reallocation of
spending that might have more permanent effects.
He/she added that, without the intervention of
monetary authorities, the interaction of these two
phenomena may result in an inflation with an
equilibrium level above the one that it had before the
pandemic. **Another** member mentioned that the
debate over the temporary nature of inflation
pressures is irrelevant given that, unlike the energy
price shock in 2017, the current inflationary episode
is the result of an accumulation of ongoing shocks
that began before the pandemic and whose effects
will transcend the pandemic. For this reason, he/she
noted that the discussion should center on the
duration and persistence of high inflation. **One**
member pointed out that although the effects of
inflationary pressures are expected to be transitory,
considerable risks to price formation prevail

worldwide, with a possible impact on inflation in
Mexico, due to the persistent uncertainty about the
duration of the shocks. This, in addition to the fact
that such pressures have affected the prices of a
wide range of products significantly.

**Among upward risks to inflation, most members**
**highlighted external inflationary pressures, cost-**
**related** **pressures,** **and** **the** **increase** **in**

**agricultural and livestock product prices, as well**
**as in energy prices.** **Some members added the**
persistence of high core inflation and an exchange
rate depreciation. **Some members mentioned the**
risk of a deterioration in medium- and long-term
inflation expectations. **One member added wage**
increases in the United States as external inflationary
pressures. He/she highlighted the risk of less slack
and a readjustment in the relative prices of services
as a consequence of the economic reopening.
**Another member mentioned that the probability of**
inflationary pressures in Mexico and worldwide being
more persistent than anticipated has increased.
Among downward risks, some members pointed out
the widening of the negative output gap, further
social distancing measures, and an appreciation of
the exchange rate. Most members considered that
**the balance of risks to inflation within the**
**forecast horizon deteriorated with respect to the**
**last decision and that it is biased to the upside.**


**_Macrofinancial environment_**

**Most members noted that the peso exchange rate**
**exhibited volatility and depreciated slightly. One**
member stated that this was due to increased risk
aversion. However, he/she added that better trading
conditions were observed in the foreign exchange
market. **Another member considered that financial**
markets were favored by the Federal Reserve's most
recent decision. **The majority of members stated**
**that short-term interest rates increased and**
**longer-term interest rates were influenced by**
**external conditions.** **They mentioned that a**
**flattening of the yield curve was observed.** **Some**
members stated that this was due to expectations of
further increases in the reference rate. One member
pointed out that, if monetary normalization in the
United States begins earlier than expected, there
could be episodes of volatility that could generate
exchange rate pressures or wider spreads in the
yield curve with respect to external government
interest rates. **Most members noted that the**
**Mexican stock market registered gains. Some**
members stated that sovereign risk indicators
remained practically unchanged. **One member**
pointed out that those of Pemex decreased, in line
with those of other oil companies in the world,
although they are still among the highest worldwide.

**Some** members noted Mexico's better

macroeconomic fundamentals compared to other
similar economies, and highlighted the country’s
fiscal discipline. **One member noted that the**
proposed fiscal package for 2022 maintains a
responsible fiscal balance. However, he/she added
that public finances may be affected if weak
investment persists due to the deterioration of the
business climate, the effects of legislative initiatives,
such as the one that seeks to reorganize the
electricity sector, or the possible need to allocate
additional budgetary resources to Pemex. He/she
indicated that it is essential to address the factors
that affect investment decisions necessary to
generate inclusive and sustained growth.

**The majority of members noted that the weak**
**performance of financing to the private sector**
**continues. Some members highlighted the fall in**
consumer and business lending. One member stated
that credit continues contracting due to factors
beyond monetary policy, such as investors’

reluctance to invest. **Another** member pointed out
that financing to Small- and Medium-sized

Enterprises (SMEs) remains about 12% below prepandemic levels and with negative annual growth
rates. **One member added that only mortgage**

7


-----

lending continued to grow and that adjusted
delinquency rates for consumer, housing and
business loans continued to decline. Some members
noted that domestic sources of financing were above
pre-pandemic levels. Some members stated that the
external sources of financing have become negative.
**One** member pointed out that financing conditions
are the tightest on record and that, while demand for
credit is expected to recover, it remains below the
levels seen even during the global financial crisis.
**Another** member mentioned the recent increase in
interest rates, especially for loans to smaller-size
firms.

**_Monetary policy_**

**The majority of members considers the shocks**
**that have increased inflation to be mainly**
**transitory. Nevertheless, the horizon in which**
**they could affect it is unknown, and they have**
**involved a wide range of products, while being of**
**considerable magnitude. This poses greater**
**risks to the price formation process and to**
**inflation expectations. For this reason, it was**
**deemed necessary to continue reinforcing the**
**monetary policy stance, adjusting it to the**
**trajectory required for inflation to converge to its**
**3% target within the forecast horizon. The**
**majority thus decided to increase the target for**
**the overnight interbank interest rate by 25 basis**
**points to 5%. Most members highlighted that, for**
**the next monetary policy decisions, they will**
**assess thoroughly the behavior of inflationary**
**pressures as well as of all factors that have an**
**incidence on the foreseen trajectory for inflation**
**and its expectations. The latter, in order to adopt**
**a policy rate that is consistent at all times with**
**the trajectory needed to facilitate the orderly and**
**sustained convergence of headline inflation to**
**the 3% target within the time frame in which**
**monetary policy operates as well as an adequate**
**adjustment of the economy and financial**
**markets.**

**One member stated that continuing increases in the**
reference rate will not stop pressures stemming from
changes in consumption patterns or supply

restrictions from taking place. He/she stated that the
latter could even worsen due to the impact of higher
rates on credit, business creation and, therefore, on
the productive plant, which in the end would lead to
a higher inflation instead of a lower one. He/she
added that such rate increases have a negative
impact on consumption, investment, credit, public
finances and financial markets, making them not only
ineffective, but also inefficient. He/she added that,


given the fragility of the economic recovery, further
monetary tightening could affect people's wellbeing.
He/she expressed that the objective sought with the
rate increases has not been achieved, since from
June to date, inflation expectations for the end of the
year and for 2022 have not ceased to increase.
He/she mentioned that, in the face of an
unprecedented economic context, it is important not
to act in a mechanical manner, but rather to be more
reflective and cautious. He/she pointed out that, as in
Mexico, inflation in many economies has exceeded
the forecasts of their central banks, but most of them
have continued to grant monetary stimulus,

acknowledging the inability of the tools available to
combat the current pressures. He/she highlighted
that the origin of inflation in Mexico is the same as in
other countries, but that Mexico stands out for its
fiscal discipline, which has relieved pressures on the
sovereign risk premium and the exchange rate.
He/she argued that this should allow Banco de
México to implement a less restrictive monetary
policy than other emerging economies, which has not
been the case. He/she stated that global market
conditions and the continuation of accommodative
policy stances in the main central banks have
opened a space for patience. In light of the outlook
that the Federal Reserve will not begin its
normalization process before the second half of
2022, he/she considered that anticipating said
normalization would reduce any future space for
possible interest rate adjustments, which could lead
to an unnecessarily restrictive position in the near
future. He/she considered that communication with
the public should play a more important role in
explaining in detail the factors that give rise to
inflation.

**Another member pointed out that it is necessary to**
act decisively and responsibly, and thus monetary
policy actions must be gradual, not only in terms of
magnitude but also of timing. He/she argued that this
will allow monetary policy to be conducted more
effectively given the unprecedented circumstances,
and will help to maintain expectations anchored, by
driving the reference rate through a gradual trajectory
that will allow it to comply with the central bank’s
priority mandate, within the horizon in which
monetary policy operates. He/she pointed out that
the inflationary pressures related to the pandemic
have continued, and that although they cannot last
indefinitely, they have shown to be more persistent.
Nevertheless, he/she stated that there are elements
that allow for acting with prudence and caution,
particularly that the national economy, compared to
other similar economies, has better macroeconomic
balances, a solid international reserve position, more

8


-----

stable fiscal balances, and a higher ex-ante real
interest rate. He/she also added that, given the
collapse of demand conditions for loanable funds and
the relative stability of the economy's total sources of
financing, the estimated range for the neutral interest
rate may have decreased. He/she stated that
although there is significant uncertainty in its
estimation, especially in the current unprecedented
environment, the stated circumstances may suggest
this decline. He/she pointed out that communication
must continue to be used as a tool that, if
implemented adequately, will help prevent market
overreactions to monetary policy decisions, given the
prevailing high uncertainty about the magnitude and
persistence of the effects of the pandemic on the
economy. He/she explained that inflation

expectations have shown to be more sensitive to the
changes in narrative that has accompanied the
decisions, than to the rate increases, so that
mechanical monetary policy responses may not have
the same implications as in previous cycles. Taking
all of the above into consideration, he/she underlined
that, on this occasion, he/she considers it necessary
to continue reinforcing monetary policy.

**One member mentioned that it is necessary to**
analyze whether a gradual approach is adequate,
considering its lagged impact and its effects on
inflation through the expectations channel. He/she
highlighted that the discussion should focus on the
persistence of high inflation, particularly of core
inflation, in order to determine if convergence to the
target will require a greater monetary policy
tightening, both in terms of magnitude and timing.
He/she pointed out that not acting in the face of a
significant increase in inflation puts the anchoring of
expectations and credibility at risk, which would not
only make more difficult the attainment of the target,
but also entail the enlargement of negative effects of
shocks. For this reason, any increase in inflation
must be matched with proportional adjustments in
the monetary policy stance. He/she stated that the
margins available to go beyond monetary neutrality
must be analyzed and the boundary between the
neutral and restrictive range of the reference rate
must be calibrated. He/she argued that the relative
monetary policy stance will gain more relevance in
decision making, because the sources of external
financing have become negative and capital flows
are more sensitive to interest rate spreads. He/she
highlighted that the pace of monetary adjustment
must be transmitted effectively along the yield curve
so that inflation expectations converge to the target
but avoiding overreactions in financial markets.
He/she stated that an eventual increase in the speed
of adjustment must be of a determined duration to


rule out an aggressive and prolonged cycle, which, in
view of the expected adjustments in the Federal
Reserve's reference rate next year, could lead to an
overly restrictive policy stance in face of a weak
economic recovery. He/she emphasized that clear,
transparent and timely communication about the
purpose of monetary policy actions generates
greater credibility, strengthens monetary policy passthrough mechanisms, and increases their

effectiveness. He/she mentioned that since the
forecasted trajectory for inflation convergence
requires maintaining a cycle of interest rate
increases, forward guidance must be more explicit
about said adjustments. For this reason, the
convenience of publishing with each monetary policy
announcement the foreseen path for the reference
rate which is consistent with the board’s inflation
forecast for the following eight quarters, as many
central banks do. He/she added that, although less
complete, another option would be to communicate
the average of the reference rate for the analysis
horizon. Lastly, he/she emphasized that, given the
current scenario, communication on its own does not
work, since the basis for a credible regime is a firm
response, preventive and consistent in the face of
inflationary pressures.

**Another member considered that, given the**
evolution of inflation and its expectations, and the
possibility of a greater persistence of inflationary
pressures, the central bank must act in a clear and
decisive manner, in order to contain any impact on
the price formation process that may lead to the deanchoring of medium- and long-term expectations.
He/she expressed that central banks should avoid
adapting higher inflation expectations by wrongly
extending the monetary stimulus. He/she argued that
failure to act now may lead to inflation reaching a
higher equilibrium level than before. He/she pointed
out that the main challenge is to assess the
appropriate pace for withdrawing the monetary
stimulus to ensure the convergence of inflation to the
3% target and maintain expectations anchored.
He/she argued that, based on available information
and the foreseen trajectory for inflation, the monetary
stimulus should be cut by 50 basis points. However,
he/she pointed out that accelerating the pace in an
environment of high uncertainty may have

undesirable effects on markets. He/she noted that,
given the high level of uncertainty, maintaining a
gradual approach such as the one implemented,
allows adjustments to be made in a timely and
prudent manner in order to ensure an orderly
convergence to the inflation target. However, he/she
acknowledged that, although the strategy

implemented is gradual, it also increases the risk of

9


-----

having to make a larger discrete adjustment in future
monetary policy decisions. He/she stated that the
monetary policy stance is consistent with an ex-ante
real interest rate of around 1.5%, in accommodative
territory and below the estimated neutral interest rate
of 2.6%. He/she highlighted that this offers room to
make the necessary and sufficient adjustments. As
to the monetary policy statement, he/she pointed out
that it should stress the additional shocks and the
reasons for the deterioration in the balance of risks
for inflation, as well as point out that the purpose of
the decision is to prevent second-round effects from
strengthening. He/she argued that this will allow
Banco de México to be in a better position to face
additional risks in a flexible manner.

**One member stated that the pandemic has implied**
a unique challenge for economic activity and
inflation. Inflation has faced multiple shocks in 2021,
and has become a global and domestic challenge.
He/she highlighted that headline and core inflation
forecasts have increased significantly on several
occasions throughout the year, and once again on
this occasion, in response to additional inflationary
pressures. He/she argued that the above points to
the need to continue adopting a trajectory for the
interest rate target that strengthens the monetary
policy stance. He/she added that, considering the
simultaneity and magnitude of the shocks that have
affected headline and core inflation and the high
levels they have reached, as well as the uncertainty
of the horizon over which they may affect inflation,
the monetary policy stance must continue to be
reinforced, adjusting it to the trajectory required for
inflation to converge to its 3% target within the
forecast horizon. He/she expressed that this strategy
of monetary policy response is necessary to keep
inflation expectations anchored, induce orderly
conditions in the foreign exchange market, and
contain risk premia in fixed-income instruments.
He/she added that Mexico faces important external
inflationary pressures and the oncoming effects of
greater global financial restrictions. He/she pointed
out that those economies, such as Mexico, that
complement their domestic savings with external
sources must maintain a solid macroeconomic
stance. In this regard, he/she considered that
monetary policy should contribute to maintain
inflation around its target, promoting an orderly
adjustment of the economy, the foreign exchange
market and the yield curve, and avoiding capital
outflows. He/she argued that tolerating high inflation
levels well above the target without further reinforcing


the monetary policy stance would affect price
formation and lead to a significant deterioration of
domestic financial markets, further complicating and
increasing the cost of inflation convergence to its
target, and jeopardizing the hard-earned credibility.
Finally, given the complex outlook for inflation,
he/she emphasized that Banco de México must
reinforce its commitment to comply with its
constitutional mandate of preserving the domestic
currency’s purchasing power.

**3. MONETARY POLICY DECISION**

The shocks that have increased inflation are largely
considered to be transitory. Nevertheless, the
horizon in which they could affect it is unknown, and
they have involved a wide range of products, while
being of considerable magnitude. This poses greater
risks to the price formation process and to inflation
expectations. For this reason, it was deemed
necessary to continue reinforcing the monetary
policy stance, adjusting it to the trajectory required for
inflation to converge to its 3% target within the
forecast horizon. The Governing Board decided to
increase the target for the overnight interbank
interest rate by 25 basis points to 5%.

For the next monetary policy decisions, the
Governing Board will assess thoroughly the behavior
of inflationary pressures as well as of all factors that
have an incidence on the foreseen trajectory for
inflation and its expectations. The latter, in order to
adopt a policy rate that is consistent at all times with
the trajectory needed to facilitate the orderly and
sustained convergence of headline inflation to the
3% target within the time frame in which monetary
policy operates as well as an adequate adjustment of
the economy and financial markets.

**4. VOTING**

Alejandro Díaz de León, Galia Borja, Irene Espinosa,
and Jonathan Heath voted in favor of increasing the
target for the overnight interbank interest rate by 25
basis points to 5.00%. Gerardo Esquivel voted in
favor of leaving the target for the overnight interbank
interest rate unchanged at 4.75%.

**5. DISSENTING OPINIONS/ VOTES**

**Vote. Gerardo Esquivel**

The current unprecedented economic context calls
for a non-mechanical response. Many central banks
are facing inflationary pressures, but most have
opted for maintaining the monetary stimulus,

10


-----

acknowledging the inability to fight them with the
available tools. Due to its global nature, the
inflationary process is similar in different economies.
However, Mexico differs from other countries in the
sense that it has maintained fiscal discipline, which
relieves pressure on the exchange rate and the
sovereign risk premium. This macroeconomic
balance gives us a room that other emerging
economies lack and which has not been used.
Moreover, the Federal Reserve’s monetary policy


stance will remain accommodative for a long period.
Thus, acting too soon in regards to our own
normalization process may reduce future room for
maneuver and lead to an unnecessarily restrictive
policy stance in the near future. In addition to being
ineffective and inefficient, interest rate increases may
also be counterproductive. From June to date, shortterm inflation expectations have not ceased to be
revised upwards, so the goal pursued with interest
rate increases has not been achieved.

11


-----

**ANNEX**

The information in this Annex was prepared for this
meeting by the staff of Banco de México’s
Directorate General of Economic Research and
Directorate General of Central Bank Operations. It
does not necessarily reflect the considerations of the
members of the Governing Board as to the monetary
policy decision.

**A.1. External conditions**

**A.1.1. World economic activity**

World economic activity continued to recover during
the third quarter of this year, although at a slower
pace and heterogeneously across countries due to
the evolution of the pandemic and spending
programs. Global industrial production and

international trade moderated significantly after
having reached historically high levels in previous
months, with contractions in some sectors affected
by the aggravation of bottlenecks in global supply
chains. The services sector also experienced a
moderation in its pace of recovery during most of the
quarter (Chart 1) due to the increase in COVID-19
cases, although in October it exhibited a more
dynamic performance. Global inflation continued
increasing due to pressures originated by

bottlenecks in production, stimulus spending and the
reallocation of spending towards merchandise, the
rise in food and energy prices, and the reopening of
certain services. In most of the main economies,
both advanced and emerging, inflation was above
their central banks' targets.

In this context, most central banks in the main
advanced economies started to show signs of a
gradual reduction in monetary stimulus. In emerging
economies, a large number of monetary authorities
have reduced monetary stimulus by raising their
policy interest rates. In this environment, financial
markets, in general, performed favorably, albeit with
some volatility in government bond interest rates.

Among key global risks, those associated with the
pandemic, inflationary pressures, and adjustments in
monetary and financial conditions stand out. The
possibility that supply chain disruptions could last
longer than expected also stands out. Likewise,
although some of the factors that have driven global
inflation are expected

1 Expressed as a quarterly annualized rate, US seasonally adjusted GDP
grew at a rate of 6.7% during the second quarter and 2.0% in the third
quarter of 2021.


to be largely transitory, it cannot be ruled out that
some of them, such as production bottlenecks, could
result in a more persistent behavior of inflation at
elevated levels, which, in an environment of
recovery, could lead to a more accelerated tightening
of monetary policy and generate new episodes of
volatility in financial markets.

**Chart 1**

**Global: Purchasing Managers’ Index:**

**Production Component**

Diffusion Index, s. a.

65

60

55

50

45

40

35 Manufacturing

Manufacturing (excl. China)

30 Services

Services (excl. China)

25

October

20

2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021

s. a. / Seasonally adjusted figures.
Source: IHS Markit.

In the United States, economic activity moderated its
dynamism during the third quarter of 2021, growing
0.5% at a quarterly and seasonally adjusted rate,
after having registered a growth of 1.6% in the
previous quarter (Chart 2).[1] This occurred in the
context of a reduction of certain fiscal stimuli, such
as additional unemployment insurance payments, an
increase in the number of COVID-19 cases,
particularly during the first half of the quarter, and
multiple bottlenecks in the production and trade of
goods. This was reflected in a moderation of private
consumption and in a negative contribution of net
exports. Inventory accumulation and business
investment were major contributors to growth during
the third quarter of the year.

US industrial production contracted at a monthly rate
of 1.3% in September, after having grown 0.1% in
August. This reflected a generalized decline in its
main sectors. In particular, manufacturing activity
contracted as a result of the continued impact on
automotive production due to the shortage of
semiconductors. Meanwhile, the fall in gas and
electricity generation was due to the normalization of

12

|Chart 1 Global: Purchasing Managers’ Index: Production Component  Diffusion Index, s. a.|Col2|
|---|---|
|||
|Manufacturing Manufacturing (excl. China) Services Services (excl. China)|October|


-----

demand for air conditioning, following the rebound
generated by warmer-than-usual weather conditions
during August. The Purchasing Managers' Index
(PMI) of the manufacturing sector suggests that the
gradual recovery of this sector will continue to be
affected by the persistence of bottlenecks.

**Chart 2**

**US Real GDP and Components**

Quarterly percentage rate and contributions in

percentage points, s. a.

10

8

6

4

2

0

-2 Private consumption expenditures

Residential investment

-4 Nonresidential investment

-6 Change in private inventories

Net exports

-8 Government consumption expenditures

-10 Total


-12


0


s. a. / Seasonally adjusted figures.
Source: BEA.

The US labor market continued to recover during
October. In particular, employment generation in the
private sector showed a rebound, following the
normalization of some services that had been
affected by the increase in COVID-19 infections
during the previous months. The non-farm payroll
increased by 531 thousand jobs in October, after
having grown by 314 thousand jobs in September.
The recovery in employment was particularly strong
in sectors such as leisure and hospitality,

professional and business services, transportation
and warehousing, and manufacturing. The level of
employment was still 4.2 million below pre-pandemic
levels. The unemployment rate declined from 4.8%
in September to 4.6% in October.

In the euro area, despite the impact on production
chains and the rebound in the number of infections,
economic activity accelerated during the third
quarter of 2021, growing 2.2% at a quarterly and
seasonally adjusted rate, after having grown 2.1% in
the second quarter.[2] This increase reflected a
generalized growth in the region's economies.
Available indicators suggest that economic activity
was driven by domestic sales. Regarding the labor

2 In annualized terms, euro area GDP registered a quarter-on-quarter
seasonally adjusted variation of 8.7% during the second quarter and 9.1%
during the third quarter of 2021.


market, the unemployment rate decreased from
7.5% in August to 7.4% in September. Meanwhile,
Purchasing Managers' Indices suggest that the pace
of economic recovery will continue to be affected by
the disruptions in global supply chains caused by the
pandemic.

In the United Kingdom, available indicators point to
a sustained recovery of economic activity during the
third quarter of 2021, albeit at a slower pace than that
observed during the second quarter, when a
seasonally adjusted quarterly rate of 5.5% was
recorded.[3] This moderation reflected the rebound in
the number of COVID-19 infections, the negative
effect of supply shortages and the increase in natural
gas prices on economic activity. As for the labor
market, the unemployment rate decreased from
4.6% in July to 4.5% in August. Purchasing
Managers' Indices suggest that the recovery in
manufacturing and services activity will be gradual.

In Japan, available information suggests that
economic activity slowed down as a state of
emergency was declared for most of the third quarter
due to the worsening pandemic.[4] Production and
exports, mainly of automobiles, continued to be
affected during the period by the persistence of
bottlenecks and the shortage of semiconductors.
The unemployment rate remained unchanged in
August at 2.8%. Purchasing Managers' Indices
suggest that activity in the services sector would
accelerate at the beginning of the fourth quarter of
the year in line with the lifting of the state of
emergency, while manufacturing activity would
continue to recover gradually.

In the main emerging market economies, growth has
been heterogeneous across regions and countries,
depending on the evolution of the pandemic and the
exposure of each country to the impact on global
supply chains. In Latin America, indicators reflect a
recovery of economic activity in most countries that
can be associated with the gradual normalization of
productive activities. In Emerging Asia, economic
activity has exhibited a mixed behavior. In China,
timely indicators point to a slowdown in activity
mainly due to the gradual withdrawal of some
economic stimulus measures and the imposition of
renewed restrictions due to the presence of COVID19 in some regions. In Emerging Europe, available
indicators suggest robust GDP growth in most

3 In annualized terms, the UK GDP quarterly seasonally adjusted
variation during the second quarter of 2021 was 23.9%.
4 In annualized terms, Japan GDP grew at a quarter-on-quarter
seasonally adjusted variation of 1.9% during the second quarter of 2021.

13


-----

economies, in light of advances in the vaccination
processes and the normalization of activities.

International commodity prices have generally risen
since Mexico's previous monetary policy decision.
Oil prices reached their highest level in more than
seven years, driven by higher global demand, in an
environment of supply restrictions due to crude oil
production cuts by members of the Organization of
the Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC) and
other oil producers. Natural gas prices increased
during most of the period analyzed due to a strong
increase in demand and low inventory levels that in
turn resulted from lower-than-expected production
due to unplanned shutdowns at natural gas exporting
plants in several countries, a higher demand from
Asia and Latin America, and lower investment in the
sector; the latter driven in part by greater incentives
to promote the use of renewable energy. However,
gas prices have recently declined due to higher
exports by major producers such as Russia. Prices
of industrial metals generally trended upward given
concerns that production of these metals will be
affected by high fuel prices, while disruptions in
global supply and transportation chains caused a
moderation in industrial production and exerted
downward pressures on the price of some metals,
such as iron ore. The prices of most grains followed
an upward trend due to crop damage caused by
heavy rains in the major producing regions.

**A.1.2. Monetary policy and international financial**
**markets**

World inflation continued increasing, albeit

heterogeneously across countries, due to pressures
originated by bottlenecks in production, stimulus
spending and the reallocation of spending towards
merchandise, the rise in food and energy prices, and
the reopening of certain services. The increase in
headline inflation in most of the major advanced
economies continued to place it above their central
banks' targets, with the exception of Japan (Chart 3).
In this context, short-term inflation expectations
drawn from surveys continued increasing in most
advanced economies, while longer-term inflation
expectations drawn from financial instruments
registered more moderate increases.


**Chart 3**

**Selected Advanced Economies:**

**Headline Inflation**

Annual percentage change

6.0 United States PCE 1/
5.5 United States CPI
5.0 Japan 3/
4.5

Euro area 2/

4.0

United Kingdom

3.5
3.0 Canada
2.5
2.0
1.5
1.0
0.5
0.0

-0.5
-1.0
-1.5 September
-2.0 October
-2.5 October
-3.0

2005 2009 2013 2017 2021

1/ The personal consumption expenditure deflator is used.
2/ Preliminary figures for October.
3/ Excludes fresh food. This series does not exclude the effect of the rise in
consumption tax in May 2014 and October 2019, nor the effect of the free
daycare and preschool program in October 2019.
Source: Bureau of Economic Analysis, Bureau of Labor Statistics, Eurostat,
Bank of Japan, Statistics Canada, Office of National Statistics.

In most of the main emerging economies, inflation
continued increasing as a result of the same factors
that affected inflation in advanced economies. In
some cases, such as Brazil, Peru and Chile,
exchange rate depreciation also played a role. In
most of these economies, except for some in the
Asian region, inflation remained above their central
banks' targets. Although it is expected that the
factors that have led to higher inflation will be
transitory, a scenario of greater inflation persistence
cannot be ruled out.

In this environment, the US Federal Reserve
announced a reduction in its asset-purchase
program; the European Central Bank announced a
moderate reduction in the pace of purchases under
its Pandemic Emergency Purchase Program

(PEPP), although the total amount of the program
remained unchanged; and the Bank of Canada
decided to end its asset purchase program and begin
the reinvestment phase in which it will purchase
assets only to maintain its holdings of government
bonds constant. On the other hand, the central bank
of New Zealand announced the first increase since
the beginning of the pandemic of 25 basis points to
its interest rate and the central bank of Australia
concluded its yield curve control policy. Other central
banks in advanced economies are expected to begin
withdrawing their monetary stimulus (Chart 4).

14


-----

Among the recent monetary policy decisions in the
main advanced economies, the following stand out:

i) In its November meeting, the US Federal
Reserve left its target range for the federal funds
rate unchanged at 0-0.25% and reiterated that it
will be appropriate to maintain that range until
labor market conditions have reached levels
consistent with its estimate of maximum
employment and inflation is at 2% and is on track
to moderately exceed that level for some time.
Given the economy's further substantial

progress towards its targets, the Federal Open
Market Committee (FOMC) decided to start
tapering the monthly pace of net asset
purchases beginning in November. Net

purchases of Treasury securities will be reduced
by USD10 billion and agency mortgage-backed
securities by USD5 billion in November and by
an equal amount in December. The Committee
indicated that similar cuts are likely to be
appropriate going forward, although it is
prepared to adjust them if changes in the
economic outlook warrant it. In this regard, the
Chairman of said institution stated that the above
would imply that the net increases in its
securities holdings would end by the middle of
next year. He also indicated that the decision to
reduce its asset purchases does not imply any
direct guidance regarding its interest rate policy.
He noted that the timing of interest rate hikes will
depend on the economy's trajectory, indicating
that he considers they can be patient in this
regard. In this context, the trajectory of the
federal funds rate implied by financial

instruments incorporates the expectation of a
first increase of 25 basis points in the third
quarter of 2022.

ii) At its October meeting, the European Central

Bank (ECB) left its refinancing rate, key deposit
facility rate and key lending facility rate
unchanged at 0.0, -0.5 and 0.25%, respectively.
It also reiterated that the ECB board expects
these interest rates to remain at current or lower
levels until: i) inflation reaches the 2% target over
the forecast horizon; ii) inflation remains at that
level for a sustained period of time; and iii) the
central bank considers that progress in core
inflation is sufficiently advanced to be consistent
with the stabilization of inflation at 2% in the
medium term. It reiterated that this could imply a
transitory period in which inflation is moderately
above its target. Regarding its Asset Purchase
Program (APP), it was left unchanged at €20
billion net per month. On the other hand,


regarding its Pandemic Emergency Purchase
Program (PEPP), it insisted that it considers that
favorable financing conditions can be

maintained with a moderately lower pace of
purchases than in the second and third quarters
of this year, keeping the total amount unchanged
at €1.85 trillion. In this regard, the president of
said institution reiterated that the adjustment in
the pace of purchases is a recalibration of its
Program and not a withdrawal of stimulus
(tapering). She also indicated that the conditions
required for an interest rate increase are not
currently being met and will not be met in the
near future. Expectations drawn from financial
instruments anticipate a first interest rate
increase of 10 basis points in the third quarter of
2022.

iii) At its October meeting, the Bank of Japan

maintained the reference rate unchanged
at -0.1% and the 10-year rate target at around
0%, as well as its asset purchase program. It
restated that, if necessary, it will not hesitate to
take additional easing measures and that it
expects interest rates to remain at their current
levels or even lower. In addition, it reiterated that
it will continue to support corporate financing and
stability in financial markets.

iv) In its November meeting, the Bank of England

left its reference interest rate unchanged at
0.10%. It stated that, should the economy,
particularly the labor market, evolve in line with
its central forecasts, an interest rate increase will
be necessary in the coming months in order for
inflation to return sustainably to its 2% inflation
target. It kept its current government bond
purchase program unchanged and reiterated the
expectation that it will conclude by the end of
2021. Expectations drawn from financial

instruments anticipate a first interest rate
increase of 15 basis points in the first quarter of
2022.

In emerging economies, given the increase in
inflation and the additional risks to price formation,
as compared to advanced economies, a large
number of central banks continue reducing their
monetary stimulus. Thus, since the last monetary
policy decision in Mexico, the central banks of Brazil,
Colombia, Peru, Chile, the Czech Republic, Poland,
Hungary, and Russia, among others, raised their
interest rates. In contrast, Turkey's central bank
announced a further decrease in its reference
interest rate.

15


-----

**Chart 4**

**Reference Rates and Trajectories Implied in OIS**

**Curves[1/]**

Percent

3.0% **― US Federal Reserve 2/** Next increase up to Nov. 5, 2021 3/

**― Bank of England** Next increase up to Sep.24, 2021
**― Bank of Japan**

2.5% **― Bank of Canada**

**― European Central Bank deposit rate**
**― OIS implicit trajectory Nov 5, 2021**

2.0% **--- OIS implicit trajectory Sep 24, 2021**

1.5%

1.0%

0.5%

0.0%

-0.5%

End of End of End of End of

-1.0% 2020 2021 2022 2023

2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023

1/ OIS: Fixed floating interest rate swap where the fixed interest rate is
associated to the effective overnight reference rate.
2/ For the observed reference rate of the U.S. the average interest rate of
the target range of the federal funds rate (0.0% - 0.25%) is used.
3/ A first increase of 25bps is assumed for the US Federal Reserve and the
Bank of Canada, 15 bps for the Bank of England and 10 bps for the
European Central Bank and the Bank of Japan.
Source: Banco de México with data from Bloomberg.

In this environment, since the last monetary policy
decision in Mexico, the stock markets of most of the
main advanced economies performed favorably,
mainly driven by a positive balance in the corporate
financial statements of the different regions, in some
cases reaching new all-time highs. (Chart 5).
Similarly, most emerging economy markets recorded
moderate gains (Chart 6). In foreign exchange
markets, the US dollar showed moderate changes
against most of the currencies of advanced
economies. Likewise, emerging economies’

currencies registered moderate mixed fluctuations,
with some depreciations, such as, for example, the
Turkish lira. With respect to government bond
interest rates in the main advanced economies, there
was a significant increase in the short-term rates of
some of these economies due to expectations of
monetary policy rate increases. Similarly, long-term
rates increased during the first half of October and
subsequently decreased. For their part, long-term
interest rates in emerging economies rose for the
most part. In this environment, in general, moderate
net capital inflows towards equity assets in most
emerging economies, and outflows from fixedincome markets were observed during the period.


Note: Interest rates correspond to swap rates at the specified terms, except Note: Interest rates correspond to government bonds in the specified terms, with the
for Hungary, where government securities with 3-year (instead of 2-year)
maturities where used as a reference. For the Philippines, a 2-year swap
rate is used.
Source: Bloomberg.

16


**Chart 5**

**Change in Selected Financial Indicators from**

**September 24 to November 5, 2021**

Percent, basis points


15%

10%


75

50


5%


25

0


0%

-5%


-10%


-25

-50


1/ The MSCI Emerging Markets Index consists of 24 countries. 2/ DXY: a
weighted average estimated by the Intercontinental Exchange (ICE) of the
nominal exchange rate of the main six currencies operated globally with the
following weights: EUR 57.6%, JPY: 13.6%, GBP: 11.9%, CAD: 9.1%, SEK:
4.2%, and CHF: 3.6%. 3/ J.P. Morgan index is constructed with the
weighted average by the nominal exchange rate of emerging economies’
currencies with the following weights: TRY: 8.3%, RUB: 8.3%, HUF: 8.3%,
ZAR: 8.3%, BRL: 11.1%, MXN: 11.1%, CLP: 11.1%, CNH: 11.1%, INR:
11.1% and SGD: 11.1%. Source: Bloomberg and ICE.

**Chart 6**

**Selected Emerging Economies: Financial**

**Assets Performance since September 27, 2021**

Percent, basis points


-----

Looking ahead, several risks to the stability of
international financial markets persist, which are
related to the evolution of economic activity and
inflationary pressures, a disorderly or earlier-thananticipated withdrawal of monetary stimuli resulting
in new episodes of volatility and tighter global
financial conditions, distortions in the valuation of
financial assets, high levels of private and public
sector debt that could lead to default or contagion
problems, and difficulties in reaching agreements
regarding the US debt ceiling, among other factors.

**A.2. Current situation of the Mexican economy**

**A.2.1. Mexican markets**

Since the previous monetary policy decision to date,
financial asset prices in Mexico have exhibited a
mixed behavior (Chart 7). The peso exchange rate
exhibited volatility and depreciated slightly, shortterm interest rates increased, and long-term ones
were influenced by external conditions.

In particular, the Mexican peso fluctuated in a range
of 76 cents, between 20.11 and 20.87 pesos per
dollar, ending the period with a depreciation of 1.46%
(Chart 8). This occurred in a context in which both
spot- and future trading conditions improved slightly
with respect to the previous period.

**Chart 7**

**Mexican Markets’ Performance**

Percent, MXN/USD and index


25.50

Mexican Peso

25.00
24.50 100-day moving average
24.00 50-day moving average
23.50
23.00
22.50
22.00
21.50
21.00
20.50
20.00
19.50
19.00
18.50
18.00
17.50
17.00

J   F   M   A   M   J   J   A   S   O   N  D   J   F   M   A   M   J   J   A  S O   N

2020 2021

Source: Prepared by Banco de México.

Interest rates of government securities exhibited a
flattening dynamic (Chart 9), increasing up to 68
basis points in those of shorter terms, while longterm ones decreased up to 11 basis points. The yield
curve of real rate instruments showed a similar
dynamic, registering movements between -12 and
32 basis points across all maturities. In this context,
compensation for inflation and inflationary risk
implicit in spreads between nominal and real rates of
market instruments showed increases for short
terms and decreases in long ones, remaining at
levels above 400 basis points in general (Chart 10).
These adjustments took place in an environment in
which trading conditions showed some improvement
during the period covering the monetary policy
decision.


**Chart 8**

**Mexican Peso Exchange Rate with Moving**

**Averages**
MXN/USD


8.5

8.0

7.5

7.0

6.5

6.0

5.5

5.0

4.5

4.0


26.0

25.0

24.0

23.0

22.0

21.0

20.0

19.0

18.0


37,000

32,000


57,000

52,000


47,000

42,000


M Bond


4.0

3.5

3.0

2.5

2.0

1.5

1.0

0.5

0.0

Inflation-indexed bonds


Range in year Range since last monetary policy decision Sep-27-21 Nov-5-21

Source: Prepared by Banco de México.


**Chart 9**

**Nominal Yield Curve of Government Securities**

Percent, basis points

8.00 80

7.50 70

7.00 6 60

#¡REF!

6.50 50

6.00 40

5.50 30

5.00 20

4.50 10

4.00 0

3.50 -10

3.00 -20

Sep-27-2021 Nov-5-2021 Change (Sep-27-2021 to Nov-5-2021)

Trading range over the period


Range in year Range since last monetary policy decision Sep-27-21 Nov-5-21


Note: The chart does not include bonds maturing in December 2021 and
June 2022. CETES with similar maturities are considered.
Source: PIP.

17


-----

**Chart 10**

**Compensation for Inflation and Inflationary Risk**

**Implicit in Government Securities’ Interest Rate**

Basis points

550

525

500

475

450

425

400

375

350

325

300 3-year

10-year

275 20-year

250 30-year

3-year average

225 10-year average

200 20-year average

30-year average

175

150

J      M       S       J       M      S       J       M       S

2019                  2020                 2021

Source: PIP.

Regarding expectations for the trajectory of the
monetary policy reference rate, information implied
by the Interbank Equilibrium Interest Rate (TIIE, for
its Spanish acronym) swap curve incorporates an
increase of around 12 basis points for the November
meeting, a reference rate of 5.42% for the end of
2021, and of close to 7.32% for the end of 2022
(Chart 11). Rates implicit in the curve of government
securities incorporate a level of the target rate close
to 5.25% for the end of 2021 and of 6.50% for the
end of 2022. Finally, most forecasters surveyed by
Citibanamex anticipate the reference rate to
increase by 25 basis points to 5.00% in the
November decision, while they expect it to reach
5.25% for the end of 2021 and 6.00% for the end of
2022.

5 Refers to the value of merchandise exports in US dollars. This value
differs from that reported for goods exports by Mexico’s System of


**Chart 11**

**Banco de Mexico Overnight Interbank Rate**

**Implied in the TIIE IRS Curve**

Percent

9.50
9.25 Banxico overnight rate (reference rate)
9.00 Implied overnight interest rate in funding TIIE futures contracts
8.75 Implied overnight interest rate in government bond yield curve
8.50
8.25 Latest figure (Nov.5,2021)
8.00 Previous monetary policy decision (Sep.30,2021)
7.75
7.50
7.25
7.00
6.75
6.50
6.25
6.00
5.75
5.50
5.25
5.00
4.75
4.50
4.25
4.00
3.75

J  M  M  J   S  N  J M  M  J   S  N  J M  M  J   S  N
2020               2021               2022

Source: Prepared by Banco de México with Bloomberg data.

**A.2.2. Economic activity in Mexico**

According to INEGI’s GDP flash estimate, economic
activity contracted during the third quarter of 2021,
with a differentiated behavior among sectors of
economic activity (Chart 12). This occurred in a
context of an intensification of the pandemic,
continued disruptions in global supply chains, and a
strong reduction of spending in business support
services due to the transition towards the new
outsourcing regime.

As for external demand, the value of non-automotive
manufacturing exports increased during the third
quarter, with respect to the previous quarter, while
automotive exports fell sharply, reflecting the effects
of the persistent disruptions in the supply of
semiconductors on the sector (Chart 13).[5] By
destination, manufacturing exports to the United
States increased slightly, while those to the rest of
the world contracted significantly.

National Accounts (SCNM, for its acronym in Spanish), given that the
latter represents the value-added measured in constant pesos[.]

18


-----

**Chart 12**

**Gross Domestic Product**

Quarterly percentage change, s. a.


16

12

8

4

0


-4

-8

-12

-16


-20 Q-III 1/

I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV I II III IV I II III

2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021

s. a./ Seasonally adjusted figures.
1/ The figure corresponding to the third quarter refers to INEGI’s GDP
flash estimate
Source: Mexico’s System of National Accounts (SCNM, for its Spanish
acronym), INEGI.

**Chart 13**

**Total Manufacturing Exports**


Indices 2013 = 100, s. a.


180

160

140

120

100

80

60

40

20


0

J

2013


M S J

2014


M S J

2015


M S J

2016


M S J

2017


M S J

2018


M S J

2019


M S J

2020


M S J

2021


M S


s. a. / Seasonally adjusted series and trend series based on data in nominal
US dollars. The former is represented by a solid line and the latter by a
dotted line.
Source: Prepared by Banco de México with data from the Tax
Administration Service (SAT, for its Spanish acronym), the Ministry of the
Economy (SE, for its Spanish acronym), Banco de México, the National
Institute of Statistics and Geography (INEGI, for its Spanish acronym).
Mexico’s Merchandise Trade Balance, and the National System of
Statistical and Geographical Information (SNIEG, for its Spanish acronym),
Information of national interest.


According to its monthly indicator, in August private
consumption followed a downward trajectory,
remaining below the level reported in February 2020.
Within it, consumption of goods of imported origin
has been declining for three months, while both
consumption of goods of national origin and of
services registered a weak performance. In August,
gross fixed investment continued to reactivate,
although it remained below the level prior to the
health emergency. The component of spending in
investment in construction rebounded, while that in
machinery and equipment partially reversed the
expansion registered in July, although it remained
above the level reported in February 2020.

As for production, according to timely information,
industrial activity improved slightly during the third
quarter, after having performed weakly during the
second (Chart 14). This performance of industrial
activity was mainly due to the dynamism of
manufacturing excluding equipment and, to a lesser
extent, to the slight reactivation of construction
(Chart 15). In contrast, the transportation equipment
sector remained weak due to the continued shortage
of semiconductors, while mining remained stagnant.
Services diminished, in a context in which a
differentiated behavior continued among its

subsectors in light of the intensification of the
pandemic and the transition to the new regime
outsourcing regime. Particularly, in July-August,
professional, corporate and business support
services; transportation and mass media information
services; educational and health services; and public
administration services registered negative

contributions to growth. In contrast, commerce,
leisure and other services, as well as temporary
accommodation and food and beverage preparation
services, contributed positively.

19


-----

**Chart 14**

**Global Indicator of Economic Activity**

Indices 2013 = 100, s. a.


120

115

110

105

100

95

90

Total

85 Secondary activities

80 Tertiary activities

Primary activities

75

70

65 August

August

60

J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J A

2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021


140

130

120

110

100

90

80

70

60

50

40

30

20


s. a. / Seasonally adjusted and trend series. The former is represented by
a solid line and the latter by a dotted line.
Source: Mexico’s System of National Accounts (SCNM, for its Spanish
acronym), INEGI.

**Chart 15**

**Industrial Activity[1/]**

Indices 2013 = 100, s. a.

130

120

110

100

90

80 Total

Mining (22.3%)

70 Manufacturing (49.7%)

Construction (23.3%)

60

Utilities (4.7%)

August

50

J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J A

2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021

s. a. / Seasonally adjusted and trend series. The former is represented by
a solid line and the latter by a dotted line.
1/ Figures in parenthesis correspond to their share in the total in 2013.
Source: Mexico’s System of National Accounts (SCNM, for its Spanish
acronym), INEGI.

Regarding the economy's cyclical position, slack
conditions for the economy as a whole are expected
to have remained wide at the beginning of the third
quarter (Chart 16), with marked differences across
sectors. The negative output gap is anticipated to
have slightly widened vis-à-vis the previous quarter,
in line with the performance of economic activity
during the period. In September, labor market
indicators exhibited a mixed behavior. In particular,
the labor participation rate and the employment-toworking-age population ratio decreased for the
second consecutive month, while both national and
urban unemployment rates decreased at the margin
(Chart 17). In September, the creation of IMSSinsured jobs continued to recover, although it
remains 18,000 jobs below its pre-pandemic levels.
Finally, in August, unit labor costs in the
manufacturing sector registered their second


consecutive monthly reduction and remained slightly
below the level reported in February 2020 (Chart 18).

**Chart 16**

**Output Gap Estimates [1/]**

**Excluding Oil Industry [4/ ]**

Potential output percentages, s. a.

12

8

4

0

-4

-8

-12

-16 Global Economic Activity Indicator 2/

Gross Domestic Product 2/

-20 95% Confidence Interval 3/


J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S

2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021

s. a. / Calculations based on seasonally adjusted figures.
1/ Output gap estimated with a tail-corrected Hodrick-Prescott filter; see
Banco de México (2009), “Inflation Report, April-June 2009”, p.74.
2/ GDP timely figures as of Q2 2021, and IGAE figures as of September
2021, in line with said timely figure.
3/ Output gap confidence interval calculated with a method of unobserved
components.
4/ Excludes both oil and gas extraction, support services for mining, and
petroleum and coal products’ manufacturing. Source: Prepared by Banco
de México with INEGI data.

**Chart 17**

**National and Urban Unemployment Rates**

Percent, s. a.

8.5

National unemployment rate

8.0

7.5 Urban unemployment rate

7.0

6.5

6.0

5.5

5.0

4.5

4.0

3.5

3.0

September

2.5

J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S

2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021

s.a./ Seasonally adjusted series and trend series. The former is represented
by a solid line and the latter by a dotted line. Source: Prepared by Banco
de México with data from ENOE, ETOE (from April to June 2020), and
ENOE new edition (ENOEN) from July to date.

20


-24


September


-----

**Chart 18**

**Productivity and Unit Labor Costs**

**in the Manufacturing Sector [1/]**

Indices 2013 = 100, s. a.


170

160

150

140

130

120

110

100

90

80


August


consumer credit intermediation margins remained at
levels higher than pre-pandemic ones. With respect
to portfolio quality, in September the corporate loan
delinquency rate remained stable and at low levels.
The mortgage loan delinquency rate decreased and
remains at low levels. Finally, consumer portfolio
delinquency rates remained at high levels, although
they declined for the seventh consecutive month.

**A.2.3. Development of inflation and inflation**
**outlook**

Between September and October 2021, annual
headline inflation increased from 6.00% to 6.24%
(Chart 19 and Table 1). This result was driven by the
continued increase of core inflation, associated with
cost-related pressures, the reallocation of spending,
and the effects of the reopening of several activities,
as well as the increase in non-core inflation
associated with the higher annual variation of energy
prices during that period.

**Chart 19**

**Consumer Price Index**

Annual percentage change

13

12 CPI

11 Core

10

Non-core

9

8

7

6

5

4

3

2

1

0

-1

-2

-3 October

J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S

2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021

Source: Banco de México and INEGI.

Annual core inflation rose from 4.92% to 5.19%
between September and October 2021,

accumulating eleven consecutive months of

increases. Within it, annual merchandise and
services inflation rose during this period (Chart 20).
The former went from 6.26% to 6.58%, driven by the
disruptions that continue to be observed in
production and supply chains, bottlenecks, and the
resulting higher production costs. The above is
taking place in a context of global supply and
demand imbalances and the reallocation of spending
towards merchandise. In particular, annual food
merchandise inflation increased from 6.87 to 7.16%,
while non-food merchandise inflation rose from 5.59
to 5.94% (Chart 21). As for services, annual inflation
increased from 3.43 to 3.64% in the referred period,

21


J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J O J A J A

2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021

s. a. / Seasonally adjusted and trend series. The former is represented by
a solid line and the latter by a dotted line.
1/ Productivity based on hours worked.
Source: Prepared by with seasonally adjusted data of the Monthly
Manufacturing Industry Survey and industrial activity indicators of Mexico’s
System of National Accounts (Sistema de Cuentas Nacionales de México,
SCNM), INEGI.

In September 2021, domestic financing to firms
moderated its contraction in real terms at an annual
rate for the second consecutive quarter. This is
explained by a smaller reduction in bank credit to
both large- and smaller-sized firms. The demand for
corporate credit continued to recover, although it
remained at low levels. Lending conditions to firms
have remained stable throughout the year, thus
remaining tight. Net corporate debt issuance in the
domestic market rebounded in September, after the
low activity in this market registered as of the first
quarter of the year. In terms of credit to households,
the housing portfolio continued to exhibit a positive
real annual variation, regaining a greater dynamism
during the reference quarter. In turn, banks’ current
consumer loan portfolio reduced its contraction at an
annual rate for the sixth consecutive month, with the
dynamism of payroll loans standing out. This, in a
context characterized by a gradual recovery of
household demand for credit. As for lending
conditions, mortgages remained stable, while, in the
case of consumer portfolio, those for credit cards and
payroll loans have eased, and, for the rest of the
segments, they remained tight.

Interest rates of bank credit to firms have followed
the dynamic of the bank funding rate. Intermediation
margins rebounded slightly as compared to the end
of the second quarter, standing at higher levels,
although nearing pre-pandemic levels. In turn,
mortgage interest rates remained at levels around
their historic lows. In August, credit card and
personal credit interest rates were similar to those
observed during the first quarter of the year. Thus,


-----

mainly due to the increase from 4.78 to 5.11% in the
annual variation of services prices other than
education and housing, especially tourism, food and
beverage preparation, and art, entertainment and
recreation services. The gradual reopening of these
sectors may have contributed to this behavior.

**Chart 20**

**Merchandise and Services Core Price Sub-index**

Annual percentage change

7

Merchandise

6 Services

5

4

3

2

1

October

0

J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S

2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021

Source: Banco de México and INEGI.

**Chart 21**

**Merchandise Core Price Sub-index**

Annual percentage change

8

7

6

5

4

3

2

1

Food, beverages and tobacco Non-food merchandise October

0

J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S

2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021

Source: Banco de México and INEGI.

Between September and October 2021, annual noncore inflation went from 9.37 to 9.47% (Chart 22 and
Table 1). This result reflected the increase from
11.69 to 13.44% in the annual inflation of energy,
with the increase from 20.63 to 27.10% in the annual
variation of the LP gas price standing out, which was
influenced by rises in its international references.
This was partially offset by the decrease from 10.41
to 9.02% in the annual inflation of livestock and
agricultural products that is associated in turn with
the lower annual variation of fruit and vegetable
prices.


J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S J M S

2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021

Source: Banco de México and INEGI.

As for inflation expectations drawn from Banco de
México’s Survey among Private Sector Forecasters,
between August and October, the median of
expected headline inflation for the end of 2021
increased from 6.05 to 6.63%, while that

corresponding to the core component went from 4.90
to 5.30%. Median expectations for the end of 2022
were adjusted from 3.75 to 3.84% for headline
inflation and from 3.70 to 3.83% for core inflation.
The medians of headline and core inflation
expectations for the medium term were adjusted
upwards from 3.51 to 3.60% and from 3.50 to 3.56%,
respectively. Long-term inflation expectations

remained at around 3.50%. Finally, the breakeven
inflation rate increased and remained at high levels,
reflecting the behavior of both inflation expectations
and the inflation risk premium, although the rise in
the latter stands out.

Headline and core inflation forecasts were revised
upwards, especially shorter-term ones. Their annual
variations are expected to decrease, particularly for
one year and beyond, and converge to the 3% target
by the end of the forecast horizon. These projections
are subject to risks. On the upside: i) external
inflationary pressures; ii) cost-related pressures; iii)
core inflation persistence; iv) exchange rate
depreciation; and v) increases in agricultural and
livestock product prices and in energy prices. On the
downside: i) a widening of the negative output gap;
ii) social distancing measures; and iii) exchange rate
appreciation. The balance of risks for the trajectory
of inflation within the forecast horizon deteriorated
and remains biased to the upside.

22


**Chart 22**

**Non-core Price Sub-index**

Annual percentage change


25

20

15

10

5

0

-5

-10

-15


October


-----

**Table 1**

**Consumer Price Index and Components**

Annual percentage change

**Item** **August 2021** **September 2021** **October 2021**

**CPI** **5.59** **6.00** **6.24**

**SubyacenteCore** **4.78** **4.92** **5.19**

**Merchandise** **5.99** **6.26** **6.58**

Food, beverages and tobacco 6.51 6.87 7.16

Non-food merchandise 5.41 5.59 5.94

**Services** **3.43** **3.43** **3.64**

Housing 2.17 2.26 2.37

Education (tuitions) 1.92 2.04 2.09

Other services 4.87 4.78 5.11

**Non-coreNo Subyacente** **8.14** **9.37** **9.47**

**Agricultural and livestock products** **8.95** **10.41** **9.02**

Fruits and vegetablesFruits abd vegetables 5.94 9.38 5.72

Livestock productsLivestock 11.54 11.29 11.98

**Energy and government-authorized prices Energéticos y Tarifas Aut. por Gobierno** **7.50** **8.55** **9.82**

Energy productsEnergy 10.07 11.69 13.44

Government-authorized pricesTarifas Autorizadas por Gobierno 1.99 1.86 1.88

Source:INEGI.


23


-----

-----

